Chapter 10

Other partitioned schemes

In the previous chapter we looked at generational and other age-based collection schemes.
Those algorithms partitioned objects by their age and chose a partition to collect based on
some age-related property. For example, generational collectors preferentially collect the
youngest partition (or generation). Although this strategy in particular is highly effective
for a wide range of applications, it does not address all the problems facing the collector.
In this chapter we examine schemes outside the age-based collection framework but still
based on partitioning the heap.
    We start by considering one of the commonest forms of segregation, allocating large
objects in a separate space. We then examine collectors that partition the heap based on
the topology of the object graph, before looking at possibilities for allocation on thread
stacks or into scoped regions. We conclude by discussing hybrid algorithms that partition
the heap and collect different spaces at different times or use different algorithms, or both.

10.1     Large object spaces
Large object spaces are one of the most common ways to partition the heap. The definition
of ‘large’ can be chosen on the basis of either the absolute size of an object (say, greater
than 1024 bytes [Ungar and Jackson, 1988]), its size relative to that of the blocks used by
the allocator [Boehm and Weiser, 1988] or its size relative to the heap [Hosking et al., 1992].
Large objects meet several of the criteria for segregation that we identified in Chapter 8.
They are more expensive to allocate and more likely to induce fragmentation, both internal
and external. It is therefore worthwhile to use policies and mechanisms to manage them
that would be inefficient if applied to smaller ones. Allocating objects in a copying space
is particularly expensive since additional space must also be reserved so that they can
be copied. Performing the copy may also be expensive, although that cost is likely to be
dominated by the cost of updating the object’s fields and processing any child pointers,
especially if the object is a large array of pointers. For these reasons, large object spaces are
often managed by collectors that usually do not physically move their objects, although
the trade-off between the performance advantages of not moving objects and the costs of
fragmentation make it likely that even large objects may need to be compacted occasionally
[Lang and Dupont, 1987; Hudson and Moss, 1992].
    There are a number of ways in which large object spaces might be implemented and
managed. The simplest is to use one of the free-list allocators described in Chapter 7 and
to reclaim objects with a mark-sweep collector. It is also possible to combine a non-moving
large object space with a wider range of algorithms including copying. Several implemen-

                                                scan

                                           Tospace

            T                                                new objects

                               Fromspace                    free-list

                                                                             ee
                                                                           fr
                                                     B

Figure 10.1: The Treadmill collector: objects are held on a double-linked list.
       Each of the four segments holds objects of a different colour, so that the colour
       of an object can be changed by ‘unsnapping’ it from one segment and ‘snap-
       ping’ it into another. The pointers controlling the Treadmill are the same as
       for other incremental copying collectors [Baker, 1978]: scanning is complete
       when scan meets T, and memory is exhausted when free meets B.
                            Jones [1996]. Reprinted by permission.

tations have separated large objects into a small (possibly fixed-size) header and a body
[Caudill and Wirfs-Brock, 1986; Ungar and Jackson, 1988, 1992; Hosking et al., 1992]. The
body is kept in a non-moving area, but the header is managed in the same way as other
small objects. It may also be handled by a generational garbage collector; opinions differ
on whether large object headers should be promoted by the collector [Hudson et al., 1991]
or not (so that the large amount of space that they occupy can be reclaimed as soon as pos-
sible after the object’s death [Ungar and Jackson, 1992]). Other Java virtual machines and
collectors, including HotSpot’s Garbage-First (G1), do not use a separate space but allocate
large objects directly into the old generation. Since large objects are by their nature likely
to survive for some time, this approach saves copying them from the young generation.

The Treadmill garbage collector
It is also possible to copy or move objects logically without moving them physically. In this
section we discuss the Treadmill; in the next section we consider how to move objects with
operating system support. In terms of the tricolour abstraction, a tracing garbage collector
partitions heap objects into four sets: black (scanned), grey (visited but not fully scanned),

white (not yet visited) and free; it processes the grey set until it is empty. Each collection
algorithm provides a different way to represent these sets. The Treadmill [Baker, 1992a]
provides some of the advantages of semispace copying algorithms but in a non-moving
collector. Although it was intended as an incremental collector its virtues have also led it
to be used in stop-the-world configurations for managing large objects.
     The Treadmill is organised as a cyclic, double-linked list of objects (Figure 10.1) so that,
considered anticlockwise, the black segment is followed by the grey one, then the white
one and finally the free one. The black and grey segments comprise the tospace, and the
white segment the fromspace of the heap. Four pointers are used to operate the Treadmill.
Just as with Cheney’s algorithm, scan points to the start of the grey segment which it
divides from the black one. B and T point to the bottom and top of the white fromspace
list, respectively, and free divides the free segment from the black segment.
     Before a stop-the-world collection, all objects are black and in tospace. An object is
allocated by advancing the free pointer clockwise, thus removing it from the free seg-
ment and adding it to the start of the black segment. When the free pointer meets the B
pointer at the bottom of fromspace, free memory is exhausted and it is time to flip. At this
point, the Treadmill contains at most two colours, black and white. The black segment is
reinterpreted as white, and the T and B pointers are swapped. The collector then behaves
much as any semispace copying collector. As grey objects are scanned, the scan pointer
is moved anticlockwise to add the object to the end of the black segment. When a white
object in fromspace is visited by the collector, it is evacuated to tospace by unsnapping it
from the white segment and snapping it into the grey segment. When the scan pointer
meets the T pointer, the grey segment is empty and the collection is complete.
     The Treadmill has several benefits. Allocation and ‘copying’ are fairly fast. A concur-
rent Treadmill can allocate objects of any colour simply by snapping them into the appro-
priate segment. As objects are not moved physically by snapping, allocation and ‘copying’
are constant time operations not dependent on the size of the object. Snapping simpli-
fies the choice of traversal order compared with other techniques discussed in Chapter 4.
Snapping objects to the end of the grey segment (before the T pointer) gives breadth-first
traversal. Snapping objects at the start of the segment (at the scan pointer) gives depth-
first traversal without needing an explicit auxiliary stack, although effectively a stack is
embedded in the links of the Treadmill for all traversal orders.
     One disadvantage of the Treadmill for general purpose collection is the per-object over-
head of the two links. However, for copying collection, this overhead is offset by removing
the need for any copy reserve as the Treadmill does not physically copy objects. Another
issue for the Treadmill is how to accommodate objects of different sizes (see [Brent, 1989;
White, 1990; Baker et al., 1985]). One solution is to use separate Treadmills for each size
class [Wilson and Johnstone, 1993]. However, these disadvantages are less of an issue
for large objects. Large object Treadmills (for example, as used in MMTk memory man-
agement framecwork) keep each object on its own page (or sequences of pages). If links
are kept in the pages themselves, they may simply consume some of the space otherwise
wasted when rounding up the size to an integral number of pages. Alternatively, the links
can be stored together, outside the pages. The best reason for keeping links separate from
user data is to reduce the risk of rogue code corrupting the collector’s metadata, but doing
so may also reduce cache and paging overheads.

Moving objects with operating system support
It is also possible to ‘copy’ or ‘compact’ large objects without physically moving them,
using support from the operating system. In this case, each large object must again be
allocated to its own set of pages. Instead of copying the object word by word, its pages can

be remapped to fresh virtual memory addresses [Withington, 1991]. It is also possible to
use operating system support to initialise large objects incrementally. Rather than zero the
space for the whole object in one step, the object’s pages can be memory protected. Any
attempt to access uninitialised sections of the object will spring this trap, at which point
the page in question can be zeroed and unprotected; see also zeroing in Section 11.1.

Pointer-free objects
There are good reasons for segregating typically large objects not directly related to their
size. If an object does not contain any pointers, it is unnecessary to scan it. Segregation
allows knowledge of whether the object is pointer-free to be derived from its address. If
the mark bit for the object is kept in a side table, then it is not necessary to touch the object
at all. Allocating large bitmaps and strings in their own area, managed by a specialised
scanner, can lead to significant performance improvements, even if the size of the area is
modest. For example, Ungar and Jackson [1988] obtained a fourfold pause time reduction
by using a separate space of only 330 kilobytes, tiny by today’s standards.

10.2     Topological collectors
One way of arranging objects in the heap is to relate their placement to the topology of
pointer structures in the heap. This arrangement offers opportunities for new garbage
collection algorithms, which we consider in this section.

Mature Object Space garbage collection
One of the goals of generational garbage collection is to reduce pause times. By and large,
the pause to collect the youngest generation can be bounded by controlling the size of the
youngest generation. However, the amount of work done to collect the oldest generation
is limited only by the volume of live data in the heap. As we saw in Chapter 9, the Belt-
way.X.X generational configuration [Blackburn et al., 2002] attempted to address this by
collecting each belt in fixed-size increments. However, this approach trades one problem
for another: cycles of garbage too large to be accommodated in a single increment cannot
be reclaimed. Both Bishop [1977] and Beltway.X.X.100 add a further area/increment of
unlimited size to provide a collector that is complete but that no longer bounds the work
done in each collection cycle.
     Hudson and Moss [1992] seek to manage a mature object space (MOS) outside an age-
based scheme, as the oldest generation of a generational system. They too divide this
space into a number of fixed-size areas. At each collection, a single area is condemned and
any survivors are copied to other areas. Hudson and Moss resolve the cycle problem by
structuring the areas, which they call cars, into a number of first-in, first-out lists called
trains: hence, the algorithm is colloquially known as the ‘Train’ collector. As might be ex-
pected, at each collection they condemn a single car but they also impose a discipline on
the destination cars to which they copy any survivors. This ensures that a garbage cycle
will eventually be copied to a train of its own, all of which can be reclaimed in isolation
from other trains. The algorithm proceeds as follows.

   1. If there are no root references to the lowest numbered train t and if t’s remembered set
      is empty, then reclaim train t as a whole as its contents are unreachable. Otherwise. . .

   2. Select the lowest numbered car c of the lowest numbered train t as the from-car.

   3. Copy any object in c that is referenced by a root to a to-car c′ in a higher numbered
      train t′ , possibly a fresh one.

   4. Recursively copy objects in c that are reachable from to-car c′ to that car; if c′ is full,
      append a fresh car to t′ .

   5. Move any object promoted from the generational scheme to a train holding a refer-
      ence to it.

   6. Scan the remembered set of from-car c. If an object o in c is reachable from another
      train, copy it to that train.

   7. Copy any other object reachable from other cars in this train t to the last car of t,
      appending a new car if necessary.

    Step 1 reclaims whole trains that contain only garbage, even if this includes pointer
structures (such as cycles) that span several cars of the train. As the train’s remembered
set is empty, there can be no references to it from any other train. Steps 3 and 4 move into a
different train all objects in the from-car that are reachable from roots via reference chains
contained in this car. These objects are certainly live, and this step segregates them from
any possibly-garbage objects in the current train. For example, in Figure 10.2, objects A
and B in car C1, train T1 are copied to the first car of a new train T3. The last two steps
start to disentangle linked garbage structures from other live structures. Step 6 removes
objects from this train if they are reachable from another one: in this example, P is moved
to train 2, car 2. Finally, Step 7 moves the remaining potentially live objects in this car (for
example, X) to the end of its train. It is essential that these steps are done in this order since
a single object may be reachable from more than one train. Following Step 7, any objects
remaining in car c are unreachable from outside it and so this from-car is discarded, just as
a semispace collector would do.
    The Train algorithm has a number of virtues. It is incremental and bounds the amount
of copying done at each collection cycle to the size of a single car. Furthermore, it attempts
to co-locate objects with those that refer to them. Because of the discipline imposed on the
order in which trains and cars are collected, it only requires references from high to low
numbered trains/cars to be remembered. If it is used with a young generation collector
so that all spaces outside the mature object space are collected at each cycle, no references
from outside mature object space need be remembered.
    Unfortunately, the Train collector can be challenged by several common mutator be-
haviours.1 Isolating a garbage structure into its own train may require a number of garbage
collection cycles quadratic in the number of cars over which the structure is distributed. As
presented above, the algorithm may fail to make progress in certain conditions. Consider
the example in Figure 10.3a where there is insufficient room for both objects (or pointer
structures) to fit in a single car. Object A will be moved to a fresh car at the end of the
current train when the first car is collected. Provided that none of the pointers in this ex-
ample are modified, the next collection will find an external reference to the leading car,
so B will be evacuated to a higher numbered train. Similarly, the third collection will find
a reference to A from B’s train and so move A there. There are no cars left in this train, so
we can dispose of it. The next cycle will collect the first car of the next train, as desired.
However, now suppose that, after each collection cycle, the mutator switches the external
reference to the object in the second car, as in Figure 10.3b. The Train collector never dis-
covers an external reference to the object in the leading car, and so the object will forever be
   1 It was superseded as the ‘low pause’ collector in Sun Microsystems’ JDK after Java 5 in favour of a concurrent

collector.

         A                             X                   Y

                                B

                                       P
                  T1C1                                                 T1C2

                                                               C

                  T2C1                                                 T2C2

                           (a) Before collecting car 1, train 1 (T1C1).

                                                           Y                  X
                                                                                  7

                                                                       T1C2

                                                                   P
                                                                          6

                                                               C

                  T2C1                                                 T2C2

         A
          3

              B
                  4
                  T3C1

    (b) After collecting car 1, train 1. X moved to the same car as its referent Y, A and B
    to a fresh train T3. The next collection cycle will isolate T2 and reclaim it wholesale.
    Numbered labels show the copies made in each algorithm step.

Figure 10.2: The Train copying collector
                              Jones [1996]. Reprinted by permission.

             A                   B                         B                  A

          (a) Before collecting the first car           (b) Before collecting the next car

Figure 10.3: A ‘futile’ collection. After a collection which moves A to a fresh
       car, the external reference is updated to refer to A rather than B. This presents
       the same situation to the collector as before, so no progress can be made.

moved to the last car of the current train, which will never empty. The collector can never
progress to collect other trains. Seligmann and Grarup [1995] called these ‘futile’ collec-
tions. They solve the problem by remembering external pointers further down the train
and using these in futile collections, thereby forcing progress by eventually evacuating the
whole train.
    The Train bounds the amount of copying done in each collection cycle but does not
bound other work, such as remembered set scanning and updating references. Any ‘pop-
ular’, highly referenced objects will induce large remembered sets and require many refer-
ring fields to be updated when they are moved to another car. Hudson and Moss suggest
dealing with such objects by moving them to the end of the newest train, into their own car,
which can be moved logically rather than physically in future collections without need to
update references. Unfortunately, this will not always segregate a garbage cycle that spans
popular cars. Even if a popular car is allowed to contain more than one popular item, it
may still be necessary to disentangle these to separate cars unless they are part of the same
structure. Both Seligmann and Grarup [1995] and Printezis and Garthwaite [2002] found
popular objects to be common in practice. The latter address this by allowing remembered
sets to expand up to some threshold (say 4,096 entries) after which they coarsen a set by
rehashing its entries into a set of the same size but using a coarser hashing function. Selig-
mann and Grarup tune the frequency of train collections by tracking a running estimate of
the garbage collected (a low estimate allows the collection frequency to be reduced). But
Printezis and Garthwaite found it to be common for an application to have a few very long
trains of long-lived data; this defeats such a tuning mechanism.

Connectivity-based garbage collection
Management of remembered sets can contribute significantly to the time and space costs
of collectors such as the Train and G1 algorithms. The performance of these collectors
would be improved if the number of inter-partition pointers that need to be remembered
could be reduced or even eliminated. In the previous chapter, we saw how Guyer and
McKinley [2004] used a static analysis to place new objects in the same generation as the
object to which they would be connected, and Zee and Rinard [2002] eliminated write bar-
riers for the initialisation of the newest object in a generational collector. Hirzel et al. [2003]
explored connectivity-based allocation and collection further. They observed that the life-
times of Java objects are strongly correlated with their connectivity. Those reachable only
from the stack tend to be short-lived whereas those reachable from globals tend to live for
most of the execution of the program (and they note that this property is largely indepen-
dent of the precise definition of short- or long-lived). Furthermore, objects connected by a
chain of pointers tend to die at the same time.

    Based on this observation, they proposed a new model of connectivity-based collection
[Hirzel et al., 2003]. Their model has four components. A conservative pointer analysis
divides the object graph into stable partitions: if an object a may point to an object b,
then either a and b share a partition or there is an edge from a’s partition to b’s partition
in the directed acyclic graph of partitions. Although new partitions may be added (for
example, as classes are loaded), partitions are never split. The collector can then choose any
partition (or set of partitions) to collect provided it also collects all its predecessor partitions
in the graph. Partitions in the condemned set are collected in topological order. This
approach has two benefits. The collector requires neither write barriers nor remembered
sets. Partitions can be reclaimed early. By collecting in topological order, as soon as the
collector has finished tracing objects in a partition, any unvisited (white) objects in that
partition or earlier ones must be unreachable and so can be reclaimed. Note that this also
allows popular child partitions to be ignored.
    Hirzel et al. suggest that the performance of connectivity-based garbage collectors de-
pends strongly on the quality of partitioning, their estimate of the survivor volume of each
partition and their choice of partitions to collect. However, they obtained disappointing
results (from simulation) for a configuration based on partitioning by the declared types of
objects and their fields, estimating a partition’s chance of survival from its global or stack
reachability, moderated by a partition age based decay function, and using a greedy al-
gorithm to choose partitions to collect. Although mark/cons ratios were somewhat better
than those of a semispace copying collector, they were much worse than those of an Ap-
pel-style generational collector. On the other hand, worst-case pause times were always
better. Comparison with an oracular collector, that received perfect advice on the choice of
partition, suggested that there was a performance gap that might be exploited by a better
configuration. Dynamic partitioning based on allocation site also improved performance
of the collector at the cost of re-introducing a write barrier to combine partitions.

Thread-local garbage collection
One way to reduce garbage collection pause times is to run the collector concurrently with
the mutator threads. A variation on this is to perform collection work incrementally, in-
terleaving the mutator and collector. Both approaches increase the complexity of imple-
mentations, chiefly by requiring greater synchronisation between collectors and mutators;
we defer discussion of incremental and concurrent garbage collection to later chapters.
However, if we can prove that a set of objects can only ever be accessed by a single thread,
and if these objects are stored in their own thread-local heaplet, then these heaplets can
be managed without synchronisation: the problem is reduced to stop-the-world collection
for each thread. In this section, we investigate different designs for thread-local collection.
Of course, thread-local approaches cannot deal with objects that may be shared; they must
still be dealt with by halting all mutator threads during collection or by more complex
concurrent or incremental techniques.
     The key to thread-local collection is to segregate objects that can be reached by just one
thread from those that are potentially shared. In its simplest configuration, heaps config-
ured for thread-local collection use a single shared space and a set of per-thread heaplets.
More generally, implementations may deploy a tree of heaplets. This requires strict regu-
lation on the direction of pointers. A hierarchy of heaplets is said to be disentangled if an
object in a thread-local heaplet may only point to another object in the same heaplet or to
a potentially shared object in an ancestor heaplet. Objects in ancestor heaplets may not
hold down-pointers to objects in descendent heaplets, nor may an object hold a cross-pointer
to an object in another unrelated heaplet, such as a sibling heaplet. The segregation of

                                              G

                              L     OL                       L     OL

                   thread 1                       thread 2

Figure 10.4: Thread-local heaplet organisation, indicating permitted pointer
       directions between purely local (L), optimistically-local (OL) and shared
       heaplets (G) [Jones and King, 2005]

objects may be made statically, using a pointer analysis, or it may be dynamic, requiring
infringements of the pointer direction rule to be detected at run time. Note that any organ-
isation can be used within a heaplet (for example, a flat arrangement or with generations).
However, it is also possible to mark objects as shared on an object by object basis.
    Steensgaard [2000] used a fast but conservative pointer analysis similar to that of Ruf
[2000] to identify Java objects potentially reachable from a global variable and by more
than one thread. The goal of his flow-insensitive, context-sensitive escape analysis is to
allow methods that create objects to be specialised in order to allocate the object in either
the thread’s local heaplet or the shared heaplet. Each heaplet comprises an old and a
young generation. His collector is only mostly thread-local. Because Steensgaard treats
all static fields as roots for a local heaplet, each collection requires a global rendezvous. A
single thread scans the globals and all thread stacks in order to copy any directly referenced
objects, before Cheney-scanning the shared heaplet. The local threads are released only
after the shared scan is complete in order to finish independent collections of their own
heaplets. These threads may encounter uncopied objects in the shared heaplet: if so, a
global lock must be acquired before the object is copied.
    Static disentanglement of shared and thread-local objects requires a whole program
analysis. This is a problem for any language that permits classes to be loaded dynami-
cally, since polymorphic methods in subclasses loaded after the analysis is complete may
‘leak’ references to local objects by writing references into fields of globally reachable ones.
Jones and King address this problem and provide a design for a truly thread-local col-
lector [King, 2004; Jones and King, 2005]. Their escape analysis builds on Steensgaard’s
but is compositional: it supports Java’s dynamic class loading, dealing safely with classes
loaded after the analysis is complete. Designed for long-running Java applications, the
analysis was sufficiently fast to be deployed at run time in a background thread, with
Sun’s ExactVM Java virtual machine running on a multiprocessor under Solaris. They
provide each thread with two local heaplets: one for objects that are guaranteed to be
reachable by only the thread that allocated them, no matter what further classes may be
loaded, and one for optimistically-local objects: those that are accessible by no more than
one thread at the time of the analysis but which may become shared if an antagonistic
class is loaded. Purely thread-local objects turn out to be comparatively rare: these are
mostly objects that do not escape their allocating method. Optimistically-local objects are

fairly common, however. The rules for pointer directionality are extended. Local objects
may also point to optimistically-local ones, but not vice versa; optimistically-local objects
may refer to global ones. A schematic of permissible pointers is shown in Figure 10.4.
Jones and King collect each thread independently, with no global rendezvous. Both a
thread’s local and optimistically-local heaplets are collected together, provided no classes
have been loaded that compromise the analysis. Whenever a class is loaded dynamically,
it is analysed both to specialise its methods, and to discover whether it extends a class al-
ready loaded and whether any of its methods potentially cause an allocation site marked
optimistically-local to become shared. If so — and such ‘non-conforming’ methods are
very rare — the optimistically-local heaplets of all threads that may use this method are
marked shared and no longer collected thread-locally, but instead are collected alongside
the shared heap.
     Steensgaard disentangle objects statically, at the cost of a global rendezvous; Jones and
King also use a static escape analysis but collect purely thread-locally, with a dynamic
class loading check to handle non-conforming methods. However, it is also possible to
detect objects dynamically as they escape from their allocating thread. Domani et al. [2002]
create objects in thread-local allocation buffers but detect escape precisely, using a write
barrier (see Section 15.2). Because shared and local objects are intermingled in the heap,
each object is associated with a global bit (held in a separate bitmap) which is set by the
write barrier just before a thread creates a reference to an object it did not allocate. The
barrier must also set this bit for every object in the transitive closure of the target object.
The Domani et al. parallel mark-sweep collector collects threads independently. It stops
all threads only if it is unable to allocate a large object or a fresh allocation buffer. They
also allocate objects known to be always global (such as thread and class objects or those
identified as global by off-line profiling) into a separate shared region. Co-existence of
global and local collections requires some synchronisation to ensure that a global collection
is not initiated while a local one is in progress; we discuss the handshakes necessary in later
chapters.
     Collecting thread-locally is simpler if all objects are immutable. Erlang [Armstrong
et al., 1996] is a strict, dynamically typed, functional programming language. Erlang pro-
grams typically use very large numbers of extremely light-weight processes which com-
municate with each other through asynchronous message passing. The original Erlang/OTP
run-time system was process-centric, with each process managing its own private memory
area. Because Erlang does not allow destructive assignment, message passing uses copy-
ing semantics and thread-local heaps can be collected independently. The costs of this
design are that message passing is an O(n) operation (where n is the size of the message)
and message data are replicated between processes.
     Sagonas and Wilhelmsson add to this architecture a shared area for messages and one
for binaries, in order to reduce the cost of message passing [Johansson et al., 2002; Sagonas
and Wilhelmsson, 2004; Wilhelmsson, 2005; Sagonas and Wilhelmsson, 2006]. They impose
the usual restrictions on pointer direction between the process-local areas and the shared
messages area. Their shared message area does not contain any cyclic data and the binaries
do not contain references. A static message analysis guides allocation: data that is likely
to be part of a message is allocated speculatively on the shared heap and otherwise in a
process’s local heap. All message operands are wrapped in a copy-on-demand operation
that checks that the operand is indeed in the shared heap and otherwise copies it; often this
test can be eliminated by the compiler. Note that the copying semantics of Erlang message
passing allow the analysis to both over- and under-approximate sharing. Local heaps are
managed with a generational, stop-and-copy Cheney-style collector, using generational
stack scanning (and en masse promotion) to avoid scanning frames that can only point to
the old generation [Cheng et al., 1998]. As they contain no cycles, the shared binaries are

reference counted. Each process maintains a remembered list2 of pointers to binaries. When
a process dies, the reference counts of binaries in this list are decremented. The shared
message area is collected by an incremental mark-sweep collector, which requires global
synchronisation. We discuss incremental mark-sweep algorithms in Chapter 16.
     Doligez and Leroy [1993] (and Doligez and Gonthier [1994]) were the first to intro-
duce the thread-local/shared region memory architecture. In their case, these local/shared
heaplets also served as the young/old generations of their collector. Their target was Con-
current Caml Light, ML with concurrency primitives. Unlike Erlang, ML does have muta-
ble variables. In order to allow threads to collect their young generations independently,
the Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier algorithm stores mutable objects in the shared old generation. If
a mutable object is updated to refer to an object in a thread-local young generation, then
the transitive closure of the young object is globalised: it is copied to the old generation. As
in the Erlang case, making two copies of the data structure is safe since young objects are
guaranteed to be immutable. As well as copying the young objects, the collector updates a
forwarding address in each object header to refer to its shared replica. These addresses are
used by subsequent thread-local, young generation collections; the mutator write barrier
has done some of the collector’s work for it. Note that the forwarding pointer must be
stored in a reserved slot in the object’s header rather than written destructively over user
data since the young copy is still in use. This additional header word is stripped from
the old generation copy as it is not required by the shared heap’s concurrent mark-sweep
collector. While this additional word imposes a space overhead in the young generations,
this overhead may be acceptable since young generation data will usually occupy a much
smaller fraction of total heap size than old generation data. A young generation collection
promotes all survivors from a thread-local heaplet to the shared heaplet. Anderson [2010]
observed that there may be many more young generation collections with this heap organi-
sation than might be experienced with a more traditional organisation. He noted that after
a collection, a thread’s stack could not contain any reference to its thread-local heaplet.
He was thus able to reduce stack walking overhead by 50% in TGC, his Doligez-Leroy-
Gonthier-based collector for pH, parallel Haskell, by introducing stack barriers to ‘water-
mark’ the highest stack frame below which there could be no references to the thread’s
local heaplet. A young generation collection therefore need not scan any frame below the
watermark for roots. We explain stack barriers in more detail in Section 11.5.
     The shared/local heaplet structure can be extended to a tree of heaplets to support
nested-parallel computation. In this model, a parent task forks child tasks and suspends
until their completion, at which point it resumes. Mirroring the structure of the computa-
tion, each task is given its own heaplet in a disentangled tree of heaplets that grows and
shrinks as tasks are forked and joined. Typically, heaplets are block-structured, which fa-
cilitates joining a heaplet to its parent when a subtask completes. This allows any subtree
of the heaplet hierarchy to be collected independently. Guatto et al. [2018] suggest a system
for nested-parallel ML. Their algorithm is biased towards the common cases of (i) reading
immutable fields; and (ii) reading mutable fields or writing non-pointer fields. Their treat-
ment of pointer updates is a natural extension of Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier. Rather than
globalising the transitive closure of an object in a descendent heaplet by copying it to a
single shared heaplet whenever a down-pointer ptr would have been created, the tran-
sitive closure is copied to the ancestor heaplet that holds the object whose field is being
updated. In the context of nested-parallel ML programs that use destructive updates for
efficiency, ptr may be written repeatedly into objects held at decreasing depths, and hence
the object at ptr promoted several times. This leads to the creation of a chain of pointers

   2 Not to be confused with reference lists used by distributed reference counting systems where the target main-

tains a list of processes that it believes hold references to it.

to a unique, authoritative copy in the shallowest ancestor heaplet, rather than a single
forwarding pointer. All accesses to mutable fields are made to the master copy, the last
element of this chain. In order to to avoid races when different tasks may be trying to pro-
mote (copy) objects, update forwarding pointers, or traverse the chain to find the master
copy, their algorithm many need to lock paths of heaplets from the object at ptr to the
ancestor heaplet, using a shared lock when searching for the master and an exclusive lock
to insert a new forwarding pointer.
    Globalising the entire transitive closure of a mutated object is expensive, unless such
mutations are rare. However, even in a pure functional language like Haskell, the lazy
evaluation mechanism will update a very great number of thunks, and these may be re-
peatedly mutated; Marlow and Peyton Jones report that having the write barrier naively
copy the transitive closure of all mutated objects would add nearly 30% to overall running
time. Researchers have therefore considered how to reduce the number of objects that need
to be globalised to the shared heap.
    Marlow and Peyton Jones [2011] treat thunks and mutable arrays specially in a collector
for GHC Haskell that combines thread-local young generation collection with a stop-the-
world, parallel, old generation collector. Their system takes advantage of the fact that
every pointer dereference in GHC already has a read barrier, in case the target is an un-
evaluated thunk. They use this read barrier for free to allow some references from the
global, old generation heap to thread-local, young generation heaplets, having their write
barrier insert proxy, indirection objects. A proxy has two fields: a pointer to the local object
and an integer identifying the processor that owns the local heap. A proxy looks just like a
thunk to the read barrier, so a caller will just jump to its entry code. The current processor
will simply continue if it owns the proxy, otherwise it will send a message to owner of the
proxy and block until it receives a reply. On receipt of this message, the owner will glob-
alise at least some of data, before overwriting the proxy with a plain indirection to the now
global object and sending a wakeup message to the blocked thread. This allows their write
barrier (combined with the existing generational write barrier) to maintain the invariant
that there are no references from the global heap to a thread-local heaplet except for proxy
indirections. It also allows flexibility in deciding whether to globalise all global-local ref-
erences or to stop at any point and insert a proxy. Their scheme treats immutable, mutable
and thunk objects separately. Immutable objects, such as constructors and functions, are
copied to the global heap to globalise them, overwriting the header of the local object with
a forwarding pointer to its global replica in case there are other references to it. A thunk
is globalised by being moved to the global heap, globalising its arguments and overwrit-
ing the local object with an indirection. The local object is reclaimed at the next collection.
Other mutable objects, such as mutable variables and arrays, are not copied but allocated
in an immovable local heaplet called the sticky heap, and globalised in a similar way to
Domani et al. [2002] by flipping a bit in a bitmap (Marlow and Peyton Jones considered
this simpler to implement than storing the bit in the object’s header). Once globalised, an
object can only be reclaimed by a global collection.
    Westrick et al. [2019] show that programs that are free of determinacy races lead to dis-
entangled heaplets because a cross-pointer can only be created by reading a down-pointer
into the heaplet of some concurrently executing task, which is racy because the read con-
flicts with the write that created the down-pointer. Their MPL system for nested-parallel
ML programs without determinacy races uses a tree of thread-local heaplets similar to that
of Guatto et al., but does not use chains of forwarding pointers or locks. Since programs
are race-free, it is possible to delay the promotion of the targets of down-pointers until a
heaplet is collected. Instead, each heaplet holds a remembered set of incoming references
from its ancestors in the tree of heaplets. When the heaplet is collected, the remembered set

is consulted to promote recursively objects reachable from ancestor heaplets: this may re-
quire updating some remembered sets in ancestor heaplets. MPL is shown to have signif-
icant performance advantages over implementations of nested-parallelism in other man-
aged languages but at the expense of space utilisation: MPL used twice as much space as
the sequential MLton implementation. Arora et al.’s [2021] MPL* extends MPL to allow
workers to steal tasks. A heaplet’s remembered set is updated when another worker steals
a task, or by a deletion barrier when a reference from an ancestor heaplet is deleted, as
well as when a new down-pointer is created. MPL* offers similar performance to MPL but
is significantly more space-efficient.

Stack allocation
Several researchers have proposed allocating objects on the stack rather than in the heap,
wherever possible. A wide variety of mechanisms have been suggested, but fewer have
been implemented, especially in production systems. Stack allocation has some attrac-
tions. It potentially reduces the frequency of garbage collection, and expensive tracing or
reference counting is unnecessary for stack allocated data. Thus, stack allocation should
in theory be gentler on caches. On the down side, it may prolong the lifetime of objects
allocated in frames that persist on the stack for a long time.
    The key issue is to ensure that no stack allocated object is reachable from another object
with a longer lifetime. This can be determined either conservatively through an escape
analysis (for example, [Blanchet, 1999; Gay and Steensgaard, 2000; Corry, 2006]) or by
run-time escape detection using a write barrier. Baker [1992b] was the first to suggest
(but not implement) stack allocation in the context of an otherwise garbage collected heap.
Laying out the stack to grow away from the heap could allow the system to use an efficient
address-based write barrier to detect references to objects on the stack from locations that
might outlive them. In such a case, the object would be copied (‘lazily allocated’) into the
heap. He also required a read barrier to handle the forwarding addresses that copying
introduced. Others have suggested allocating objects in a stack of frames separate from
the call stack. Cannarozzi et al. [2000] used a write barrier to partition the heap, with each
partition associated with the oldest activation record that might refer to it. Unfortunately,
the cost (in Sun’s handle-based JDK 1.1.8) was large: an extra four 32-bit words per object.
Qian and Hendren [2002] allocated frames lazily to avoid allocating any empty ones. They
used a write barrier to mark such a frame as global if any of its objects escaped. In this
case, the write barrier also marked the site in the method allocating the object as non-
local but this requires storing a site identity in the object’s header. They shared the lock
word for this purpose at the cost of making the frame global if an object is ever locked;
unfortunately, library code often contains redundant (that is, local) locking (which is why
biased locking is so effective). Corry [2006] used a cheaper intraprocedural escape analysis
that associates object frames with loops rather than method invocations and hence works
well with dynamic class loading, reflection, factory methods and so on.
    Azul Systems’ multicore, multiprocessor Java appliances provided hardware-supported
object-by-object escape detection. When an object is allocated on the stack, some pointer
bits are used to store the frame’s depth in the stack. These bits are ignored by pointer loads
but checked by stores: storing a reference to an object in a new frame into an object in an
old frame causes a trap which moves the object and fixes up references to it (which can only
be held by objects in newer frames). The fixup is expensive so needs to be rare. If stack
allocating an object would cause the frame to become too large, it is placed in an overflow
area to the side. Azul found that they still need occasional thread-local collections to deal
with dead stack allocated objects in long-lived frames.

    Overall, most of these schemes have not been implemented, are reported with insuffi-
cient detail of comparative systems or do not offer significant performance improvements.
While it is likely that for many applications a large fraction of objects might be stack allo-
catable, most of these are likely to be short-lived. Azul found that over half of all objects
may be stack allocated in large Java applications. However, this scenario is precisely the
one in which generational garbage collection excels. It is not clear that stack allocation
reduces memory management costs sufficiently to make it worthwhile. Another rationale
for stack allocation is that it can reduce memory bandwidth by keeping these objects en-
tirely in the cache, given a sufficiently large cache. One related strategy that is effective is
scalar replacement or object inlining whereby an object is replaced by local variables repre-
senting its fields [Dolby, 1997; Dolby and Chien, 1998, 2000; Gay and Steensgaard, 2000].
A common application of scalar replacement is for iterators in object-oriented programs.

Region inferencing
Stack allocation is a restricted form of more general region-based memory management.
The key idea behind region-based memory is that objects are allocated into regions and that
entire regions are reclaimed as soon as none of their contents is required by the program.
Typically, region reclamation is a constant time operation. The decisions as to when to
create a region, into which region to place an object and when to reclaim a region may
fall to the programmer, the compiler, the run-time system or a combination of these. For
example, the programmer may be required to add explicit instructions or annotations to
create and destroy regions or to indicate the region into which an object must be allocated.
Possibly the best known explicit system is the Real-Time Specification for Java (RTSJ). In
addition to the standard heap, the RTSJ provides an immortal region and scoped regions.
The RTSJ enforces strict rules on pointer directionality: an object in an outer scoped region
cannot refer to one in an inner scope.
    Other region-based systems may relax the requirements on pointer direction, allowing
regions to be reclaimed even if there are references into that region from other, live regions.
To be safe, such systems require a guarantee that the mutator will never follow a dangling
pointer into a deallocated region. These systems require compiler support, either for infer-
ring the region into which an object should be allocated and when it is safe to reclaim the
region, or to check programmer annotations (possibly in the form of non-standard type
systems). The best known, fully automatic, region inferencing system is that for Standard
ML [Tofte et al., 2004]. Used with care, these systems can lead to programs that are ef-
ficient and use less memory. However, this is very dependent on program style, often
requiring the programmer to have a deep understanding of the inferencing algorithm (al-
though not its implementation). Region inferencing can also make programs harder to
understand and more difficult to maintain as small changes can have significant effects on
the inferencing decisions [Coblenz et al., 2022]. The ML Kit inferencing algorithm was also
very expensive for large programs (for example, a 58,000 line program took one and a half
hours to compile). Tofte et al. report that it was often best to restrict region inferencing
to well-understood coding patterns and manage other parts of the program by garbage
collection.
    More recently, the Rust language includes as part of the language a system similar to
region inferencing, there called lifetimes, that is often implicit but that also supports explicit
lifetime parameters and types. As Coblenz et al. found, this system appears more difficult
to use than automatic garbage collection, at least for novice programmers.

                                  100
                                                                            Aggressive
                                                  Mark-Sweep

                                  75
                       alloca on threshold
                               50 25

                                                                             Semispace
                                                                             copying
                                                 Passive
                                  0

                                             0       25            50          75        100
                                                           evacua on threshold

Figure 10.5: A continuum of tracing collectors. Spoonhower et al. contrast
       an evacuation threshold — sufficient live data to make a block a candidate
       for evacuation — with an allocation threshold — the fraction of a block’s free
       space reused for allocation.
                   Spoonhower et al. [2005], doi: 10.1145/1064979.1064989
            © 2005 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

10.3     Hybrid mark-sweep, copying collectors
When considering how the volume of live objects in a block can be used to make evacuate
or mark decisions, Spoonhower et al. [2005] contrast an evacuation threshold — whether
the block contains sufficiently little live data to make it a candidate for evacuation — with
an allocation threshold — how much of the block’s free space should be reused for alloca-
tion. These thresholds determine when and how fragmentation is reduced. For example,
a mark-sweep collector has an evacuation threshold of zero (it never copies) but an allo-
cation threshold of 100% (it reuses all free space in a block), whereas a semispace copying
collector has an evacuation threshold of 100% but an allocation threshold of zero (from-
space pages are not used for allocation until after the next collection); these two collectors
are shown in Figure 10.5. Overly passive memory managers with low evacuation and allo-
cation thresholds can suffer from fragmentation; overly aggressive managers, where both
thresholds are high, have high overheads either because they replicate data or because
they require more passes to collect the heap.
    The performance of a large or long-running application may eventually suffer from
fragmentation unless the heap is managed by a compacting collector. Unfortunately, com-
paction is likely to be expensive in time or space compared with non-moving collection.
Semispace copying requires a copy reserve but mark-compact algorithms require several
passes over the heap in addition to the cost of moving objects. To address these prob-
lems, Lang and Dupont [1987] proposed combining mark-sweep collection with semispace
copying to compact the heap incrementally, one region at a time. The heap is divided into
k + 1 equally sized regions, one of which is empty. At collection time, some region is cho-
sen to be the fromspace and the empty region is used as the tospace. All other regions are
managed by a mark-sweep collector. As the collector traces the heap, objects are evacuated

                       Tospace   Fromspace

                                       (a) Before collection

                       Tospace   Fromspace

                                        (b) After collection

Figure 10.6: Incremental incrementally compacting garbage collection. One
       space (fromspace) is chosen for evacuation to an empty space (tospace),
       shown as grey; the other spaces are collected in place. By advancing the
       two spaces, the whole heap is eventually collected.
                             Jones [1996]. Reprinted by permission.

to the tospace region if they are in the fromspace region; otherwise they are marked (see
Figure 10.6). References in any region to fromspace objects must be updated with their
tospace replicas.
    By rotating the region chosen to be the fromspace through the heap, Lang and Dupont
can compact the whole heap in k collections at a space overhead of 1/k of the heap. Unlike
mark-compact algorithms, no extra passes or data structures are required. They observe
that this algorithm can provide flexibility in tracing order, especially if tospace is managed
by a Cheney algorithm. At each tracing step, the collector can choose whether to take the
next item from the mark-sweep or the copying work list: Lang and Dupont advocate pre-
ferring the mark-sweep collector in order to limit the size of its stack. There is also a locality
argument here since mark-sweep tends to have better locality than Cheney copying.
    The Spoonhower et al. [2005] collector for C# takes a more flexible approach. It uses
block residency predictions to decide whether to process a block in place to tospace or to
evacuate its contents. Predictions may be static (for example, large object space pages), use
fixed evacuation thresholds (generational collectors assume few young objects survive) or
dynamic ones (determined by tracing). Spoonhower et al. use residency counts from the
previous collection to determine whether to evacuate or mark objects in a block (blocks
containing pinned objects are processed in place) in order not to need an extra pass at each
collection. In a manner similar to Dimpsey et al. [2000] (discussed below), they maintain a
free-list of gaps, and bump allocate into these.

10.4     Garbage-First: collecting young regions
Garbage-First (G1) [Detlefs et al., 2004] is a sophisticated and complex incrementally com-
pacting algorithm, intended for applications with large heaps and designed to meet a soft
real-time performance goal that collection should consume no more than x milliseconds
of any y millisecond time slice. Initially introduced as an experimental feature of Sun Mi-
crosystems’ HotSpot Java virtual machine in JDK 6, G1 was intended as a longer term
replacement for a concurrent mark-sweep collector in order to provide compaction with
more predictable response times; it has been the default collector since JDK 9. Here we dis-
cuss how the forthcoming version of G1 (to appear in JDK 203 ) treats partitions, focusing
  3 Thomas Schatzl’s blog provides excellent explanations of G1 policies and mechanisms, https://

tschatzl.github.io.

Algorithm 10.1: Garbage-First remembered set barrier fast path. The deletion barrier for
snapshot-at-the-beginning tracing is omitted (see Section 15.1).

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      ...                                                /* deletion barrier */
 3      src[i] ← ref                                                           $
 4      field ← &src[i]                            /* the address of the field */
 5      if region(field) = region(ref) || ref = null
 6         return
 7      if card(field) = Young
 8         return
 9      StoreLoadFence
10      if card(field) = dirty                                                 $
11         return
12      card(field) ← dirty
13      enqueueCard(dirtyCardBuffer, card(field))

on ‘young only’ collections. In line with common usage, we will refer to G1 partitions as
‘regions’. We will turn to how G1 concurrently marks old regions in Chapter 16.
    G1 uses the same generation structure as other OpenJDK collectors. Its young gener-
ation comprises an eden (newly allocated) space and a pair of survivor spaces, and it has
a single old generation. Like the Lang and Dupont collector, G1 divides these spaces into
equal-sized regions of contiguous virtual memory. Typically, these are in the range of 1 to
32 megabytes although the HotSpot Java virtual machine allows users to configure region
sizes up to 512 megabytes. Allocation occurs into a current allocation region in eden, taken
from a list of empty regions. To minimise synchronisation between mutator threads, each
thread has its own bump pointer local allocation buffer, acquired from the current alloca-
tion region with an atomic compare-and-swap operation; larger objects may similarly be
allocated directly in the allocation region. ‘Humongous’ objects, larger than half a region,
are allocated in their own sequence of regions.
    Unlike Lang and Dupont, G1 allows an arbitrary set of regions to be chosen for collec-
tion. It therefore requires the mutator’s write barrier to record any pointer that it writes
which may refer to a region that may be evacuated. Engineering of regions, write barriers
and remembered sets is therefore complex and critical. G1 maintains a global card table
and, for each region R, a remembered set: a sparse set of cards, each of which corresponds
to a configurable range (default, 512 bytes) of addresses that might hold a reference to R
(we discuss the implementation of card tables in more detail in Chapter 11). G1 uses the
card table for two purposes. Mutators use it as a temporary scratch space to reduce the
number of duplicates in their refinement buffers (which we describe below); in garbage col-
lection pauses, G1 repurposes the table as a combined remembered set for all the regions
to be evacuated.
    The G1 filtering write barrier records interesting pointers. Algorithm 10.1 shows the
fragment of the post-write barrier to support region evacuation (but omits the pre-write
barrier required for concurrent marking). Each mutator thread has a dirtyCardBuffer,
a local sequential store buffer (array) of recently dirtied cards (default, 256). The write
barrier first filters out any writes of null or of pointers between objects in the same region,
and any writes to young objects. For other writes, it checks if the card corresponding
to the overwritten field is dirty and, if not, dirties the card and adds it to the thread’s

dirtyCardBuffer. When this buffer is full, the barrier appends it to a global queue of
filled remembered set buffers.
     Concurrent remembered set refinement threads wait on a condition variable for the size
of this queue to become sufficiently large. The purpose of these threads is to populate the
regions’ remembered sets. A refinement thread scans each card of a buffer, first setting
the card to Clean before examining the pointer fields of the objects whose modification
may have dirtied the card. If any interesting inter-region pointer is discovered, the card
is inserted into the remembered set of the referenced region. Note that the write barrier
in Algorithm 10.1 requires a StoreLoad fence between the pointer update and adding the
card to the buffer to prevent reorderings4 of memory stores and loads that may prevent
the refinement thread from seeing the mutator store. G1 fixes the values of cards corre-
sponding to young regions as Young in order to mitigate the performance impact of the
StoreLoadFence in the barrier. Some cards may contain fields that are updated fre-
quently. G1 defers processing such cards until the next evacuation pause, placing them in
a cache of ‘hot’ cards; it uses a second card table to record how many times a card has been
dirtied since the last evacuation pause.
     This organisation gives considerable flexibility in the choice of regions to be evacuated.
Regions are compacted in parallel, in evacuation pauses with all mutator threads stopped
(see Chapter 14). In general, G1 will choose those regions with low fractions of live data,
attempting to meet a soft real-time pause time goal, which can be supplied by the user. It
predicts the pause time required to evacuate a condemned set5 (CS) of regions according
to the formula

T (CS) = Tfixed + TmergeCard × NdirtyCard + ∑ TmergeRS × rsSize(r ) + Tcopy × liveBytes(r )
                                                                                               
                                                     r ∈CS

where Tfixed represents fixed costs common to all pauses, TmergeCard the average time to
merge a card from the refinement buffer into the combined remembered set, NdirtyCard the
number of dirty cards in the refinement buffer at the start of the collection, TmergeRS the
average time to merge a card from a region’s remembered set into the condemned set,
rsSize(r ) the number of cards in r’s remembered set, Tcopy the cost per byte of evacuating
(and scanning) a live object and liveBytes(r ) an estimate of the number of live bytes in
region r.
    As implemented in OpenJDK, G1 is a generational collector. It starts in a ‘young only’
mode, collecting only young generation and humongous regions. In this mode, G1 needs
to maintain only the remembered sets belonging to young regions as humongous objects
are not moved and old generation regions are not collected. A ‘young only’ collection
starts by halting mutator threads and disconnecting their thread-local allocation buffers.
Before evacuation, G1 merges all remembered sets of the current condemned set (here,
the young generation), the refinement queues and the hot card cache into a single remem-
bered set (repurposing the card table to represent this). This removes any duplicates from
the individual remembered sets that would otherwise need to be filtered out later in a
more expensive way. This is straightforward to parallelise as is subsequent iteration over
the card table. By recording approximate areas larger than cards with a second-level card
table, G1 can avoid scanning all of the card table corresponding to the old generation. In
many cases, this results in its only needing to scan a small fraction of the card table (in con-
trast, for example, to the OpenJDK parallel collector which always needs to scan the entire
card table). In the evacuation phase, parallel threads move objects starting from the roots
(thread stacks, the unified remembered set, Java virtual machine internal data structures
  4 We discuss memory consistency in Section 13.2.
  5 OpenJDK calls a condemned set a ‘collection set’.

and code), promoting those in eden regions to survivor regions, and those in survivor
regions to old generation regions once they have survived sufficiently many collections.
After this phase has finished copying live objects, G1 does any necessary clean-up work,
including processing weak references, before restarting the mutators.
    Eventually it will become necessary to collect old regions as well. G1 initiates such
‘mixed collections’, starting by concurrently marking live objects once the old generation
occupies a sufficient fraction (adaptively adjusted) of the heap or after a humongous object
is allocated. We discuss ‘mixed collections’ in Chapter 16. Overall, G1 is a complex and
delicate collector that relies on its automatic Ergonomics tuning and careful work by its
developers over many years.

10.5      Trading space and time
Next, we examine collectors that trade off the space-time costs of mark-sweep collection
and fragmentation. Each takes a different approach to the problems of trying to make best
use of available heap space, avoiding the need to defragment (whether through evacuation
or mark-compact) and reducing time overheads in the collector’s loops.
    Dimpsey et al. [2000] describe a sophisticated parallel mark-sweep (with occasional
compaction) collector for IBM’s server Java virtual machine, version 1.1.7. Like Sun’s 1.1.5
collectors, the IBM server used thread-local allocation buffers.6 Small objects were bump-
allocated within a buffer without synchronisation; synchronised allocation of buffers and
other large objects (greater than 0.25 times the buffer size) was performed by searching a
free-list. Dimpsey et al. found that this architecture on its own led to poor performance. Al-
though most large object requests were for local allocation buffers, free chunks that could
not satisfy these requests tended to congregate at the start of the free-list, leading to very
long searches. To address this, they introduced two further free-lists, one for objects of
exactly the local allocation buffer size (1.5 kilobytes plus header) and one for objects be-
tween 512 kilobytes and the buffer size. Whenever the buffer list became empty, a large
chunk was obtained from the large object list and split into many buffers. This optimi-
sation substantially improved Java performance on uniprocessors and even more so on
multiprocessors.
    The IBM server collector marked objects in a side bitmap. Sweeping traversed the
bitmap, testing bits a byte or a word at a time. Dimpsey et al. optimise their sweep by
ignoring short sequences of unused space; a bit in the object header was used to distinguish
a large object from a small one followed by garbage, and two tables were used to translate
arbitrary byte values in the mark bitmap to counts of leading and trailing zeroes. The
consequence of this is that, after a collection, parts of an allocation buffer may be free but
not usable for allocation since the server bump-allocates only from fresh buffers. However,
not only did this approach reduce sweep time but it also reduced the length of the free-lists,
since they no longer contain any small blocks of free space.
    The potential cost of this technique is that some free space is not returned to the alloca-
tor. However, objects tend to live and die together and Dimpsey et al. exploit this property
to avoid compaction as much as possible. They follow the advice of Johnstone [1997] by
using an address-ordered, first-fit allocator in order to increase the chance of creating holes
in the heap large enough to be useful. Furthermore, they allow local allocation blocks to
be of variable length. If the first item on the local allocation buffer free-list is smaller than a
desired size T (they use 6 kilobytes), it is used as is (note that the item must be larger than
the minimum size accepted for inclusion in the free-list). If it is between T and 2T, it is
split into two evenly sized buffers. Otherwise, the block is split to yield a buffer of size T.
  6 Contrary to our conventions, Dimpsey et al. call these ‘thread-local heaps’.

                                   lineCursor                             blockCursor
                                            lineLimit                                   blockLimit

             Marked in previous        Implicitly marked        Freshly allocated        Free

Figure 10.7: Allocation in immix, showing blocks of lines. Immix uses bump
       pointer allocation within a partially empty block of small objects, advanc-
       ing lineCursor to lineLimit, before moving onto the next group of un-
       marked lines. It acquires wholly empty blocks in which to bump-allocate
       medium-sized objects. Immix marks both objects and lines. Because a small
       object may span two lines (but no more), immix treats the line after any se-
       quence of (explicitly) marked lines as implicitly marked: the allocator will
       not use it.
                Blackburn and McKinley [2008], doi: 10.1145/1375581.1375586
            © 2008 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

Dimpsey et al. also set aside 5% of the heap beyond the ‘wilderness boundary’ [Korn and
Vo, 1985], to be used only if insufficient space is available after a collection.

10.6     Mark-region collection: immix
Like the Dimpsey et al. IBM server, the immix collector [Blackburn and McKinley, 2008]
attempts to avoid fragmentation. It too is a mostly mark-sweep collector, but it eliminates
fragmentation when necessary by copying rather than compacting collection. Immix em-
ploys a block-structured heap, just as the other collectors discussed in this section. Its
32-kilobyte blocks are the basis for both thread-local allocation and the units for defrag-
mentation. At collection time, immix chooses whether to mark a block in place or to evac-
uate its live objects, using liveness estimates gathered from the previous collection cycle (in
the same way as Spoonhower et al. but in contrast to Detlefs [2004a], who obtain their es-
timates from concurrent marking). Both the IBM server and immix use fast bump-pointer
allocation. Whereas Dimpsey et al. reduce fragmentation by allocating from variable-sized
buffers, immix can also allocate sequentially into line-sized gaps in partially filled buffers.
Immix lines are 128 bytes, chosen to roughly match cache line lengths. Just as Dimpsey
et al. optimise their collector’s sweep by ignoring short sequences of unused space, so im-
mix reclaims space in recyclable blocks at the granularity of lines rather than individual
objects. Let us look at the immix collector in detail.
    Immix allocates from either completely free or partially filled (‘recyclable’) blocks. Fig-
ure 10.7 shows the structure of recyclable blocks. For the purpose of allocation, immix
distinguishes large objects (which are allocated in a large object space), medium-sized
objects whose size is greater than a line, and small objects; most Java objects are small.
Algorithm 10.2 shows the immix algorithm for small and medium-sized objects. Immix
preferentially allocates into empty line-sized gaps in partially filled blocks using a linear,
next-fit strategy. In the fast path, the allocator attempts to bump-allocate into the current
contiguous sequence of free lines (line 2). If this fails, the search distinguishes between
small and medium-sized allocation requests.
    We consider small requests first. In this case, the allocator searches for the next se-
quence of free lines in the current block (line 11). If this fails, immix tries to allocate from
free lines in the next partially filled block (line 13) or the next empty block (line 15). If

Algorithm 10.2: Allocation in immix

 1   alloc(size):
 2      addr ← sequentialAllocate(lines, size)
 3      if addr ̸= null
 4         return addr
 5      if size ≤ LINE_SIZE
 6         return allocSlowHot(size)
 7      else
 8         return overflowAlloc(size)
 9

10   allocSlowHot(size):
11      lines ← getNextLineInBlock()
12      if lines = null
13         lines ← getNextRecyclableBlock()
14         if lines = null
15            lines ← getFreeBlock()
16            if lines = null
17               return null                                                 /* Out of memory */
18      return alloc(size)
19

20   overflowAlloc(size):
21      addr ← sequentialAllocate(overflowBlock, size)
22      if addr ̸= null
23         return addr
24      overflowBlock ← getFreeBlock()
25      if overflowBlock = null
26         return null                                 /* Out of memory */
27      return sequentialAllocate(overflowBlock, size)

neither request succeeds, the collector is invoked. Notice that, unlike first-fit allocation,
the immix allocator never retreats even though this may mean that some lines are only
partially filled.
    In most applications, a small number of Java objects are likely to be larger than a line but
not ‘large’. Blackburn and McKinley found that treating these like the small objects above
led to many lines being wasted. To avoid fragmenting recyclable blocks, these medium-
sized objects are bump-allocated into empty blocks (overflowAlloc). They found that
the overwhelming proportion of allocation was into blocks that were either completely free
or less than a quarter full. Note that allocation of both small and medium-sized objects is
into thread-local blocks; synchronisation is only required to acquire a fresh block (either
partially filled or completely empty).
    The immix collector marks both objects (to ensure correct termination of the scan) and
lines (the authors call this ‘mark-region’). A small object is by definition smaller than a line,
but may still span two lines. Immix marks the second line implicitly (and conservatively):
the line following any sequence of marked lines is skipped by the allocator (see Figure 10.7)
even though, in the worst case, this might waste nearly a line in every gap. Blackburn and
McKinley found that tracing performance was improved if a line was marked as an object
was scanned rather than when it was marked and added to the work list, since the more
expensive scanning operation better hid the latency of line marking. Implicit marking

improved the performance of the marker considerably. In contrast, medium-sized objects
are marked exactly (a bit in their header distinguishes small and medium objects), but
omitting the mark for the last line occupied by the object.
    Immix compacts opportunistically, depending on fragmentation statistics, and in the
same pass as marking. These statistics are recorded at the end of each collection by the
sweeper, which operates at the granularity of lines. Immix annotates each block with the
number of gaps it contains and constructs histograms mapping the number of marked
lines as a function of the number of gaps blocks contain. The collector selects the most-
fragmented blocks as candidates for compaction in the next collection cycle. As these
statistics can only provide a guide, immix can stop compacting early if there is insufficient
room to evacuate objects. In practice, compaction is rare for many benchmarks.

10.7     Copying collection in a constrained memory space
As we have seen, these incremental techniques require a copy reserve of just one block
but take many collections to compact the whole heap. Sachindran and Moss [2003] adopt
this approach for generational collection in memory constrained environments, dividing
the old generation into a sequence of contiguous blocks. Rather than evacuate a single
block at each collection, Mark-Copy collects the whole heap one block at a time at each full
heap collection. Like any other generational collector, objects are allocated into the nursery
which is collected frequently, with any survivors being copied to the old generation. If the
space remaining drops to a single block, a full heap collection is initiated.
    Independent collection of each block requires a remembered set for each one, but this
would complicate the generational write barrier since it would have to record not only
inter-generational pointers but also inter-block ones. Instead, Mark-Copy’s first phase
marks all live objects, and also constructs per-block unidirectional remembered sets and
counts the volume of live data for each block. Two advantages arise from having the
marker rather than the mutator construct the remembered sets: the remembered sets are
precise (they only contain those slots that actually hold pointers from higher numbered to
lower numbered blocks at the time of collection) and they do not contain any duplicates.
G1 similarly has collector threads construct remembered sets for old generation regions.
Windows of consecutive blocks are evacuated one at a time, starting with the lowest num-
bered (to avoid the need for bidirectional remembered sets), copying live data to the free
block. Because the marker has counted the volume of live data in each block, the collector
can determine how many blocks can be evacuated in each pass. For example, the second
pass in Figure 10.8 was able to evacuate a window of three blocks. At the end of each pass,
the space consumed by the evacuated blocks is released (unmapped).
    By evacuating blocks one at a time if necessary, collectors like Mark-Copy effectively in-
crease the space available compared with a standard semispace collector, which may lead
to fewer collections given the same space budget. Mark-Copy may also be incremental, in-
terleaving collections of blocks in the old generation with nursery collections. However, it
has disadvantages. Each full collection scans every object twice, once to mark it and once
to copy it. Marking requires space for a mark stack and for the remembered sets. Each
copying pass may require thread stacks and global data to be rescanned. Still, under some
useful range of conditions it performs well compared with copying generational collectors
that must reserve more of the available space for copying into.
    The MC2 collector [Sachindran et al., 2004] relaxes Mark-Copy’s requirement for blocks
to occupy contiguous locations by numbering blocks logically rather than by their (vir-
tual) address. This has several advantages. It removes the need for blocks to be remapped
at the end of each pass (and hence the risk of running out of virtual address space in a

           remset               Roots

          A                 C              E              G

                                                                             Unmapped

                                                                                            Unmapped
                           D               F              H
           B

                           (a) After marking (live objects are shown in grey)

                            C              E              G              B
                Unmapped

                                                                                            Unmapped
                           D               F              H

        (b) After the first copying pass. B has been evacuated and the first block has been
        unmapped.

                                                                                        D
                                                                         B
                Unmapped

                                Unmapped

                                               Unmapped

                                                              Unmapped

                                                                         C              G

        (c) After the second copying pass. Note that there was sufficient room to evacuate
        three blocks.

Figure 10.8: Mark-Copy divides the space to be collected into blocks. Af-
      ter the mark phase has constructed a remembered set of objects containing
      pointers that span blocks, the blocks are evacuated and unmapped, one at a
      time.
                      Sachindran and Moss [2003], doi: 10.1145/949305.949335
               © 2003 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

32-bit environment). It also allows blocks to be evacuated logically simply by changing
their block number, which is useful if the volume of live data in the block is sufficiently
high to outweigh the benefit of copying and compacting it. Numbering the blocks logi-
cally also allows the order of collection of blocks to be modified at collection time. Unlike
Mark-Copy, MC2 spreads the passes required to copy old generation blocks over multiple
nursery collections; it also marks the old generation incrementally using a Steele insertion
barrier (we discuss incremental marking in Chapter 15). Because of its incrementality, it
starts collecting the old generation somewhat before space runs out, and adaptively ad-
justs the amount of work it does in each increment to try to avoid a large pause that might
occur if space runs out. Like other approaches discussed in this chapter, MC2 segregates
popular objects into a special block for which it does not maintain a remembered set (thus

treating them as immortal although this decision can be reverted). Furthermore, in order
to bound the size of remembered sets, it also coarsens the largest ones by converting them
from sequential store buffers to card tables (we explain these techniques in Chapter 11).
Large arrays are also managed by card tables, in this case by allocating space for their own
table at the end of each array. Through careful tuning of its combination of techniques, it
achieves high space utilisation, high throughput and well-balanced pauses.

10.8     Bookmarking garbage collection
These incremental compaction techniques have allowed the heap to be compacted (even-
tually) without the time overhead of traditional mark-compact algorithms or the space
overhead of standard semispace collection. Nevertheless, programs will still incur a sig-
nificant performance penalty if the number of pages occupied by the heap is sufficiently
large that either mutator activity or garbage collector tracing leads to paging. The cost of
evicting and loading a page is likely to be of the order of millions of cycles, making it worth
expending considerable effort to avoid page faults. The Bookmarking collector [Hertz et al.,
2005] mitigates the total cost of mutator page faults and avoids faults during collection.
     The collector cooperates with the operating system’s virtual memory manager to guide
its page eviction decisions. In the absence of such advice, the manager is likely to make
a poor choice of which page to evict. Consider a simple semispace collector and a virtual
memory manager which always evicts the least recently used page. Outside collection
time, the page chosen will always be an as yet unused but soon to be occupied tospace
page. Indeed, if most objects are short-lived, it is quite likely that the least recently used
page will be the very next one to be used by the allocator — the worst possible paging
scenario from its point of view! A fromspace page would be a much better choice: not
only will it not be accessed (and hence reloaded) until the next collection but its contents
do not need to be written out to the backing store.
     The Bookmarking collector can complete a collection trace without faulting in non-
resident pages. The trace conservatively assumes that all objects on a non-resident page are
live but it also needs to locate any objects reachable from that page. To support this, if a live
page has to be scheduled for eviction, the run-time system scans it, looking for outgoing
references, and ‘bookmarks’ their targets. When this page is reloaded, its bookmarks are
removed. These bookmarks are used at collection time to propagate the trace.
     The virtual memory manager is modified to send a signal whenever a page is sched-
uled for eviction. On receipt of a signal, the Bookmarking collector always attempts to
choose an empty page. If this is not possible, it calls the collector and then selects a newly
emptied page. This choice can be communicated to the virtual memory manager through
a system call, for example madvise with the MADV_DONTNEED flag. Thus Bookmarking
attempts to shrink the heap to avoid page faults. It never selects pages in the nursery or
those containing its metadata. If Bookmarking cannot find an empty page, it chooses a
victim (often the scheduled page) and scans it for outgoing references, setting a bit in their
targets’ headers. Hertz et al. extend the Linux kernel with a new system call allowing user
processes to surrender a list of pages.
     If the whole heap is not memory resident, full heap collections start by scanning it for
bookmarked objects, which are added to the collector’s work list. While this is expensive,
it is cheaper in a small heap than a single page fault. Occasionally it is necessary to compact
the old generation. The marking phase counts the number of live objects of each size class
and selects the minimum set of pages needed to hold them. A Cheney pass then moves
objects to these pages (objects on the target page are not moved). Bookmarked objects are
never moved in order to avoid having to update pointers held in non-resident pages.

10.9       Ulterior reference counting
So far we have seen a number of different partitioned organisations of the heap. Each
partitioning scheme allows different spaces of the heap to be managed by different policies
or algorithms, collected either at the same or at different times. Segregation has been used
to distinguish objects by their expected lifetimes, by their size or in order to improve heap
utilisation. In the final section of this chapter, we consider segregation of objects according
to the rate at which they are mutated.
    There is ample evidence that for a wide range of applications young objects are allo-
cated and die at very high rates; they are also mutated frequently (for example, to ini-
tialise them) [Stefanović, 1999]. Evacuation is an effective technique for such objects since
it allows fast bump pointer allocation and needs to copy only live data, little of which is
expected. Modern applications require increasingly large heaps and live sets. Long-lived
objects tend to have lower mortality and update rates. All these factors are inimical to
tracing collection: its cost is proportional to the volume of live data and it is undesirable
to trace long-lived data repeatedly. On the other hand, reference counting is well suited to
such behaviour as its cost is simply proportional to the rate at which objects are mutated.
Blackburn and McKinley [2003] argue that each space, young and old, should be managed
by a policy appropriate to its size, and to the expected lifetimes and mutation rate of the
objects that it contains.
    Their Ulterior reference counting collector therefore manages young objects by copying
and older ones by reference counting. It allocates young objects into a bounded-size nurs-
ery space, using bump pointer allocation. Any young objects that survive a nursery col-
lection are copied to a mature space, managed with segregated fits free-lists. The mutator
write barrier is responsible both for managing reference counts of objects in the mature
space and for remembering pointers from that space to young objects. Reference counting
is deferred for operations involving stacks or registers, and the collector coalesces reference
count updates made to other heap objects. Whenever a pointer field of an unlogged object
is updated, the object is logged. Logging records the address of the object and buffers a
decrement for each of the object’s referents in the reference counted mature space.7
    At garbage collection time, the collector moves surviving young objects into the refer-
ence counted world, and reclaims unreachable data in both spaces. It increments the count
of each reference counted child in the mutation log; any targets in the nursery are marked
as live, and added to the nursery collector’s work list. As surviving young objects are
promoted and scavenged, the collector increments the reference counts of their targets. As
with many other implementations of deferred reference counting, the counts of objects ref-
erenced by the roots are also incremented temporarily during collection. All the buffered
increments are applied before the buffered decrements. Cyclic garbage is handled using
the Recycler algorithm [Bacon and Rajan, 2001]. However, rather than invoking it at each
collection on all those decremented objects whose count did not reach zero, Blackburn and
McKinley trigger cycle detection only if the available heap space falls below a user-defined
limit. An abstract view of Ulterior reference counting is shown in Figure 10.9; compare
this with standard deferred reference counting shown in Figure 5.1 in Chapter 5.
    Goodell et al. [2010] adopt a different approach to optimising reference counting heav-
ily contended objects for multithreaded MPI programs in high performance computing,
partitioning objects by type. First, they suppress reference counting on predefined objects
with immortal lifetimes (those with lifetimes from MPU_Init to MPI_Finalize). Sec-
ond, they manage heavily contended objects with a mark-sweep collector. The reference
  7 In contrast, the write barrier of Levanoni and Petrank [2001] records a snapshot of the mutated object (see

Chapter 5).

                                                stacks
                                    defer      registers      ignore
                               RC             defer or RC                    ignore

                              RC space                        non-RC space

                                              remember

Figure 10.9: Ulterior reference counting schematic: the heap is divided into
       a space that is managed by reference counting and one that is not. The
       schematic shows whether reference counting operations on pointer loads or
       stores should be performed eagerly, deferred or ignored.
                 Blackburn and McKinley [2003], doi: 10.1145/949305.949336
            © 2003 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

counts for these objects are not manipulated when a transient object acquires or releases
a reference to them. Instead, they are allocated with a reference count of two — the sec-
ond reference being held by the garbage collector which maintains a set of these objects.
At collection time, the collector (i) sweeps its set of collector-managed objects, marking
them not live, (ii) traces from its set of allocated transient objects, marking live any collec-
tor-managed objects it finds, and finally (iii) sweeps the set of collector-managed objects
again, reclaiming any not marked live.

10.10      Issues to consider
As we have seen in this chapter, there are several reasons other than age to segregate ob-
jects in the heap. We can partition the set of objects in the heap so that we can manage
different partitions or spaces under different policies and with different mechanisms: the
policies and mechanisms adopted will be those most appropriate to the properties of the
objects in the space. Partitioning by physical segregation can have a number of benefits
including fast address-based space membership tests, increased locality, selective defrag-
mentation and reduced management costs.
    One of the most common policies is to manage large objects differently from small
ones. Large objects are placed in their own space, which is typically a non-moving space
in order to avoid the cost of copying or compacting these objects. Large objects are usually
allocated to their own sequence of pages, which are not shared with other objects. It can
be worthwhile distinguishing objects that do not contain pointers (such as bitmaps repre-
senting images) from large arrays of pointers: it is not necessary to trace the former and, if
they are marked in a separate bitmap, it is never necessary for the collector to access them,
thus avoiding page and cache faults.
    Partitioning can also be used to allow the heap to be collected incrementally rather
than as a whole. Here, we mean that the collector can choose to collect only a subset of the
spaces in the heap in the same way that generational collectors preferentially collect only
the nursery generation. The benefit is the same: the collector has a more tightly bounded
amount of work to do in any single cycle and hence it is less intrusive.
    One approach is to partition the graph by its topology or by the way in which the
mutator accesses objects. One reason for doing this is to ensure that large pointer structures
are eventually placed in a single partition that can be collected on its own. Unless this is
done, garbage cyclic structures that span partitions can never be reclaimed by collecting a
single partition on its own. Collectors like the Train algorithm [Hudson and Moss, 1992]

or connectivity-based garbage collection [Hirzel et al., 2003] use the topology of objects.
The Train algorithm collects a small space at a time and relocates survivors into the same
spaces as other objects that refer to them. Connectivity-based collection uses a pointer
analysis to place objects into a directed acyclic graph of partitions, which can be collected in
topological order. Objects can also be placed into regions that can be reclaimed in constant
time, once it is known that all the objects in a region are dead. Placement can either be
done explicitly, as for example by the Real-Time Specification for Java, or automatically
guided by a region inferencing algorithm [Tofte et al., 2004]. Rust and C++ may also be
able to infer (some) dynamically allocated objects that die as a scope is exited.
    Pointer analyses have also been used to partition objects into heaplets that are never ac-
cessed by more than one thread [Steensgaard, 2000; Jones and King, 2005]. These heaplets
can then be collected independently and without stopping other threads. Blackburn and
McKinley [2003] exploit the observation that mutators are likely to modify young objects
more frequently than old ones. Their Ulterior reference counting collector thus manages
young objects by copying and old ones by reference counting. High mutation rates do not
impose any overhead on copying collection which is also well suited to spaces with high
mortality rates. Reference counting is well suited to very large, stable spaces which would
be expensive to trace.
    Another common approach is to divide the heap into spaces and apply a different col-
lection policy to each space, chosen dynamically [Lang and Dupont, 1987; Detlefs et al.,
2004; Blackburn and McKinley, 2008]. The usual reason for this is to allow the heap to
be defragmented incrementally, thus spreading the cost over several collection cycles. At
each collection, one or more regions are chosen for defragmentation; typically their sur-
vivors are evacuated to another space whereas objects in other spaces are marked in place.
Copying live data space by space also reduces the amount of space required to accom-
modate the survivors compared with standard semispace collection. At the extreme, the
Mark-Copy collector [Sachindran and Moss, 2003], designed for collection in restricted
heaps, copies the whole of its old generation in a single collection cycle, but does so block-
by-block in order to limit the space overhead to a single block. Its successor, MC2 [Sachin-
dran et al., 2004], offers greater incrementality, working to achieve good utilisation of avail-
able memory and CPU resources while also avoiding large or clustered pauses.
http://taylorandfrancis.com
