Chapter 11

Run-time interface

The heart of an automatic memory management system is the collector and allocator, their
algorithms and data structures, but these are of little use without suitable means to access
them from a program or if they themselves cannot appropriately access the underlying
platform. Furthermore, some algorithms impose requirements on the programming lan-
guage implementation, for example to provide certain information or to enforce particular
invariants. The interfaces between the collector (and allocator) and the rest of the system,
both the language and compiler above, and the operating system and libraries beneath,
are the focus of this chapter.
    We consider in turn allocating new objects; finding and adjusting pointers in objects,
global areas and stacks; actions when accessing or updating pointers or objects (barriers);
synchronisation between mutators and the collector; managing address space; and using
virtual memory.

11.1     Interface to allocation
From the point of view of a programming language, a request for a new object returns
an object that is not only allocated, but also initialised to whatever extent the language
and its implementation require. Different languages span a large range of requirements.
At one end of the spectrum is C, which only requires a freshly allocated cell of storage of
the requested size — the values in that cell are arbitrary and initialising the cell is entirely
the programmer’s responsibility. At the other end of the spectrum lie pure functional lan-
guages such as Haskell, where at the language level one must provide values for all the
fields of a new object and it is not possible to perceive an uninitialised object. Languages
more concerned with type safety require proper initialisation of all fields, either by requir-
ing the programmer to provide (or assign) values or by using safe defaults for each type,
or through some combination of these techniques.
    For our purposes, we break allocation and initialisation down into three steps, not all
of which apply in every language or case.

   1. Allocate a cell of the proper size and alignment. This is the job of the allocation
      subsystem of the memory manager.

   2. System initialisation. By this we mean the initialisation of fields that must be prop-
      erly set before the object is usable in any way. For example, in object-oriented lan-
      guages this might include setting the method dispatch vector in the new object. It
      generally also includes setting up any header fields required by the language, the

      memory manager or both. For Java objects this might include space for a hash code
      or synchronisation information, and for Java arrays we clearly need to record their
      length somewhere.

   3. Secondary initialisation. By this we mean to set (or update) fields of the new object
      after the new object reference has ‘escaped’ from the allocation subsystem and has
      become potentially visible to the rest of the program, other threads and so on.

Consider the three example languages again.

   • C: All the work happens in Step 1; the language neither requires nor offers any sys-
     tem or secondary initialisation — the programmer does all the work (or fails to). No-
     tice, though, that allocation may include setting up or modifying a header, outside
     of the cell returned, used to assist in freeing the object later.

   • Java: Steps 1 and 2 together provide an object whose method dispatch vector, hash
     code and synchronisation information are initialised, and all fields set to a default
     value (typically all zeroes). For arrays, the length field is also filled in. At this point
     the object is type safe but ‘blank’. This is what the new bytecode returns. Step 3 in
     Java happens in code provided inside a constructor or static initialiser, or even after-
     wards, to set fields to non-zero values. Even initialisation of final fields happens in
     Step 3, so it can be tricky to ensure that other threads do not see those fields change
     if the object is made public too soon.

   • Haskell: The programmer provides the constructor with values for all fields of the re-
     quested object, and the compiler and memory manager together guarantee complete
     initialisation before the new object becomes available to the program. That is, every-
     thing happens in Steps 1 and 2, and Step 3 is disallowed. ML works the same way
     for object creation even though it offers mutable objects as a special case, and Lisp is
     likewise biased towards functional creation of objects even though it also supports
     mutation.

If a language requires complete initialisation, like Haskell and ML, then there is a bit of a
problem defining the interface to allocation: there is an essentially infinite variety of signa-
tures for allocating, depending on the number of fields and their types. The implementers
of Modula-3, which allows functional-style initialisation of new objects but does not re-
quire it, solved the problem by passing an initialising closure to the allocation subroutine.
Allocation then acquires the necessary storage and invokes the initialising closure to fill in
the new object. The closure has access to the values to insert and code to copy those val-
ues into the object. Given the static scoping of Modula-3, such closures do not themselves
require heap allocation, but only a static chain pointer (reference to the enclosing envi-
ronment’s variables) — a good thing, since otherwise there might be an infinite regress.
However, if the compiler generates the initialisation code for these languages, whether the
initialisation happens ‘inside’ the allocation routine or outside does not matter.
    The Glasgow Haskell Compiler solves the problem in a different way: it inlines all of
Steps 1 and 2, calling the collector if memory is exhausted. It uses sequential allocation so
obtaining the cell is simple, and initialisation proceeds by setting the header word and the
object’s fields, whose values were already calculated. This is an example of tight integra-
tion of a compiler and a particular approach to allocation (and collection).
    Note that functional initialisation has two strong advantages: it helps ensure complete
initialisation of objects and, provided that the initialisation code is effectively atomic with
respect to possible garbage collection, it allows the initialising stores to avoid some write

barriers. In particular one can omit generational write barriers in the functional initialisa-
tion case because the object being initialised must be younger than any objects to which it
refers. In contrast, this is not generally true in Java constructors [Zee and Rinard, 2002].
    A language-level request for a new object will eventually translate into a call to an
allocation routine, which may sometimes be inlined by a compiler, to accomplish Step 1
and possibly some or all of Step 2. The key property that allocation needs to satisfy is that
Steps 1 and 2 are effectively atomic with respect to other threads and to collection. This
guarantees that no other component of the system will perceive an object that lacks its
system initialisation. However, if we consider the interface to the allocator (Step 1), there
remains a range of possibilities depending on the division of labour between Steps 1, 2 and
3. Arguments to an allocation request may include the following.

The size requested, generally in bytes, but possibly in words or some other granule size.
     When requesting an array, the interface may present the element size and the number
     of elements separately.

An alignment constraint. Typically there is a default alignment and a way to request an
     alignment that is more strict. These constraints may consist of only a power-of-two
     indication (word, double-word, quad-word alignment, and so on) or a power of two
     and an offset within that modulus (such as aligned on word two of a quad-word).

The kind of object to allocate. For example, managed run-time languages such as Java
     typically distinguish between array and non-array objects. Some systems distinguish
     between objects that contain no pointers and ones that may contain pointers [Boehm
     and Weiser, 1988]; objects containing executable code may also be special. In short,
     any distinction that requires attention by the allocator needs to appear at the inter-
     face.

The specific type of object to allocate, in the sense of programming language types. This
     is different from ‘kind’ in that it may not of itself be interesting to the allocator.
     Rather, the allocator may use it in initialising the object, and so forth. Passing this
     value in may simplify making Step 2 atomic (by moving the burden to Step 1) and
     may also reduce code size by avoiding one or more extra instructions at each alloca-
     tion site.

Which of these arguments we need depends somewhat on the language we are support-
ing. Furthermore, we may present information somewhat redundantly at the interface to
avoid forcing additional computation at run time. While it is possible to provide a sin-
gle rich allocation function that takes many arguments and handles all cases, for speed
and compactness we might provide a number of allocation functions, tailored to different
kinds of object. Considering Java as an example, we might break it down into: scalar ob-
jects (non-arrays), arrays of byte/boolean (one-byte elements), arrays of short/char
(two-byte elements), arrays of int/float (four-byte elements), arrays of references and
arrays of long/double (eight-byte elements). Beyond this there may be internal things
such as the objects that represent classes, method dispatch tables, method code and so on,
depending on whether they are held in the collected heap. Even if they are not part of the
collected heap, one still needs an interface to the explicit-free allocator that creates them.
    Here are some of the possibilities for the post-condition that the allocator guarantees at
the end of Step 1 if it succeeds.

   • The referenced cell has the requested size and alignment, but is not otherwise pre-
     pared for use.

    • Beyond having correct size and alignment, the cell is zeroed. Zeroing helps to guar-
      antee that the program cannot treat old pointers — or non-pointer bit patterns for that
      matter — as valid references. Zero is a good value because it typically represents the
      null pointer and is otherwise a bland and legal value for most types. Some languages,
      such as Java, require zeroing or something similar for their security and type-safety
      guarantees. It can also be helpful in debugging a system if non-allocated memory
      has a specific and easily recognised non-zero bit pattern, such as 0xdeadbeef or
      0xcafebabe, values we have actually seen.

    • The allocated cell appears to be an object of the requested type. This is a case where
      we present the type to the allocator. The difference between this and the weakest
      post-condition (the first one in this list) is that the allocator fills in the object header.

    • The allocator guarantees a fully type-safe object of the requested type. This involves
      both zeroing and filling in the object header. This is not quite the same as a fully
      initialised object in that zeroing provides a safe, but bland, default value, while a
      program will generally initialise at least one field to a non-default value.

    • The allocator guarantees a fully initialised object. This may be less common, since the
      interface must provide for passing the initial value(s). A good example is the cons
      function in Lisp, which we might provide as a separate allocation function because
      calls to it are so common and need to be fast and simple from the program’s side.

What is the most desirable post-condition? Some aspects, such as zeroing, may be dictated
by the language semantics. Likewise, some may be dictated by the level of concurrency in
the environment, and whether and how objects might ‘leak’ from an allocating thread and
become visible to other threads or the collector. Generally, the more concurrent or leaky
the setting, the stronger the post-condition we need.
    What happens if the allocator cannot immediately satisfy the request? In most systems
we want to trigger collection internally and avoid revealing this case to the caller. There is
generally little that a caller can do, and it is wasteful to insert retry loops everywhere the
program tries to allocate an object.1 However, especially in the presence of inlining, we
might inline the common (successful) case and call a collect-and-retry function out of line.
Of course if we inline Step 1, then there remains little distinction between Steps 1 and 2 —
the overall code sequence must be effectively atomic. Later on we discuss handshaking be-
tween mutators and collectors, so as to achieve such atomicity. We note that for purposes
of atomicity it is generally more appropriate to view allocation as a mutator activity.

Speeding allocation
Since many systems and applications tend to allocate at a high rate relative to the rest
of their computation, it is important to tune allocation to be fast. A key technique is to
inline the common case code (the ‘fast path’) and call out to ‘slow path’ code that handles
the rarer, more complex cases. Making good choices here requires careful comparative
measurements under suitable workloads.
    An apparent virtue of sequential allocation is its simplicity, which leads to a short code
sequence for the common case. This is especially true if the target processor provides
enough registers to dedicate one to hold the bump pointer, and possibly one more to hold
the heap limit. In that case the typical code sequence might be: move the bump pointer to
the result register; add-immediate the needed size to the bump pointer; compare the bump
   1 In principle a Java program can catch the exception and try nulling some pointers and restarting a computa-

tion, but we are not aware of that strategy in real programs. Besides, Java’s soft references are an arguably better
way to do the same thing.

pointer against the limit; conditionally branch to a slow path call. Notice that putting the
bump pointer into a register assumes per-thread sequential allocation areas. Some ML
and Haskell implementations further combine multiple allocations in a straight line (basic
block) of code into one larger allocation, resulting in just one limit test and branch. The
same technique can work for code sequences that are single-entry but multiple-exit by
allocating the maximum required along any of the paths, or at least using that as the basis
for one limit test on entry to the code sequence. Clifford et al. [2014] gave a name to this
optimisation of combining multiple allocations into a single one: allocation folding. They
went on to observe that, because the objects are guaranteed at the time of allocation to
reside in the same generation, a compiler can safely remove more write barriers for stores
to those objects, at least up to the next garbage collection safe-point (see Section 11.6).
They found that these optimisations can offer significant improvements in performance.
    It might seem that sequential allocation is necessarily faster than free-list techniques,
but segregated-fits can also be quite efficient if partially inlined and optimised. If we know
the desired size class statically, and we keep the base pointer to the array of free-list point-
ers in a dedicated register, the sequence is: load the desired list pointer; compare it with
zero; branch if zero to a slow path call; load the next pointer; store the next pointer back
to the list head. In a multithreaded system the last step may need to be atomic, say a
compare-and-swap with branch back to retry on failure, or we can provide each thread
with a separate collection of free-list heads.

Zeroing
Some system designs require that free space contain a distinguished value, often zero, for
safety, or perhaps some other value (generally for debugging). Systems offering a weak
allocation guarantee, such as C, may not do this,2 or may only do it as an option for de-
bugging. Systems with a strong guarantee, such as functional languages with complete
initialisation, do not need zeroing — though optionally setting free space to a special value
may aid in debugging. Java is the typical example of a language that requires zeroing.
     How and when might a system zero memory? We could zero each object as we allocate
it, but experience suggests that bulk zeroing is more efficient. Also, zeroing with explicit
memory writes at that time may cause a number of cache misses, and on some architec-
tures, reads may block until the zeroing writes drain from a hardware write buffer/store
queue. Some ML implementations, and also Oracle’s HotSpot Java virtual machine, prefetch
ahead of the (optimised) bump pointer precisely to try to hide the latency of fetching newly
allocated words into the cache [Appel, 1994; Gonçalves and Appel, 1995]. Modern proces-
sors may also detect this pattern and perform the prefetching in hardware. Diwan et al.
[1994] found that write-allocate caches that can allocate on a per-word basis offered the
best performance, but these do not seem to be common in practice.
     From the standpoint of writing an allocator, it is often best to zero whole chunks using
a call to a library routine such as bzero. These routines are typically well optimised for the
target system, and may even use special instructions that zero directly in the cache without
fetching from memory, such as dcbz (Data Cache Block Zero) on the PowerPC or dc zva
(Data Cache Zero by Virtual Address) on the ARMv8-A architecture. Notice that direct use
of such instructions may be tricky since the cache line size is a model-specific parameter.
In any case, a system is likely to obtain best performance if it zeroes large chunks that are
power-of-two aligned.
     Another technique is to use demand-zero pages in virtual memory. While these are
fine for start-up, the overhead of the calls to remap freed pages that we are going to reuse,
and of the traps to obtain freshly zeroed real memory from the operating system, may be
  2 While malloc does not zero memory, calloc does.

higher than zeroing pages ourselves. In any case, we should probably remap pages in bulk
if we are going to use this technique, to amortise some of the cost of the call.
    Another question is when to zero. We might zero immediately after collection. This has
the obvious disadvantage of lengthening the collection pause and the less obvious disad-
vantage of dirtying memory long before it will be used. Such freshly zeroed words will
likely be flushed from the cache, causing write-backs, and then will need to be reloaded
during allocation. Anecdotal experience suggests the best time to zero from the stand-
point of performance is somewhat ahead of the allocator, so that the processor has time
to fetch the words into the cache before the allocator reads or writes them, but not so far
ahead of the allocator that the zeroed words are likely to be flushed. Given modern cache
miss times, it is not clear that the prefetching technique that Appel described will work; at
least it may need tuning to determine the proper distance ahead of the allocator that we
should prefetch. Yang et al. [2011] explored the performance issues in some detail, find-
ing the average overhead of zeroing to be 3% to 5%, and up to more than 12%, on a high
performance virtual machine. They found that bulk zeroing could benefit from using a
hardware feature called non-temporal stores (also called cache bypassing), that is, stores that
do not cause the updated data to be fetched into the cache. They obtained average perfor-
mance improvement of 3% with their techniques. For purposes of debugging, zeroing or
writing a special value into memory should be done as soon as we free cells, to maximise
the range of time during which we will catch errors.

11.2     Finding pointers
Collectors need to find pointers in order to determine reachability. Some algorithmic tac-
tics require precise knowledge of pointers. In particular, safely moving an object at location
x to a new location x ′ and reusing its original cell requires us to update all pointers to x
to refer to x ′ . However, safely reclaiming an object demands certainty that the program
will no longer use it, but the converse is not true: it is safe to retain an object that the pro-
gram will never use again, although it is space-inefficient (which admittedly could cause
a program to fail for lack of available heap). Thus a collector can estimate references to
non-moving objects, as long as its estimates are conservative — it may only over-estimate
the references to an object but not under-estimate them. Reference counting without cycle
collection is conservative, but another way conservatism arises in some schemes is because
they lack precise knowledge of pointers. Thus they may treat a non-pointer value as if it
is a pointer, particularly if it appears to refer to an allocated object. We consider first tech-
niques for conservative pointer finding and then ones for accurately finding pointers in
various locations.

Conservative pointer finding
The foundational technique for conservative pointer finding is to treat each contiguous
pointer-sized and aligned sequence of bytes as a possible pointer value, called an ambigu-
ous pointer. Since the collector knows what memory regions compose the heap, and even
which parts of those regions are allocated, it can discriminate possible pointers from values
that cannot be pointers. For speed, the collector’s algorithm for testing a pointer value’s
‘pointer-ness’ needs to be efficient. A typical approach works in two steps. First it filters
out values that do not refer to any heap area in memory. It might do this with a range
test if the heap is one contiguous area, or by taking the value’s upper bits, obtaining a
chunk number and looking in a table of heap chunks. The second step is to see if the
referenced storage in the heap is actually allocated. It might check that by consulting a

                                                                    p:
                          GC_top_index
      TOP_SZ items

                                 ...

                                                                  LOG_TOP_SZ
                                 ...

                          bottom_index
      BOTTOM_SZ items

                                                                  LOG_BOTTOM_SZ
                                 ...

                                                                                   GC_obj_map
                                 ...

                              hashlink
                                                                  LOG_HBLKSIZE

                          struct hblkhdr
                               hb_size
                               hb_next
                               hb_map
                                 ...

                               hb_marks

                To determine whether a value p is a pointer to an allocated object:
                        1. Does p point between the lowest and highest plausible heap ad-
                           dresses?
                        2. Use high-order bits of p as an index into the first-level table to ob-
                           tain the second-level table. In a 64-bit address space, the top-level
                           table is a chained hash table rather than an array.
                        3. Use middle-order bits of p as an index into the second-level table
                           to get the block header.
                        4. Is the offset of the supposed object a multiple of hb_size from the
                           start of the block?
                        5. Consult the object map for blocks of this size; has the slot corre-
                           sponding to this object in this block been allocated?

Figure 11.1: Conservative pointer finding. The two-level search tree, block
     header and map of allocated blocks in the Boehm-Demers-Weiser conserva-
     tive collector.
                                          Jones [1996]. Reprinted by permission.

bitmap of allocated words. For example, the Boehm-Demers-Weiser conservative collector
[Boehm and Weiser, 1988] works in terms of blocks, with each block dedicated to cells of
a particular size. A block has associated metadata giving the cell size, and also a bitmap
indicating allocated versus free cells. After doing a range check using the heap bounds,
this algorithm next checks to see if the referenced block is allocated at all, and if the block
is allocated it checks whether the particular object is allocated. Only then will it set a mark
bit in its marking phase. The whole process, illustrated in Figure 11.1, has a typical path
length of about 30 RISC instructions.
    Some languages require that pointers refer to the first word of their referent object, or
some standard offset into the object, such as after some header words (see Figure 7.2). This
allows a conservative collector to ignore possible interior pointer values as opposed to
their canonical reference pointer. It is fairly easy to build conservative pointer finding al-
gorithms in both cases; the Boehm-Demers-Weiser collector can be configured either way.3
One caution concerning conservative collection for C is that it is legal for an ‘interior’ ref-
erence to an array to point one element beyond the end of the array. Therefore, conservative
collectors for C may need to retain two objects in that case, or else over-allocate arrays by
one word to avoid possible ambiguity. An explicit-free system may interpose a header be-
tween objects, which also solves the problem. In the presence of compiler optimisations,
pointers may be even further ‘mangled’; see Section 11.2 for a discussion of this topic.
    Since a non-pointer bit pattern may cause the collector to retain an object that is in fact
not reachable, Boehm [1993] devised a mechanism called blacklisting, which tries to avoid
using regions of virtual address space as heap when their addresses correspond to these
kinds of non-pointer values. In particular, if the collector encounters a possible pointer
that refers to memory in a non-allocated block, it blacklists the block, meaning it will not
allocate the block. Were it to allocate the block (and an object at that address), future traces
would mistakenly recognise the false pointer as a true pointer. The collector also supports
blocks used for strictly non-pointer objects, such as bitmaps. Distinguishing this data not
only speeds the collector (since it does not need to scan the contents of these objects), but it
also prevents excessive blacklisting that can result from the bit patterns of the non-pointer
data. The collector further refines its blacklisting by discriminating between invalid point-
ers that may be interior, and those that cannot be interior, because they are from the heap
in the configuration that disallows heap-stored interior pointers. In the possibly interior
case, the referenced block is blacklisted from any use, while in the other case the collector
allows the block to be used for small non-pointer objects (this cannot cause much waste).
To initialise the blacklist, the collector does a collection immediately before the first heap al-
location. It also avoids using blocks whose address ends in many zeroes, since non-pointer
data in the stack often results in such values.
    While conservative collection is typically considered to be relevant primarily to lan-
guages or implementation strategies that do not admit accurate pointer finding, and thus
to be a kind of necessary evil to avoid if accurate pointer finding is possible, Shahriyar et al.
[2014] (see also [Shahriyar, 2015]) found that conservative pointer finding may be faster.
Specifically, for a suite of Java benchmarks they found that conservative deferred reference
counting Immix was faster than its accurate counterpart. They also found that the excess
retention of objects and the number of objects that had to be pinned (could not be moved)
were quite small.
    Somewhat conversely, Banerjee et al. [2020] explored how to do accurate collection for C
programs. Their approach was to track the provenance (origin) of pointers through the pro-
gram. They applied compile-time analyses and optimisations to do much of this tracking

  3 In either case it allows interior pointers, but in the more restrictive case it requires that any reachable object

have a reachable pointer that is not interior. Thus in that configuration it ignores interior pointers when marking.

                                             Tag      Encoded value
                                             00       Pointer
                                             10       Object header
                                             x1       Integer

Table 11.1: An example of pointer tag encoding

                                        Tag      Encoded value
                                        00       Integer
                                        01       Pointer
                                        10       Other primitive value
                                        11       Object header

Table 11.2: Tag encoding for the SPARC architecture

statically, applying dynamic tracking only when necessary. This tracking may introduce
an overhead of 16%. However, they found that their sound and accurate collection is 13%
faster than conservative collection and reclaims 6% more memory.

Accurate pointer finding using tagged values
Some systems, particularly ones based more on dynamic typing, include a tag with each
value that indicates its type. There are two basic approaches to tagging: bit stealing and
big bags of pages. Bit stealing reserves one or more bits, generally at the low or high end of
each word, and lays out objects that can contain pointers in a word-oriented fashion.4 For
example, on a byte-addressed machine with a word size of four bytes, we might steal two
bits for tags. We force objects to start on a word boundary, so pointers always have their
low two bits zero. We choose some other value(s) to indicate (say) integers. Supposing
that we give integers word values with a low bit of 1, we end up with 31-bit integers —
bit stealing in this way does reduce the range of numbers we can represent easily. We
might use a pattern of 10 in the low bits to indicate the start of an object in the heap, for
parsability (Section 7.6). Table 11.1 illustrates the sample tag encoding, which is similar to
one used in actual Smalltalk implementations.
    Dealing with tagged integers efficiently is a bit of a challenge, though arguably the com-
mon case on modern pipelined processors might not be that bad — one cache miss might
swamp it. Still, in order to support dynamically typed language implementations that use
tagged integers, the SPARC architecture included instructions for adding and subtracting
tagged integers. These instructions indicate overflow of the operation (there are versions
that trap as well) or if either operand’s two lowest bits are not zero. For this architecture we
might use the tag encoding shown in Table 11.2. This encoding does require that we adjust
references made from pointers, though in most cases that adjustment can be included in
an offset field of a load or store instruction. The exception is in dealing with accesses to
arrays, which then require the pointer to the array, the offset computed from the index
and this additional adjustment. Still, given the hardware support for arithmetic on tagged
integers, it seemed a reasonable trade-off. This encoding was previously used with the
Motorola MC68000, which has a load instruction that adds an immediate constant, a base
register and another register, all to form the effective address, so on the MC68000 there
was no big penalty to using the encoding.
  4 See Section 15.1 for a different application of bit stealing.

    The big bag of pages approach to tagging associates the tag/type information with an
entire block. This association is therefore typically dynamic and involves a table lookup.
The need for memory references is a disadvantage, but the corresponding advantage is that
numeric and other primitive values have their full native length. This tagging approach
dedicates whole blocks to hold integers, other blocks to floating point numbers, and so on.
Since these are pure values and do not change,5 when allocating new ones we might use
hashing to avoid making new copies of the values already in the table. This technique, also
called hash consing (from the Lisp cons function for allocating new pairs) is quite venerable
[Ershov, 1958; Goto, 1974]. In hash consing Lisp pairs, the allocator maintains a hash table
of immutable pairs and can avoid allocating a new pair if the requested pair is already in
the table. This extends in the obvious way to any immutable heap-allocated objects, such
as those of class Integer in Java. Notice that this is a case where it might be good to use
weak references (Section 12.2) from the hash table to the objects it contains.

Accurate pointer finding in objects
Assuming we are not using tagged values, finding pointers in objects generally requires
knowing each object’s type — at least in the sense of which fields of the object are point-
ers. In object-oriented languages, that is, those with dynamic method dispatch, where the
actual run-time type of an object is not entirely determined by the type of the referring
pointer variable or slot, we need type information associated with the particular object.
Systems usually accomplish this by adding a header to each object that includes type in-
formation. Since object-oriented languages generally have a method dispatch vector for
each type, and they generally store a pointer to that vector in the header of each object of
that type, they typically store information about the type in, or pointed to by, the dispatch
vector. Thus the collector, or any other part of the run-time that uses type information
(such as the reflection mechanism in Java), can find the type information quite readily.
What the collector needs is a table that indicates where pointer fields lie in objects of the
given type. Two typical organisations are a bit vector, similar to a bitmap of mark bits, and
a vector of offsets of pointer fields. Huang et al. [2004] used a vector of offsets to particular
advantage by permuting the order of the entries to obtain different tracing orders, and thus
different orders of objects in a copying collector, improving cache performance. With care,
they did this while the system was running (in a stop-the-world collector).
    A way to identify pointers in objects that is simpler in some respects than using a table
is to partition the pointer and non-pointer data. This is straightforward for some languages
and system designs6 but problematic for others. For example, in ML objects can be poly-
morphic. If the system generates a single piece of code for all polymorphic versions, and
the objects need to use the same field for a pointer in some cases and a non-pointer in oth-
ers, then segregation fails. In object-oriented systems that desire to apply superclass code
to subclass objects, fields added in subclasses need to come after those of superclasses,
again leading to mixing of pointer and non-pointer fields. One way around that is to place
pointer fields in one direction from the reference point in the object (say at negative offsets)
and non-pointer fields in the other direction (positive offsets), which has been called bidi-
rectional object layout. On byte-addressed machines with word-aligned objects, the system
can maintain heap parsability by ensuring that the first header word has its low bit set —
preceding words contain pointers, whose two low bits will always be zero (see US Patent
5,900,001). In practice the tabular approach does not seem to be a problem, and as Huang
et al. [2004] showed, it can actually be advantageous.
   5 This is a property of the representational approach, not of the language: in using this form of tagging, the

designer made a choice to represent integers (floats, and so on) as tagged pointers to their full (untagged) values.
   6 Bartlett [1989b] takes this approach for a Scheme implementation done by translating to C, and Cheadle et al.

[2000] take this approach in Non-Stop Haskell.

    Some systems actually generate object-oriented style methods for tracing, copying and
so on [Thomas, 1993; Thomas and Jones, 1994; Thomas, 1995a,b]. One can view the ta-
ble approach as being like an interpreter and the method approach as the corresponding
compiled code strategy. An interesting idea in Thomas’s line of work is the system’s ability,
when copying a closure, to create a tailored version of the closure’s environment that omits
elements of the environment that the particular function does not use. This saves space in
copied environment objects, and perhaps more significantly, avoids copying unused parts
of the environment. Cheadle et al. [2004] also developed collection code specialised for
each type of closure. Bartlett [1989a] applied the idea of methods for collection to C++ by
requiring the user to write a pointer-enumerating method for each collected C++ class.
    A managed language can use object-oriented indirect function calls in other ways re-
lated to collection. In particular, Cheadle et al. [2008] dynamically change an object’s func-
tion pointer so as to offer a self-erasing read barrier in a copying collector, similar to the
approach Cheadle et al. [2000] used for the Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC). That system
also used a version of stack barriers (see Section 11.5), implemented in a similar way, and
it used the same trick again to provide a generational write barrier when updating thunks.
A fine point of systems that update closure environments is that, since they can shrink an
existing object, in order to maintain heap parsability they may need to insert a ‘fake’ object
in the heap after the one that shrank. Conversely, they may also need to expand an object:
here the old version is overwritten with an indirection node, holding a reference to the new
version. Later collections can short-circuit the indirection node. Collectors can also per-
form other computation on behalf of the mutator such as eager evaluation of applications
of ‘well-known’ functions to arguments already partially evaluated: a common example is
the function that returns the head of a list.
    In principle, statically typed languages can avoid object headers and save space. Appel
[1989b] and Goldberg [1991] explain how to do this for ML, starting from type information
provided only for roots (we have to start somewhere). Later, Goldberg and Gloger [1992]
observe that this might require full type inference during collection, depending on how
the program uses polymorphic types; see also [Goldberg, 1992].
    While languages such as C are generally considered as not admitting accurate pointer
finding because they permit arbitrary type casting and so on, see the discussion of accurate
pointer finding for C at the end of the section on conservative pointer finding, above.
    Now that we have described various strategies for accurate pointer finding in objects,
how does their performance compare? Garner et al. [2011] considered this question across
four hardware architectures with a suite of 18 benchmark programs. They found that
choice of mechanism made a difference — 16% in collection time on average, with a 2.5%
impact on total running time. They saw variation across architectures, but three techniques
showed consistent advantage: layout of pointer fields within objects, specialisation, and
encoding metadata in object headers. In particular, bidirectional layout sped pointer find-
ing both because of its simplicity and because more user-level types map to the same lay-
out, reducing the variety of cases presented to the collector. (We note that they found its
advantages were lost for large heaps.) Specialisation was important in that a few cases can
handle 90% of the objects, using code requiring less dispatching and call overhead. This
can be characterised as following a policy of inlining the common cases. Lastly, using three
bits in the object header to encode those most common cases supports rapid branching to
the specialised code for those cases, avoiding memory references to tables describing an
object’s layout.

Accurate pointer finding in global roots
Finding pointers in global roots is relatively easy by applying almost any of the techniques
mentioned for finding pointers in objects. Languages differ primarily in whether the set

of global roots is entirely static or whether it can grow dynamically. Such dynamic growth
can result from dynamic code loading. Some systems start with a base collection of objects.
For example, Smalltalk, some Lisp and some Java systems start with a base system ‘image’,
also called the boot image, that includes a number of classes/functions and instances, par-
ticularly if they start with an interactive programming environment. A running program
might modify parts of the system image — usually tables of one kind or another — caus-
ing image objects to refer to newer objects. A system might therefore treat pointer fields in
the image as roots. Notice, though, that image objects can become garbage, so it may be a
good idea sometimes to trace through the image to find what remains actually reachable.
This is all tied into whether we are using generational collection, in which case we may
treat the image as a particularly old generation.

Accurate pointer finding in stacks and registers
One way to deal with call stacks is to heap allocate activation records, as advocated by Ap-
pel [1987], for example. See also [Appel and Shao, 1994, 1996] and a counter-argument by
Miller and Rozas [1994]. Some language implementations manage to make stack frames
look like heap objects and thus kill two birds with one stone. Examples include the Non-
Stop Haskell [Cheadle et al., 2000] and its later optimisation [Cheadle et al., 2004]. It is also
possible to give the collector specific guidance about the contents of the stack, for example
as Henderson [2002] does with custom-generated C code for implementing the Mercury
language, and which Baker et al. [2009] improved upon for a real-time Java implementa-
tion.
    However, most languages treat stack frames specially because of the need for a variety
of efficiencies in order to obtain best performance. There are three issues we consider:

   1. Finding frames (activation records) within the stack.

   2. Finding pointers within each frame.

   3. Dealing with conventions concerning passing values as arguments, returning them,
      and saving and restoring values in registers.

In most systems it is not just the collector that needs to find frames in the stack. Mecha-
nisms such as exception handling and continuations may need to ‘parse’ the stack, not to
mention the tremendous value of stack examination in debugging and its requirement in
some systems, such as Smalltalk. Of course the view given to the programmer may be one
very cleaned up from the typically more optimised and ‘raw’ layout in the actual frames.
Because stack parsing is generally useful, frame layout conventions generally provide for
it. For example, many designs include a dynamic chain field in each frame, which points
to the previous frame. Various other fields generally lie at fixed offsets from the refer-
ence point of the frame (the address to which the frame pointer or dynamic chain refers).
These might include the return address, the static chain and so on. Systems also generally
provide a map to determine from a return address the function within which the address
lies. In non-collected systems this might only occur in debugger symbol tables, but many
managed systems access this table from the program, so it may be part of the loaded or
generated information about code, rather than just in auxiliary debugger tables.
    To find pointers within a frame, a system might explicitly add stack map information
to each frame to help the collector. This metadata might consist of a bitmap indicating
which frame fields contain pointers, or the system might partition a frame into pointer-
containing and non-pointer portions, with metadata giving the size of each. Notice that
there are likely to be some initial instructions of each function during which the new frame

exists but is not yet entirely initialised. Collecting during this time might be problematic;
see our later discussion of garbage collection safe-points and mutator handshaking in Sec-
tion 11.6. Alternatively, we might get by with careful collector analysis of the initial code
sequence, with careful use of push instructions on a machine that supports them or some
other custom-designed approach. Obviously frame scanning is simpler if the compiler
uses any given frame field always as a pointer or always as a non-pointer. That way the
whole function needs only one map.
    However, the single-map approach is not always possible. For example, at least two
language features make it difficult:

   • generic/polymorphic functions.

   • the Java virtual machine jsr instruction.

We previously observed that a polymorphic function may use the same code for pointer
and non-pointer arguments. Since a straightforward stack map cannot distinguish the
cases, the system needs some additional source of information. Fortunately, the caller
‘knows’ more about the specific call, but it too may be a polymorphic function. So the
caller may need to ‘pass the buck’ to its caller. However, this is guaranteed to bottom out,
at the main function invocation in the worst case. The situation is analogous to typing
objects from roots [Appel, 1989b; Goldberg, 1991; Goldberg and Gloger, 1992].
    In the Java virtual machine, the jsr instruction performs a local call, which does not
create a new frame but rather has access to the same local variables as the caller. It was
designed to be used to implement the try-finally feature of the Java language, using a
single piece of code to implement the finally block by calling it using jsr in both the
normal and the exceptional case. The problem is that during the jsr call, some local vari-
ables’ types are ambiguous, in the sense that, depending on which jsr called the finally
block, a particular variable, not used in the finally block but used later, might contain
a pointer from one call site and a non-pointer from another. There are two solution ap-
proaches to this problem. One is to refer these cases to the calling site for disambiguation.
In this approach rather than have each stack map entry be just ‘pointer’ or ‘non-pointer’
(that is, a single bit), we need an additional case that means ‘refer to jsr caller’. In ad-
dition, we need to be able to find the jsr return address, which requires some analysis
of the Java bytecode to track where it stored that value. An alternative, more popular in
modern systems, is to transform the bytecode, or dynamically compile code, simply to
duplicate the finally block. Whilst in pathological cases that might cause exponential
blowup in code size, it substantially simplifies this part of the system. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that generating Java stack maps for dynamically compiled code has been a sig-
nificant source of subtle bugs, so managing system complexity here may be important. We
note that some systems defer generating a stack map until the collector needs it, saving
space and time in the normal case but perhaps increasing collector pause time.
    Another reason that a system might choose not to use a single map per frame is that it
further restricts the register allocator: it must use a given register consistently as a pointer
or non-pointer. This is particularly undesirable on machines with few registers.
    Notice that whether we have one map per function, or different ones for different parts
of a function, the compiler must propagate type information far through the back end. This
may not be overly difficult if we understand the requirement before we write the compiler,
but revising existing compilers to do it can be quite difficult.

Optimising stack scanning. Griffin et al. [2005] developed two methods to reduce the typ-
ical effort needed to scan a stack. One used tags in stack frames to avoid creating stack

maps for a frame over and over (see Chapter 20 on page 466) and incorporated stack bar-
riers (see Section 11.5). The other tagged pointers in frames to avoid processing the same
pointer multiple times during each stack scan (see page 467). This latter optimisation may
be of most use with a non-moving collector and can help avoid reference count overflows
when reference counting.

Finding pointers in registers. To this point we have ignored the issue of pointers in ma-
chine registers. There are several reasons why handling registers is more difficult than
dealing with stack contents.

   • As we pointed out previously, even if each stack frame field is fixed as a pointer or a
     non-pointer for a whole function, it is less convenient to impose that rule on registers
     — or to be even further restrictive and require that pointers, and only pointers, reside
     in a particular subset of the registers. It is probably practical only on machines that
     provide a large number of registers. Thus most systems will have more than one
     register map per function.

   • Even when guaranteeing that no pointer stored in a global root, heap object or local
     variable is an interior or derived pointer (see pages 193–194 of this section), efficient
     local code sequences may result in a register holding such an ‘untidy’ pointer.

   • Calling conventions often provide that some registers follow a caller-save protocol,
     in which the caller must save and restore a register if it wants the value to survive
     across a call, and that some other registers follow a callee-save protocol, in which the
     callee must save and restore a register, on behalf of callers deeper in the stack, before
     the callee can use the register. Caller-save registers are not a problem since the caller
     knows what kind of value is in them, but callee-save registers have contents known
     only to some caller up the stack (if any). Thus a callee cannot indicate in a register
     map whether or not an unsaved callee-save register contains a pointer. Likewise, if a
     callee saves a callee-save register to a frame field, the callee cannot say whether that
     field contains a pointer.

A number of systems require a callee-save stack unwinding mechanism as a matter of
course, in order to reconstruct the frame structure of the stack and call chain, especially for
systems that do not designate a ‘previous frame’ register and the like.
    We now introduce an approach to the callee-save registers problem. First, we add meta-
data that indicates for each function which callee-save registers it saves, and where in its
frame it saves them. We assume the more common design where a function saves in one
go, near the beginning of the function, all the callee-save registers that it will use. If the
compiler is more sophisticated and this information varies from place to place within a
function, then the compiler will need to emit per-location callee-save information.
    Starting with the top frame, we reconstruct the register state for each frame by ‘unsav-
ing’ a callee’s saved callee-save registers to obtain the register state of the caller at the point
of call. As we go, we record which registers we ‘unsaved’ and the value that the callee had
in them, for use as we come back up the stack. When we reach the base of the stack, we
can ignore any saved callee-save register contents since there is no caller. Therefore, for
that frame we can produce any pointers for the collector, and allow it to update them.
    As we walk back up the stack, we re-save the callee-save registers. Notice that if the
collector updated a pointer, then this will update the saved value appropriately. We get
from our side memory the value that the callee had in the register. Once we have done
this for all callee-save registers saved by the callee, we produce pointers for the callee, and
allow the collector to update them as necessary. However, we should skip any registers

Algorithm 11.1: Callee-save stack walking

 1   processStack(thread, func):
 2      Regs ← getRegisters(thread)            /* register contents thread would see */
 3      Done ← empty                                     /* no registers processed yet */
 4      Top ← topFrame(thread)
 5      processFrame(Top, Regs, Done, func)
 6      setRegisters(thread, Regs) /* get corrected register contents back to thread */
 7

 8   processFrame(Frame, Regs, Done, func):
 9      IP ← getIP(Frame)                                      /* current instruction pointer (IP) */
10      Caller ← getCallerFrame(Frame)
11

12      if Caller ̸= null
13         Restore ← empty                                /* holds info to restore after doing caller */
14

15          /* Update Regs to Caller’s view at point of call */
16          for each ⟨reg,slot⟩ in calleeSavedRegs(IP)
17              add(Restore, ⟨reg, Regs[reg]⟩)
18              Regs[reg] ← getSlotContents(Frame, slot)
19          processFrame(Caller, Regs, Done, func)
20

21          /* Write updated saved callee−save register value back to slots */
22          for each ⟨reg, slot⟩ in calleeSavedRegs(IP)
23              setSlotContents(Frame, slot, Regs[reg])
24

25          /* Update Regs to our view, adjusting Done */
26          for each ⟨reg, value⟩ in Restore
27              Regs[reg] ← value
28              remove(Done, reg)
29

30      /* process our frame’s pointer slots */
31      for each slot in pointerSlots(IP)
32           func(getSlotAddress(Frame, slot))
33

34      /* process our frame’s pointers in registers */
35      for each reg in pointerRegs(IP)
36           if reg ̸∈ Done
37               func(getAddress(Regs[reg]))
38               add(Done, reg)

whose contents we processed in the caller, to avoid processing them a second time. In
some collectors, processing the same root more than once is not harmful; mark-sweep is
an example since marking twice is not a problem. However, in a copying collector it is
natural to assume that any unforwarded referent is in fromspace. If the collector processes
the same root twice (not two different roots referring to the same object), then it would
make an extra copy of the tospace copy of the object, which would be bad.
   We offer details of this process in Algorithm 11.1, and now proceed to describe the
example illustrated in Figure 11.2. In the algorithm, func is the function applied to each

                                           r1 = 155
                                           r2 = 784
            8   Restore      Regs              main()
                              r1 = p           old IP: ...
                              r2 = 784         saved:
                calleeSavedRegs                  1: 155
                                               locals:
                @ main+52                        2: p
                                                 3: 75
                                                                1

                                           r1 = p
                                           r2 = 784
            7   Restore      Regs              f()
                 〈r1, r〉      r1 = p           old IP: main+52
                 〈r2, 17〉     r2 = 784         saved:
                calleeSavedRegs                  1: 784
                  〈r1, 2〉, 〈r2, 1〉               2: p
                @ f+178                        locals:
                                                 3: -13
                                                 4: q          2

                                           r1 = r
                                           r2 = 17
            6   Restore      Regs              g()
                 〈r2, t〉      r1 = r           old IP: f+178
                              r2 = 17          saved:
                calleeSavedRegs                  1: 17
                  〈r2, 1〉                      locals:
                @ g+36                           2: r
                                                 3: -7
                                                 4: s           3

                                           r1 = r
                                           r2 = t
            5   Restore      Regs                    GC happens
                              r1 = r                 IP = g+36  4
                              r2 = t                 r1 = r
                                                     r2 = t

                                 (a) Stack scanning: walking from the top

Figure 11.2: Stack scanning

frame slot and register, for example the body of the for each loop in markFromRoots
of Algorithm 2.2 (Mark-Sweep, Mark-Compact) or the body of the root scanning loop in
collect of Algorithm 4.2 (Copying).
   Considering Figure 11.2a, notice first the call stack, which appears shaded on the right.
The sequence of actions leading to that stack is as follows.

  1. Execution begins at main with r1 containing 155 and r2 containing 784. Whatever
     effectively called main is outside the scope of the collected system, so it cannot refer
     to heap allocated objects and those register contents therefore cannot be references.
     Likewise we are not interested in the return address oldIP. As it executed, main saved

      r1 in slot 1 and set local 2 to refer to object p and local 3 to hold 75. It then called f
      with r1 containing p, r2 containing 784 and a return address of main + 52.
   2. Function f saved the return address, saved r2 in slot 1 and r1 in slot 2, and set local 3
      to −13 and local 4 to refer to object q. It then called g with r1 containing a reference
      to object r, r2 holding 17 and a return address of f + 178.
   3. Function g saved the return address, saved r2 in slot 1, and set local 2 to refer to
      object r, local 3 to hold −7 and local 4 to refer to object s.
The register contents above each frame’s box indicate the values as execution entered the
function in question, and the contents below the frame’s box the values when that frame
suspended execution. These are the values that our unwinding procedure should attempt
to recover.
    We now assume that a garbage collection occurs in the middle of g.
   4. Garbage collection occurs at location g + 36 in g, when register r1 contains a reference
      to object r and r2 a reference to object t. One can think of the IP and register values as
      being stored in a suspended thread data structure or perhaps in an actual frame for
      the garbage collection routine.
   At some point, garbage collection calls processStack on this thread stack, with func
being the copy function of a copying collector. This is the most interesting case, since
the collector will generally update object references because the target object moved. The
boxes to the left in Figure 11.2a show the values of Regs and Restore as we proceed to
examine the frames in the order g, f, main. We show numbered snapshots of Restore and
Regs on the left in the figure, labelled with the numbers corresponding to these comments:
   5. Here processStack has retrieved registers from the thread state into Regs and
      initialised Restore. Execution is at line 15 in Algorithm 11.1 for the frame for g.
   6. Here we have updated Regs and saved information into Restore for later use. Exe-
      cution is at line 19 for g’s frame. Since g had saved r2 into slot 1, the proper value for
      f to see is 17. We save into Restore the fact that g’s view of r2 should be t, when we
      get back to handling g after the recursive call of processFrame. We show the pairs
      returned by calleeSavedRegs for g’s IP value in a box to the left of g’s frame.
   7. Execution is at line 19 for f’s frame. We ‘un-saved’ both r1 and r2 in this case, from
      slots 2 and 1, respectively.
   8. Execution is at line 19 for main’s frame. Here we assume that Caller is null, so we
      do not ‘un-save’ any callee-saved registers — they cannot contain pointers since their
      values come from outside the managed universe.
Having reconstructed the register contents that held just as main called f, we can proceed
to process the frame and registers for main, and likewise handle f and g. Turning to Fig-
ure 11.2b, we illustrate two states for each frame: first the state at line 35 of Algorithm 11.1
and then the state after line 38. The frames themselves show the state at line 35. Those
values that are written, though their value is not necessarily changed, are in boldface; those
not written are in grey.
   9. Regs holds the register values at the point main called f; as yet, Done is empty.
 10. Register r1 was updated by func (because r1 is in pointerRegs for main + 52). Done
     indicates that r1 refers to a (possibly) new location of its referent object.

                                           r1 = 155            r1 = 155
                                           r2 = 784            r2 = 784
             Restore                           main()                          Regs      Done        9
                                               old IP: ...                      r1 = p
                                               saved:                           r2 = 784
             calleeSavedRegs                     1: 155                        pointerSlots: 2
                                               locals:                         pointerRegs: r1
             @ main+52                           2: p'                         @ main+52
                                                 3: 75
                                                                               Regs      Done        10
                                                                                r1 = p'   r1
                                                                                r2 = 784
                                           r1 = p              r1 = p'
                                           r2 = 784            r2 = 784
             Restore                           f()                             Regs        Done      11
              〈r1, r〉                          old IP: main+52                  r1 = r
              〈r2, 17〉                         saved:                           r2 = 17
             calleeSavedRegs                     1: 784                        pointerSlots: 2, 4
               〈r1, 2〉, 〈r2, 1〉                  2: p'                         pointerRegs: r1
             @ f+178                           locals:                         @ f+178
                                                 3: -13                        Regs        Done      12
                                                 4: q'                          r1 = r'     r1
                                                                                r2 = 17
                                           r1 = r              r1 = r'
                                           r2 = 17             r2 = 17
             Restore                           g()                             Regs        Done      13
              〈r2, t〉                          old IP: f+178                    r1 = r'     r1
                                               saved:                           r2 = t
             calleeSavedRegs                     1: 17                         pointerSlots: 2, 4
               〈r2, 1〉                         locals:                         pointerRegs: r1, r2
             @ g+36                              2: r'                         @ g+36
                                                 3: -7
                                                 4: s'                         Regs        Done      14
                                                                                r1 = r'     r1
                                                                                r2 = t'     r2
                                           r1 = r              r1 = r'
                                           r2 = t              r2 = t'
             Restore                                 GC happens           15
                                                     IP = g+36
                                                     r1 = r'
                                                     r2 = t'

                                  (b) Stack scanning: walking back to the top

Figure 11.2 (continued): Stack scanning

 11. Regs holds the register values at the point where f called g. Notice that the values of
     r1 and r2 are saved into slots 2 and 1 of f’s frame, and their values in Regs have been
     set from Restore.

 12. Register r1 was updated by func and added to Done.

 13. Regs holds the register values at the point garbage collection occurred in g. Specifi-
     cally, the value in r2 is saved into slot 1 of g’s frame and its value in Regs has been set
     from Restore. Since r1 has not been set from Restore, r1 remains listed in Done.

 14. Register r1 was skipped (because it was in Done), but r2 was updated by func and
     added to Done

Algorithm 11.2: Stack walking for non-modifying func

 1   processStack(thread, func):
 2      Top ← topFrame(thread)
 3      processFrame(Top, func)
 4      Regs ← getRegisters(thread)                            /* register contents thread would see */
 5      for each reg in pointerRegs(IP)                          /* trace from registers at GC−point */
 6         func(getAddress(Regs[reg]))
 7

 8   processFrame(Frame, func):
 9      Done ← empty
10      loop
11         IP ← getIP(Frame)                                    /* current instruction pointer (IP) */
12

13           /* process our frame’s pointer slots */
14           for each slot in pointerSlots(IP)
15                func(getSlotAddress(Frame, slot))
16

17           /* process our frame’s pointers in registers */
18           for each reg in pointerRegs(IP)
19                if reg ̸∈ Done
20                    func(getAddress(Regs[reg]))
21                    add(Done, reg)
22

23           Caller ← getCallerFrame(Frame)
24           if Caller = null
25              return
26

27           /* Update Regs to Caller’s view at point of call */
28           for each ⟨reg,slot⟩ in calleeSavedRegs(IP)
29               Regs[reg] ← getSlotContents(Frame, slot)
30               remove(Done, reg)
31

32           Frame ← Caller

Finally, in step 15 processStack stores the values in Regs back to the thread state.

Variations on Algorithm 11.1. There are a number of reasonable variations on Algorithm 11.1.
Here are some of particular interest:

     • If func will not update its argument, then one can omit the Done data structure, the
       statements that update it, and the conditional test on line 36, invoking func uncon-
       ditionally on line 37. This simplification applies for non-moving collectors and non-
       moving phases of moving collectors. It also applies if a moving collector’s imple-
       mentation of func works correctly if invoked on the same slot more than once.

     • Rather than calling func late in processFrame, one can move the two for loops
       at the end upwards, inserting them after line 9. If combined with variation one, the
       resulting algorithm needs to process the stack only in one direction, which allows an
       iterative implementation as opposed to a recursive one, as shown in Algorithm 11.2.

Algorithm 11.3: No callee-save stack walking

 1    processStack(thread, func):
 2       Top ← topFrame(thread)
 3       processFrame(Top, func)
 4       Regs ← getRegisters(thread)           /* register contents thread would see */
 5       for each reg in pointerRegs(IP)         /* trace from registers at GC−point */
 6          func(getAddress(Regs[reg]))
 7       setRegisters(thread, Regs)     /* get corrected reg contents back to thread */
 8

 9    processFrame(Frame, func):
10       repeat
11          IP ← getIP(Frame)                                        /* current instruction pointer */
12          for each slot in pointerSlots(IP)                       /* process frame’s pointer slots */
13             func(getSlotAddress(Frame, slot))
14          Frame ← getCallerFrame(Frame)
15       until Frame = null

     • If the system does not support callee-save registers, and a function desires a register’s
       contents to be preserved across a call, then the function must save and restore the
       register itself (caller-save). A saved caller-save register value will have a type known
       in the caller, so one can treat it just like a local or temporary variable. This results in
       the substantially simplified Algorithm 11.3, which is also iterative.

Compressing stack maps. Experience shows that the space needed to store stack maps
can be a considerable fraction of the size of the code in a system. For example, Diwan
et al. [1992] found their tables for Modula-3 for the VAX to be 16% of the size of code, and
Stichnoth et al. [1999] reported their tables for Java to be 20% of the size of x86 code. Tarditi
[2000] describes techniques for compressing these tables and applies them in the Marmot
Java compiler, achieving a compression ratio of 4 to 5 and final table sizes averaging 3.6%
of code size. The approach exploits two empirical observations.

     • While there may be many garbage collection points (GC-points) needing maps, many
       of those maps are the same. Thus a system can save space if multiple GC-points share
       the same map. In the Marmot system, this is particularly true of call sites, which tend
       to have few pointers live across them. Tarditi [2000] found that this technique cut
       table space in half.

     • If the compiler works to group pointers close together in stack frames, then even
       more maps tend to be the same. Using live variable analysis and colouring to place
       pointer variables with disjoint lifetimes into the same slot also increases the number
       of identical maps. Tarditi [2000] found this to be important for large programs.

The overall flow of Tarditi’s scheme is as follows.

     1. Map the (sparse) set of return addresses to a (smaller, denser) set of GC-point num-
        bers.7 In this mapping, if table entry t[i] equals return address ra, then ra maps to
        GC-point i.
     7 Tarditi uses the term ‘call site’ where we use ‘GC-point’.

  2. Map the set of GC-point numbers to a (small dense) set of map numbers. This is
     useful because multiple GC-points often have the same map. Given the GC-point i
     above, this can be written as map number mn=mapnum[i].

  3. Index into a map array using the map number to get the map information. Given mn
     from the previous step, this can be written as info=map[mn].

In Tarditi’s scheme the map information is a 32-bit word. If the information fits in 31 bits,
then that word is adequate and its low bit is set to 0; otherwise, the low bit is set to 1 and
the remaining bits point to a variable-length record giving the full map. The details proba-
bly need to be retuned for different platforms (language, compiler and target architecture),
so refer to the paper for the exact encoding.
    Tarditi also explored several organisations for mapping IP (instruction pointer) values
to GC-point numbers.

   • Using the same number for adjacent GC-points whose stack maps are the same, a
     technique also used by Diwan et al. [1992]. This only records the first GC-point, and
     subsequent ones whose address is less than the next address in the table are treated
     as being equivalent.

   • Using a two-level table to represent what is conceptually a large array of GC-point
     addresses. This builds a separate table for each 64-kilobyte chunk of code space.
     Since all GC-points in the chunk have the same upper bits, it needs to record only
     the low 16 bits in each table entry. In a 32-bit address space this saves essentially half
     the table space. We also need to know the GC-point number for the first GC-point in
     a chunk; simply adding this to the index of a return address within the chunk’s table
     will get the GC-point number for the matching IP.

   • Using a sparse array of GC-points and interpolating by examining the code near the
     IP value. This chooses points roughly k bytes apart in the code, indicating where
     these places are, their GC-point number and their map number. It starts from the
     highest location preceding the IP value and disassembles code forward. As it finds
     calls (or other garbage collection points), it updates the GC-point number and map
     number. Notice that it must be able to recognise GC-points by inspection. Tarditi
     found that even for the x86 the disassembly process for these purposes was not
     overly complex or slow, though the scheme includes a 16-element cache to reduce
     repeated computation for the same return address values. It was the most compact
     of the schemes examined and the disassembly overhead was small.

    Stichnoth et al. [1999] described a different stack map compression technique, oriented
towards producing a map for every instruction. Similar to the sparse array of Tarditi [2000],
this uses a scheme that records full information for certain reference points in the code,
and then disassembles forward from the nearest preceding point to the IP value of interest.
Stichnoth et al., though, compute the actual map, as opposed to the GC-point number. The
reference points at which it starts are (roughly) the beginning of basic blocks in the code.
However, if the map at the end of one block is the same as the map at the beginning of the
next one — that is, there was no flow merge that affected the map — then they treat the
two blocks as one large block. Working forward from each reference point, they encode
the length of the instruction at that point (because the x86 has variable length instructions)
and the delta to the map caused by the instruction. For example, the instruction might
push or pop a value on the stack, load a pointer into a register, and so on. They Huffman
code the delta stream to obtain additional compression. Across a suite of benchmarks
they get an average map size of about 22% of code size. They argue that, as a fraction of

code size, the situation should not be worse for machines with larger register sets — the
instructions increase in size too. Also, the overall space used might be somewhat better
for machines with fixed-length instructions, since there is still a noticeable overhead for
recording instruction lengths, even though (like Tarditi [2000]) they use a disassembler in
most cases to avoid recording instruction lengths. They still need a fraction of a bit to mark
those places where they cannot legally allow garbage collection, such as in the middle of
the sequence for a write barrier. Given that a fixed-length instruction machine probably
uses something like 4 bytes for each instruction, and the average instruction length for the
x86 may be half that or less, the table size for a fixed-length instruction machine using the
techniques of Stichnoth et al. may be more in the range of 5% to 10% of code size.

Accurate pointer finding in code
Code may contain embedded references to heap allocated objects, particularly in managed
run-time systems that load or generate code dynamically. Even code compiled ahead of
time may refer to static/global data, that might lie in an initially loaded heap. There are
several difficulties around pointers within code:
   • It is not always easy, or even possible, to distinguish code from any data embedded
     within it.
   • As in the case of uncooperative compilers, it is not generally possible to tell embed-
     ded pointers from non-pointer data that happen to have a value that looks as if it
     refers to a location in the heap.
   • When embedded in instructions, a pointer may be broken into smaller pieces. For
     example, on the MIPS processor, loading a 32-bit static pointer value into a register
     would typically require a load-upper-immediate instruction, which loads a 16-bit
     immediate field into the upper half of a 32-bit register and zeroes the low 16 bits,
     and then an or-immediate of another 16-bit value into the lower half of the register.
     Similar code sequences occur for other instruction sets. This is a particular case of
     derived pointers.
   • An embedded pointer value may not refer directly to its target object; see our discus-
     sions of interior (on the facing page) and derived (on page 194) pointers.
In some cases one may be able to disassemble code to find embedded pointers, but going
through all the code each time the collector needs to process the roots may have a large
overhead. Of course, the program cannot update such embedded pointers, so caching
their locations would be effective.
    The more general solution is to arrange for the compiler to generate a side table that
indicates where embedded pointers lie in the code.
    Some systems simply rule out embedded pointers to avoid the issues altogether. The
impact on code performance will vary according to target architecture, compilation strat-
egy and statistics of programs’ accesses.

Target objects that move. If the target of an embedded reference moves, then the collector
must update the embedded reference. One possible difficulty is that for safety or security
reasons code areas may be read-only. Thus the collector must either change the permis-
sions temporarily (if possible), which might involve expensive system calls, or the system
must disallow embedded references to moving objects. Another difficulty is that updating
code in main memory generally does not force updates or invalidations of copies of that
code residing in instruction caches. The solution is to require all processors to invalidate

the affected instruction cache lines. Some machines may need to follow this by a special
synchronisation instruction that guarantees that future instruction fetches occur logically
after the invalidations. Furthermore, before invalidating instruction cache lines, one may
need to force modified lines in the data cache (holding the bytes of code that were updated)
to main memory, and synchronise to make sure that the writes are complete. The details
are architecture specific.

Code that moves. A particular case of targets that move is code that a collector moves. Not
only must this take into account the concerns that we just considered, but it must also fix
up return addresses that lie in the stack and registers since they might refer to code that the
collector is moving. Further, it must invalidate all instruction cache lines corresponding to
the new location of the code and perform the careful code writing steps we enumerated
above. Clearly it would be more deeply problematic if the code of the collector itself could
move. Finally, moving code is particularly difficult in the case of concurrent collectors.
Either the collector must stop the world, or arrange that threads can use either the old or
the new copy of the code, move them to the new code over a period of time, and reclaim
the space of the old code only after it knows all the threads have moved over.

Handling interior pointers
An interior pointer is a pointer that refers to some location inside an object, but not neces-
sarily using the standard reference to the object. More precisely, we consider each object
to occupy a set of memory locations (addresses), disjoint from those of any other object.
An interior pointer to an object refers to one of the object’s locations. If we consider Fig-
ure 7.2 we see that an object’s standard reference may not correspond to any of its interior
pointers! Also, the set of locations an object occupies may be larger than just the locations
holding its programmer-visible data. For example, C allows pointers one location beyond
the end of an array and that reference is still a legal interior pointer to the array.
    While it is possible that a system might break a language-level object up into multiple
pieces (as done by, for example, Siebert [1999]), for the purpose of handling interior (and
derived) pointers we use the term ‘object’ to mean a contiguous range of locations devoted
to representing a particular (language-level) object.
    The key problem the collector faces with an interior pointer is determining the object to
which the pointer refers, that is, how to compute the standard reference to the object from
the value of the interior pointer. Several approaches are possible.
   • Provide a table that records the start of each object. A system might maintain an
     array of object start addresses, perhaps in two-level form as done by Tarditi [2000]
     for recording GC-point addresses in code (see Section 11.2). Another way is to use a
     bitmap with one bit per granule (unit of allocation), setting the corresponding bit for
     granules that are the first granules of objects. This might be useful for the allocator
     and collector in any case.
   • If the system supports heap parsability (Section 7.6), then one can scan the heap to
     find the object whose locations contain the target of the interior pointer. It would
     be prohibitively expensive to search from the beginning of the heap every time, so
     typically a system records the first (or last) object-start position within each k byte
     chunk of the heap, where k is usually a power of two for convenient and efficient
     calculation. This allows parsing to start in the chunk to which the interior pointer
     refers, or the previous chunk as necessary. There is a trade-off between the space
     used for this side table and the overhead of parsing. For a more detailed discussion,
     see Section 11.8.

   • A big bag of pages organisation can determine object size by looking up the target
     block’s metadata. It can compute the offset of the target within the block (simply
     mask so as to keep the appropriate lower bits of the address), and round that down
     using the object size to determine the first location of the object.

We do assume that given knowledge of the set of locations occupied by the target object,
the collector can determine the standard reference and work from there. Notice that if
the object moves, as in a copying collector, then we need to update the interior pointer,
moving it by the same amount, that is, causing it to refer to the same relative position in
the moved object as it did in the old copy. Alternatively, the system might support pinning
of objects, as discussed in Section 11.4.
    The primary objection to dealing with interior pointers is the space and time overhead
they can add to processing. If interior pointers are relatively rare and distinguished from
tidy pointers (those that refer to an object’s standard reference point), then the time over-
head of dealing with the interior pointers themselves may not be great. However, making
provision for them at all may add space cost for tables — though the particular collector
design may include the necessary tables or metadata anyway — and add time cost for
maintaining the tables. There are also the considerations of programming complexity and
software engineering and maintenance costs.
    Return addresses are a particular case of interior pointers into code. They present no
special difficulty, though for a variety of reasons the tables for looking up the function
containing a particular return address may be distinct from the tables the collector uses for
other objects.

Handling derived pointers
Diwan et al. [1992] identified what they call derived pointers, that is, values that are derived
from one or more pointers via an arithmetic expression. Interior pointers are a special case
where the expression has the simple form p + i or possibly p + c where p is a pointer, i
is a dynamically computed integer offset and c is a statically known constant. However,
for an interior pointer the resulting expression value must be an address within the set
of locations of object p, which leads to the simpler solutions already discussed. Derived
pointers can be much more general, for example:

   • upperk ( p) or lowerk ( p), the upper or lower k bits of the pointer p.

   • p ± c such that the resulting address lies outside of the locations of p.

   • p − q, the distance between two objects.

In some cases, we can reconstruct a tidy pointer — one that points to the referent’s standard
reference address — from the derived pointer. An example is p + c where c is a compile-
time known constant. In the general case, we must have access to the base expression from
which the derived pointer was derived. That expression might itself be a derived pointer,
but eventually gets back to tidy pointers.
    In a non-moving collector, just having the tidy pointers available as roots is enough.
Notice, though, that at a GC-point the tidy pointer may no longer be live in the sense of
compiler live variable analysis, even though the derived pointer is live. Thus the compiler
must keep at least one copy of the tidy pointer(s) for each live derived pointer. An excep-
tion to this rule is the p ± c case since adjusting with a compile-time known value produces
the tidy pointer without reference to other run-time data.
11.3. OBJECT TABLES                                                                           195

    For a moving collector, we need additional compiler support: the compiler needs to
produce extended stack maps that give, for each derived pointer, the locations of the ex-
pressions from which it was derived and the operations needed to reconstruct the de-
rived pointer. Diwan et al. [1992] give details on handling derived quantities of the form
∑i pi − ∑ j q j + E where the pi and q j are pointers or derived values and E is an expression
not involving pointers (and thus not affected if any of the pi or q j move). The advantage
of this form is that it can subtract out the pi and add in q j , forming E before moving any
objects; do any moving; then add back the new pi′ and subtract off the new q′j to produce
the correct adjusted derived pointer.
    Diwan et al. [1992] point out several issues that arise in optimising compilers when
trying to handle derived pointers, including dead base variables (which we mentioned
above), multiple derivations reaching the same point in code (for which they add more
variables to record the path that actually pertains), and indirect references (where they
record the value in an intermediate location along the chain of references). Supporting
derived pointers sometimes required producing less optimal code, but the impact was
slight. They achieved table sizes about 15% the size of code for Modula-3 on the VAX.

11.3     Object tables
For reasons of mutator speed and space consumption, many systems have represented
object references as direct pointers to their referent objects. A more general approach is
to give each object a unique identifier and to locate its contents via some mapping mech-
anism. This has been of particular interest when the set of objects is large, and possibly
persistent, but the hardware’s underlying address space is small in comparison. The focus
here is on heaps that fit into the address space. Even in that case, however, some systems
have found it helpful to use object tables. An object table is a typically dense array of small
records, handles, which refer to objects. A handle may contain only a pointer to the object’s
data, or it may also contain additional status information, which might otherwise have
been held in the object’s header. For speed, an object reference is typically either a direct
index into the object table or else a pointer to the handle in the object table. Using an index
makes it easier to relocate the table, but requires adding the object table base in order to
access an entry — which may not cost additional instructions provided that the system
dedicates a register to point to the base of the table.
    A significant advantage of object tables is that they permit straightforward compaction,
or indeed moving of any object, at any time by simply moving the object(s) and then (atom-
ically) updating its object table entry to reflect its new location. To simplify this, each object
should have a hidden self-reference field (or back-pointer to its object table entry), to make
it possible to find the table entry from the object’s data. With this, a mark-compact collector
can proceed by marking as usual (modulo the level of indirection imposed by the object
table) and then doing a simple sliding compaction of the object data. Although it is easy to
simply chain free object table entries into a free-list, Kalibera and Jones [2011] found this
offered very poor performance in Minuteman, a framework for experimenting with real-
time collection for Java. Instead, they construct the object table as a linked list of blocks of
handles. Although they tried different implementations of handles, they found it most ef-
fective to place metadata in the handle, including a reference to class and size information
but not array size (in order to allow fixed-size handles), instead of in the object header.
Careful treatment of freed handles was important. To improve locality, their collector at-
tempted to keep together freed handles from the same handle block as objects/handles
tended to die in clumps. They also kept the blocks in address order. Notice that in mark-
ing it may be advantageous to keep mark bits in the handles, so as to save a memory
11.4. REFERENCES FROM EXTERNAL CODE                                                            196

reference when checking or setting the mark bit. A side mark bitmap has similar benefits.
    Object tables may be problematic, or simply unhelpful, if the language allows interior
or derived pointers. If a language disallows interior pointers, then whether or not the
implementation uses an object table should not affect semantics of the implementation.
However, there is one language feature that more or less assumes an object table for its effi-
cient implementation: the Smalltalk become: primitive. This operator causes two objects
to swap their roles in the object universe. This is easy to do with object tables: the system
merely swaps the contents of two table entries. Without an object table a become: may
require a sweep over the entire heap. If used sparingly (Smalltalk typically uses become:
to install a new version of something) this may remain acceptable, particularly because
direct object reference implementations are generally faster than object table ones.

11.4     References from external code
Some languages and systems support use of heap allocated objects from outside of the
managed environment. A typical example is the Java Native Interface, which allows code
written in C, C++ or possibly other languages to access objects in the Java heap. More
generally, just about every system needs to support input/output, which must somehow
move data between the operating system and heap objects. Two difficulties arise in sup-
porting references from external code and data to objects in a managed heap. The first
issue is ensuring that the collector continues to treat an object as reachable while external
code possesses a reference to the object. This is necessary to prevent the object from being
reclaimed before the external code is done with it. Often we need the guarantee only for
the duration of a call to external code. We can make that guarantee by ensuring that there
is a live reference to the object in the stack of the calling thread.
    However, sometimes the object will be used by external code for a period of time that
extends beyond an initial call. In that case the usual solution is for the collector to maintain
a table of registered objects. The external code is required to register an object if the code will
use the object after the current call. The external code must also explicitly deregister the
object when the code no longer needs the object and will not attempt further use of it. The
collector simply treats entries in the registered-object table as additional roots.
    The second issue is ensuring that external code knows where an object is. This is only
relevant to moving collectors. Some interfaces keep external code at arm’s length by re-
quiring all accesses to heap objects to go through collector-provided access routines. This
makes it easier to support collectors that move objects. Typically the collector provides
to external code a pointer to a handle. The handle contains a reference to the actual heap
object, and possibly some other management data. Handles act as registered-object table
entries, and thus are roots for collection. The Java Native Interface works this way.
    While handles offer a clean separation of the managed heap from the unmanaged
world, and they more easily admit collection techniques that move objects, not all external
code is prepared to follow the access protocols, notably operating system calls. Thus it
may be necessary to prevent externally referenced objects from moving. To support this,
a pinning interface may offer pin and unpin operations, with the meaning that an object
cannot be moved while it is pinned, and the further implication that pinned objects are
reachable and will not be reclaimed.
    If we know when allocating an object that it may need to be pinned, then we can allo-
cate the object directly into a non-moving space. This may work for buffers for file stream
I/O if the buffered-stream code allocates the buffers itself. However, in general it is diffi-
cult to determine in advance which objects will need to be pinned. Thus, some languages
support pin and unpin functions that the programmer can invoke on any object.
11.5. STACK BARRIERS                                                                        197

   Pinning is not a problem for non-moving garbage collectors, but is inconvenient for
ones that normally move an object. There are several solutions, each with its own strengths
and weaknesses.
   • Defer collection, at least of a pinned object’s region, while it is pinned. This is simple,
     but there is no guarantee that it will be unpinned before running out of memory.
   • If the application requests pinning an object, and the object is not in a non-moving
     region, we can immediately collect the object’s containing region (and any others
     required to be collected at the same time) and move the object to a non-moving re-
     gion. This might be acceptable if pinning is not frequent, and the collector is of a
     design such as a generational collector with a nursery whose survivors are copied to
     a non-moving mature space.
   • We can extend our collector to tolerate not moving pinned objects, which complicates
     the collector and may introduce new inefficiencies.
As a simple example of extending a moving collector to support pinning, consider a basic
non-generational copying collector. Extending it to support pinned objects requires first
of all that the collector can distinguish pinned from unpinned objects. It can copy and
forward unpinned objects as usual. It will trace through pinned objects, updating pointers
from the pinned object to objects that move, but leaving pinned objects where they are. The
collector should also record in a table the pinned objects it encounters. When all survivors
have been copied, the collector reclaims only the holes between pinned objects rather than
reclaiming all of fromspace. Thus, rather than obtaining a single, large, free region, it may
obtain an arbitrary number of smaller ones. The allocator can use each one as a sequential
allocation space. This can lead to a degree of fragmentation, but that is unavoidable in the
presence of pinning. Notice that a future collection may find that a previously pinned ob-
ject is no longer pinned, so the fragmentation need not persist. As we saw in Section 10.3,
some mostly non-moving collectors take a similar approach, also sequentially allocating in
the gaps between surviving objects [Dimpsey et al., 2000; Blackburn and McKinley, 2008].
    Another possible difficulty is that, even though an object is pinned, the collector is
examining and updating it, which may lead to races with external code that accesses the
object at the same time. Thus, we may need to pin not only a given object but also some
of the objects to which it refers. Likewise, if, starting from a given object, external code
traces through to other objects, or even just examines or copies references to them without
examining the objects’ contents, those other objects also need to be pinned.
    Features of a programming language itself, and its implementation, may require pin-
ning. In particular, if the language allows passing object fields by reference, then there may
be stack references to the interior of objects. The implementation can apply the interior
pointer techniques described on page 193 in order to support moving the object contain-
ing the referent field. However, such support can be complex and the code for handling
interior pointers correctly may thus be difficult to maintain. Therefore, an implementation
might choose simply to pin such objects. This requires being able to determine fairly easily
and efficiently which object contains a given referent. Hence it most readily allows interior
pointers but not more general cases of derived pointers (see page 194 above).

11.5     Stack barriers
Earlier we described techniques for finding pointers in stacks, but assumed it was accept-
able to scan the whole stack of a thread at once, that is, that the system could pause the
thread long enough to process its entire stack. It is not safe to scan a frame in which a
11.6. GC SAFE-POINTS AND MUTATOR SUSPENSION                                                   198

thread is actively running, so we must either pause the thread for some period of time or
get the thread to scan for us (that is, call a scanning routine, essentially pausing itself) — see
Section 11.6 for more discussion of when it is appropriate to scan a thread’s registers and
stack. It is possible to scan a stack incrementally, however, and also mostly-concurrently,
using a technique called stack barriers. The idea is to arrange for a thread to be diverted if
it tries to return (or throw) beyond a given frame in its stack. Suppose we have placed a
barrier in frame F. Then we can asynchronously process the caller of F, its caller, and so
on, confident that the running thread will not cut the stack back from under our scanning.
     The key step to introduce a stack barrier is to hijack the return address of the frame.
In place of the actual return address, we write the address of the stack barrier handler we
wish to install. We put the original return address in some standard place that the stack
barrier handler can find, such as a thread-local variable. The handler can then remove the
barrier, as appropriate. Naturally it must be careful not to disturb any register contents
that the caller may examine.
     For incremental stack scanning by the thread itself, when it encounters the barrier, the
handler scans some number of frames up the stack and sets a new barrier at the limit of its
scanning (unless it finished scanning the whole stack). We call this synchronous incremen-
tal scanning. For asynchronous scanning by another thread, the barrier serves to stop the
running thread before it overtakes the scanning thread. For its part, the scanning thread
can move the barrier down after it scans some number of frames. That way it is possible
that the running thread will never hit the barrier. If it does hit the barrier, then it merely
has to wait for the scanning thread to advance and unset that barrier; then it can continue.
     Cheng and Blelloch [2001] introduced stack barriers in order to bound the collection
work done in one increment and to support asynchronous stack scanning. Their design
breaks each stack into a collection of fixed-size stacklets that can be scanned one at a time.
That is, returning from one stacklet to another is the possible location of what we call a
stack barrier. But the idea does not require discontiguous stacklets or predetermination of
which frames can have a barrier placed on them.
     Stack barriers can also be used in the opposite way from that described above: they
can mark the portion of the stack that has not changed, and thus that the collector does
not need to reprocess to find new pointers. In collectors that are mostly-concurrent this
approach can shorten the ‘flip’ time at the end of a collection cycle.
     Another use for stack barriers is in handling dynamic changes to code, particularly
optimised code. For example, consider the situation where routine A calls B, which calls
C, and there is a frame on the stack for an optimised version of A that inlined B but did not
further inline C. In this situation there is a frame for A + B and another one for C. If the
user now edits B, future calls of B should go to the new version. Therefore, when returning
from C, the system should deoptimise A + B and create frames for unoptimised versions
of A and B, so that when B also returns, the frame for A supports calling the new version
of B. It might also be possible to re-optimise and build a new A + B. The point here is that
returning to A + B triggers the deoptimisation, and the stack barrier is the mechanism that
supports the triggering.
     Yet another application of stack barriers is in implementing generalized work stealing
[Kumar et al., 2014], covered in Section 13.8.

11.6     GC safe-points and mutator suspension
In Section 11.2 we mentioned that a collector needs information about which stack frame
slots and which registers contain pointers. We also mentioned that this information can
vary according to the specific code location (we will say IP, for instruction pointer) at which
11.6. GC SAFE-POINTS AND MUTATOR SUSPENSION                                                                  199

garbage collection happens in a function. There are two issues of concern about where
garbage collection can happen: whether a given IP is safe for garbage collection, and the
size of the stack map tables (see Section 11.2 for details on compressing maps), which tend
to be large if more IPs are legal for garbage collection.
    What might make a given IP unsafe for garbage collection? Most systems have oc-
casional short sequences of code that must be run in their entirety in order to preserve
invariants relied on by garbage collection. For example, a typical write barrier needs to do
both the underlying write and some recording. If a garbage collection happens between
the two steps, some object may be missed by the collector or some pointer not properly
updated by it. Systems usually have a number of such short sequences that need to be
atomic with respect to garbage collection (though not necessarily atomic with respect to
true concurrency). In addition to write barriers other examples include setting up a new
stack frame and initialising a new object.
    A system is simpler in one way if it can allow garbage collection at any IP — there
is no concern about whether a thread is suspended at a point safe for garbage collection,
a GC safe-point or GC-point for short. However, such a system is more complex in that it
must support stack maps for every IP, or else employ techniques that do not require them,
as for uncooperative C and C++ compilers. If a system allows garbage collection at most
IPs, then if it needs to collect and a thread is suspended at an unsafe point, it can either
interpret instructions ahead for the suspended thread until it is at a safe-point, or it can
wake the thread up for a short time to get it to advance (probabilistically) to a safe-point.
Interpretation risks rarely exercised bugs, while nudging a thread only gives a probabilistic
guarantee. Such systems may also pay the cost of larger maps [Stichnoth et al., 1999].
    Many systems make the opposite choice and only allow garbage collection at certain
restricted safe-points, and only produce maps for those points. The minimal set of safe-
points needed for correctness includes each allocation (since garbage collection is always
a possibility there)8 and each call of a routine in which there may be allocation or which
may cause the thread to suspend in a wait (since if the thread suspends, some other thread
may cause a garbage collection).
    Beyond the minimal points needed for correctness, a system may wish to allow garbage
collection at more locations so as to guarantee that garbage collection can proceed with-
out an unbounded wait for the thread to reach its next safe-point. To make this stronger
guarantee, there needs to be a safe-point in each loop; a simple rule is to place a safe-point
at each backwards branch in a function. In addition there needs to be a safe-point in each
function entry or each return, since otherwise functions, especially recursive ones, could
perform many calls and returns before encountering a safe-point. Since these additional
safe-points do not do anything that actually can trigger a garbage collection, they need to
have an added check for whether garbage collection is needed/requested, so we call them
GC check-points. This checking adds overhead to the normal operation of mutators, though
perhaps not very much, particularly if the compiler takes some simple measures to reduce
the overhead. For example, it might omit the checks in methods that are quite short or have
no loops or calls. Also, by inserting an additional level of looping it can avoid checking
on every iteration of a loop and only check every nth iteration. If the check itself is cheap,
then these measures will not be necessary. In any case there is a clear trade-off between the
overhead of frequent checks and the latency of infrequent ones.
    Agesen [1998] compared two ways of causing a thread to suspend at a GC-point. One is
polling, alluded to above, where the thread checks a flag that indicates that a collection has
been requested. The other technique is patching, which involves modifying the code at the
next GC-point(s) of the thread so that when the suspended thread is restarted, it will stop
  8 Excepting the possibility of checking for adequate thread-private free space before a sequence of allocations.
11.6. GC SAFE-POINTS AND MUTATOR SUSPENSION                                                200

at the next GC-point. This is similar to placing temporary breakpoints in a debugger. Some
processors support a single-step trap mechanism that may be useful here. Agesen found
that patching has much lower overhead than polling, but of course it is more difficult to
implement, and more problematic in a concurrent system.
    In bringing up the idea of GC check-points, notice that we have introduced the notion
of a handshake mechanism between the collector and a mutator thread. Such handshakes
may be necessary even if a system does not include true concurrency but merely multi-
plexes several mutator threads on one processor — the collector may need to indicate the
need for garbage collection and then wake up any suspended thread that is not at a safe-
point so that the thread can advance to a safe-point. Some systems allow threads to sus-
pend only at safe-points so as to avoid this additional complexity, but for other reasons a
system may not control all aspects of thread scheduling, and so may need this handshake.
    For concreteness we mention some particular mechanisms for the handshake. Each
thread can maintain a thread-local variable that indicates whether the rest of the system
needs that thread’s attention at a safe-point. This mechanism can be used for things other
than signalling for a garbage collection. At a GC check-point, the thread checks that thread-
local variable, and if it is non-zero (say) it calls a system routine that uses the exact value
of the variable to determine what action to take. One particular value will indicate ‘time to
garbage collect’. When the thread notices the request, it sets another thread-local variable
to indicate it has noticed, or perhaps decrements a global variable on which a collector
thread is waiting. Systems typically arrange for thread-local variables to be cheap to access,
so this may be a good approach.
    Another possibility is to set a processor condition code in the saved thread state of the
suspended thread. A GC check-point can then consist of a very cheap conditional branch
over a call to the system routine for responding to the request. This approach only works if
the processor has multiple condition code sets (as for the PowerPC) and can be guaranteed
not to be in external code when awakened. If the machine has enough registers that one
can be dedicated to the signalling, a register can be used almost as cheaply as a condition
code flag. If a thread is in external code, the system needs an alternate method of getting
attention when the thread comes out of that code (unless it is suspended as a safe-point
already). Hijacking the return address (see also Section 11.5) is a way to get attention as
the external code completes.
    As an alternative to flag setting and return address hijacking, in some cases an oper-
ating system-level inter-thread signal, such as those offered by some implementations of
POSIX threads, may be a viable alternative. This may be problematic for wide portability,
and it may not be very efficient. It can be slow in part because of the relatively long path
through the operating system kernel to set up and deliver a signal to a user-level handler.
This can be ameliorated if the processor and operating system support user-mode trap de-
livery. It can also be slow because of the need not only for a low-level processor interrupt
but because of the effect on caches and translation lookaside buffers.
    In sum, there are two basic approaches: synchronous notification, also appropriately
called polling, and asynchronous notification via some kind of signal or interrupt. Each ap-
proach has its own overheads, which vary across platforms. Polling may also require a de-
gree of compiler cooperation, depending on the specific technique. Further, asynchronous
notification will usually need to be turned into synchronous, since scanning the stack, or
whatever action is being requested, may not be possible at every moment. Thus, the signal
handler’s main goal may be to set a flag local to its thread where the thread is guaranteed
to notice the flag soon and act on it.
    We further note that in implementing synchronisation between threads to direct scan-
ning of stacks, considerations of concurrent hardware and software crop up, for which
we offer general background in Chapter 13. Of particular relevance may be Section 13.7,
11.7. GARBAGE COLLECTING CODE                                                                 201

which discusses coordinating threads to move from phase to phase of collection, which
mutator threads may need to do as collection begins and ends.

11.7     Garbage collecting code
While many systems statically compile all code in advance, garbage collection has its roots
in implementations of languages like Lisp, which can build and execute code on the fly —
originally interpretively but also compiled to native code since early days. Systems that
load or construct code dynamically, and that optimise it at run time, are if anything more
common now. Loading and generating code dynamically leads logically enough to the
desire to reclaim the memory consumed by that code when the code is no longer needed.
Straightforward tracing or reference counting techniques often will not work, because code
for many functions is accessible through global variables or symbol tables that will never
be cleared. In some languages, little can be done if the program does not explicitly remove
such entries — and the language may provide no approved way to do that.
    Two specific cases deserve further mention. First, closures consist of a function and an
environment of bindings to use when the function runs. Naive construction of a closure,
say for function g nested within function f , provides g with the full environment of f ,
possibly sharing a common environment object. Thomas and Jones [1994] described a
system that, upon collection, can specialise the environment to just those items that g uses.
This may ultimately make some other closure unreachable and thus reclaimable.
    The other case is class-based systems, such as Java. One consideration is that in such
systems object instances generally refer to their class. It is common to place classes, and
the code for their methods, in a non-moving, non-collected area. In that way the collector
can ignore the class pointer in every object. But to reclaim classes, the collector will need
to trace the class pointer fields — possibly a significant cost in the normal case. It might
avoid that cost by tracing through class pointers only when invoked in a special mode.
    For Java in particular, a run-time class is actually determined by both the class’s code
and its class loader. Since loading a Java class has side effects such as initialising static
variables, unloading a class is not transparent if the class might be reloaded by the same
class loader. The only way to guarantee that a class will not be reloaded by a given class
loader is for the class loader itself to be reclaimable. A class loader has a table of the classes
it has loaded (to avoid reloading them, reinitialising them, and so on) and a run-time
class needs also to mention its class loader (as part of its identity). So, to reclaim a class,
there must be no references to its class loader, any class loaded by that class loader, or any
instance of one of those classes, from existing threads or global variables (of classes loaded
by other class loaders). Furthermore, since the bootstrap class loader is never reclaimed,
no class that it loads can be reclaimed. While Java class unloading is something of a special
case, certain kinds of programs rely on it or else servers will run out of space.
    In addition to user-visible code elements such as methods, functions and closures, a
system may generate multiple versions of code to be interpreted or run natively, for ex-
ample optimised and unoptimised code, or specialised versions of functions. Generating
a new version of a function may make old versions unreachable for future invocations of
the function. However, invocations still in process may need the old versions. Thus return
addresses embedded in the stack or closures may retain old code. In any case, the system
may need tracing or reference counting rather than immediately reclaiming old versions.
A related technique is on-stack replacement, in which a system replaces an in-process invoca-
tion’s code with new code. While this is commonly done more in order to improve the per-
formance of the still-running invocation, it also helps make old versions reclaimable. See
Fink and Qian [2003] and Soman and Krintz [2006] for examples of on-stack replacement

approaches and applications for Java. While on-stack replacement is most often directed at
optimising code, some applications, such as debugging, requires deoptimised code, which
can have the same effect of helping to make old versions of code reclaimable.

11.8     Read and write barriers
Several classes of garbage collection algorithm require ‘interesting’ pointers to be detected
as mutators run. If a collector only collects part of the heap, then any reference to an
object in that region from outside it is of interest to the collector: in the absence of further
knowledge, the collector must treat that reference as a root. For example, generational
collectors must detect any reference to a younger generation object written into an object
in an older generation. As we shall see in Chapter 15, interleaving mutation and collection
(whether or not the collector runs in its own thread) presents ample opportunities for the
mutator to hide pointers from the collector. If these references are not detected and passed
to the collector, then live objects may be reclaimed prematurely. All these cases require the
mutator to add references on the fly to the collector’s work list. This is achieved through
read or write barriers.
    Other chapters on specific algorithms address the particular content of read and write
barriers as needed by those algorithms. However, here we offer some general observa-
tions about how to implement barriers. To abstract from particular needs of a collection
algorithm, such as generational or concurrent collectors, we concern ourselves with the
detection and recording of ‘interesting’ pointers. Detection is the determination that a par-
ticular pointer is ‘interesting’ while recording is noting that fact for later use by the collector.
To some extent detection and recording are orthogonal, though some detection methods
may lend themselves more to particular recording methods. For example, detection via
page protection violations lends itself more to recording the location being modified.

Engineering
A typical barrier involves one or more checks that guard an action. Typical checks include
whether a pointer being stored is null and the relationship between the generations of the
referring object and its referent, and a typical action is to record an object in a remembered
set. The full code for all the checks and the action may be too large to inline entirely, de-
pending on implementation. Even a fairly modest sequence of instructions would create
very large compiled code and also risk poor instruction cache performance since much of
the code only executes rarely. Therefore, designers often separate the code into what is
commonly called ‘fast path’ and ‘slow path’ portions. The fast path is inlined for speed,
and it calls the slow path part only if necessary; there is one copy of the slow path in or-
der to conserve space and improve instruction cache performance. It is critical that the
fast path code include the most common cases and that the slow path part be less com-
mon. However, it sometimes helps to apply the same principle to the slow path code. If
the barrier involves multiple tests — and they usually do — then it is important to order
those tests so that the first one filters out the most cases, the second the next larger set of
cases, and so on, modulo the cost of performing the test. In doing this tuning, there is
no substitute for trying various arrangements and measuring performance on a range of
programs, because so many factors come into play on modern hardware that simple ana-
lytical models fail to give adequate guidance. This is exemplified by the study of barrier
performance presented by Yang et al. [2012], which showed the impact of differences in
micro-architectures with same instruction set (Intel 32-bit machines). The increased use of
out-of-order micro-architectures with powerful memory subsystems since that work, and

the shift to 64-bit machines, may well have caused further performance shifts. Indeed, we
have heard of cases where a barrier that does more work actually executes faster.
    Another significant factor in barrier performance is speed in accessing any required
data structures, such as card tables. It may be a good trade-off to dedicate a machine
register to hold a data structure pointer, such as the base of the card table, but this can
vary considerably by machine and algorithm.
    Also of concern is the software engineering and maintenance of those aspects of the
garbage collection algorithm — mostly barriers, GC checks and allocation sequences —
that are built into the compiler(s) of a system. If possible, it seems best to arrange for the
compiler to inline a routine in which the designer codes the fast path portion of a sequence.
That way the compiler does not need to know the details and the designer can change
them freely. However, as we noted before, these code sequences may have constraints,
such as no garbage collection in the middle of them, that require care on the compiler’s
part. The compiler may also have to disable some optimisations on these code sequences,
such as leaving apparently dead stores that save something useful for the collector and
not reordering barrier code or interspersing it with surrounding code. To that end, the
compiler might support special pragmas or markers for the designer to use to indicate
special properties such as uninterruptible code sequences.
    In the remainder of this section we discuss write barriers. We defer the discussion
of read barriers to later chapters where we discuss incremental and concurrent collection
since this is the context in which they are used. Write barriers are more complex than read
barriers since they not only have to detect ‘interesting’ writes but must also record some
information for the garbage collector’s later use. In contrast, read barriers typically cause
an immediate action, such as copying to tospace the target of the reference just loaded.

Precision of write barriers
Interesting pointers can be remembered using different policies and mechanisms. Poli-
cies dictate the precision with which the location of an interesting pointer is recorded in
the remembered set. The choice of policy is a trade-off between adding overheads to the
mutator or to the collector. In general it is better to favour adding overhead to relatively in-
frequent collector actions (such as discovering roots) than to very frequent mutator actions
(such as heap stores). Without a barrier, pointer stores are normally very fast (although
null pointer or array bounds checks are often required by managed languages). Adding
a write barrier can increase the instruction count for a pointer write by a factor of two or
more, though some of this cost may be masked if the cache locality of the barrier is better
than that of the mutator itself (for example, it is probably unnecessary to stall the user code
while the write barrier records an interesting pointer). Likewise, the high instruction level
parallelism support from many modern microarchitectures will tend to absorb some of
these costs. Typically, more precise recording of interesting pointers in the remembered set
means less work for the collector to do to find the pointer but more work for the mutator to
filter and log it. At one extreme, in a generational collector, not logging any pointer stores
transfers all overheads from the mutator to the collector which must scan all other spaces
in the heap looking for references to the condemned generation. While this is unlikely to be
a generally successful policy, linear scanning has better locality than tracing, and this may
be the only way to collect generationally if there is no support for detecting pointer stores
from the compiler or operating system [Bartlett, 1989a]. Swanson [1986] and Shaw [1988]
have suggested that this can reduce garbage collection costs by two-thirds compared with
simple semispace copying.
     There are three dimensions to remembered set policy. First, how accurately should
pointer writes be recorded? Not all pointers are interesting to a collector, but uncondi-

tional logging may impose less overhead on the mutator than filtering out uninteresting
pointers. The implementation of the remembered set is key to this cost. Remembered sets
with cheap mechanisms for adding an entry, such as simply writing a byte in a fixed-size
table, will favour unconditional logging, especially if addition is idempotent. On the other
hand, if adding an entry is more expensive or the size of the remembered set is a concern,
then it is more likely to be worthwhile to filter out uninteresting pointers. Filtering is es-
sential for concurrent or incremental collectors to ensure that their work lists do eventually
empty. For a particular filtering scheme, there is a trade-off between how much filtering to
do inline and when to call an out-of-line routine to complete the filtering and possibly add
the pointer to a remembered set. The more filtering that is done inline, the fewer instruc-
tions that may be executed, but the code size will increase and the larger instruction cache
footprint may undermine any performance gains. This requires careful tuning of the order
of filter tests and which are done inline.
    Second, at what granularity is the location of the pointer to be recorded? The most
accurate is to record the address of the field into which the pointer was written. However,
this will increase the size of the remembered set if many fields of an object, such as an
array, are updated. An alternative is to record the address of the object containing the
field: this also permits duplicates to be filtered, which field remembering does not (since
there is generally no room in the field to record that it has been remembered). Object
remembering requires the collector to scan every pointer in the object at scavenge time
in order to discover those that refer to objects that need to be traced. A hybrid solution
might be to object-record arrays and field-record scalars on the assumption that if one slot
of an array is updated, then many are likely to be. Conversely, it might be sensible to field-
record arrays (to avoid scanning the whole thing) and object-record scalars (since they tend
to be smaller). For arrays it may make sense to record only a portion of the array. This is
analogous to card marking, but specific to arrays and aligned with the array indices rather
than with the addresses of the array’s fields in virtual memory. Whether to store the object
or one of its slots may also depend on what information the mutator has at hand. If the
write action knows the address of the object as well as the field, the barrier can choose to
remember either; if only the address of the field is passed to the barrier, then computing
the address of the object will incur further overhead. Hosking et al. [1992] resolve this
dilemma by storing the addresses of both the object and the slot in their sequential store
buffer for an interpreted Smalltalk system. Blackburn [2019] presents performance results
for a design of field-recording that uses one bit per field to avoid recording a field more
than once. These bits are stored adjacent to the object. That work showed that a careful
implementation can get the overhead of field-recording as compared to object-recording
down to about 1% to 2%.
    Card table techniques (which we discuss below) divide the heap logically into small,
fixed-size cards. Pointer modifications are recorded at the granularity of a card, typically
by setting a byte in a card table. Note that the card marked can correspond to either the
updated field or object (these may reside on different cards). At scavenge time, the collec-
tor must first find any dirty cards corresponding to the condemned generation and then
find all the interesting pointers held in that card. The choice of object or field card marking
will affect how this search is performed. Coarser than cards, pointer stores can be logged
at the granularity of a virtual memory page. With help from the hardware and operating
system, this may impose no direct overhead on the mutator but, like cards, increases work
for the collector. Unlike cards, marked pages will always correspond to the updated slot
not to its containing object since the operating system is oblivious to object layout.
    Third, should the remembered set be allowed to contain duplicate entries? The case for
duplicates is that not checking eases the burden on the mutator; the case against is that du-
plicates increase the size of the remembered set and move the cost of handling duplicates

to the collector. Card and page marking eliminate duplicates since they typically simply
set a bit or a byte in a table. Object recording can also eliminate most duplicates by marking
objects as logged, for example by using a bit in their header, regardless of the implementa-
tion of the remembered set itself, whereas duplicate elimination is unlikely to be so simple
if word-sized fields are recorded (but Zhao et al. [2022a,b] achieve good results with a field
recording barrier). The cost to the mutator is that this is an additional check which may
or may not be absorbed by the reduction in remembered set entries added, and that an
additional write is performed. Otherwise, remembered sets must be implemented as true
sets rather than multisets if they are not to contain duplicates.
    In summary, if a card- or page-based scheme is used, then the collector’s scanning cost
will depend on the number of dirty cards or pages. Otherwise, the cost will depend on the
number of pointer writes if a scheme without duplicate elimination is used. With dupli-
cate elimination, it will depend on the number of different objects modified. In all cases,
uninteresting pointer filtering will reduce the collector’s root scanning cost. Mechanisms
for implementing remembered sets include hash sets, sequential store buffers, card tables,
virtual memory mechanisms and hardware support. We consider each of these in turn.

Hash tables
The remembered set must implement a true set if it is to remember slots without duplicat-
ing entries. Equally, a set is required for object remembering if there is no room in object
headers to mark an object as remembered. A further requirement for a remembered set is
that adding entries must be a fast, and preferably constant time, operation. Hash tables
meet these requirements.
    Hosking et al. [1992] implement a remembered set with a circular hash table, using
linear hashing in their multiple generation memory management toolkit, for a Smalltalk
interpreter that stores stack frames in generation 0, step 0 in the heap. More specifically,
a separate remembered set is maintained for each generation. Their remembered sets can
store either objects or fields. The tables are implemented as arrays of 2i + k entries (they use
k = 2). Hence addresses are hashed to obtain i bits (from the middle bits of the address),
and the hash is used to index the array. If that entry is empty, the address of the object
or field is stored at that index; otherwise, the next k entries are searched (this is not done
circularly, which is why the array size is 2i + k). If this also fails to find an empty entry, the
table is searched circularly.
    In order not to increase further the work that must be done by the remembering code,
the write barrier filters out all writes to generation 0 objects and all young-young writes.
In addition, it adds all interesting pointers to a single scratch remembered set rather than
to the remembered set for the target generation. Not deciding at mutator time the gen-
eration to whose remembered set it should be added might be even more apposite in a
multithreaded environment; there per-processor scratch remembered sets could be used
to avoid contention as thread-safe hash tables would be too expensive. In all, Hosking
et al. used 17 inlined MIPS instructions in the fast path of the write barrier, including the
call to update the remembered set, making it comparatively expensive even on the MIPS,
a register-rich architecture. At scavenge time, the roots for a given generation may reside
either in that generation’s remembered set or in the scratch remembered set. Duplicates
between the remembered sets are removed by hashing the generation’s remembered set
into the scratch remembered set, and the scratch remembered set is processed: any in-
teresting pointers encountered are added to the appropriate remembered sets. We saw
in Section 10.4 that the OpenJDK G1 collector similarly does not decide at mutator time
which region’s remembered set to update but instead, and only where necessary, its write
barrier simply updates a card which it appends to a thread-local sequential store buffer

Algorithm 11.4: Recording stored pointers with a sequential store buffer

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      add %src, %i, %fld                                                /* fld := &src[i] */
 3      st %ref, [%fld]                                                     /* src[i] := ref */
 4      st %fld, [%next]                                               /* SSB[next] := fld */
 5      add %next, 4, %next                                              /* next := next + 1 */

(see below); concurrent refinement threads subsequently add the location of any interest-
ing pointers found from these buffers to the remembered set of the appropriate region.
    Garthwaite [2005] used hash tables in his implementation of the Train algorithm. The
common operations on his tables are insertion and iteration, so he used open addressing.
Because it is common to map adjacent addresses, he eschewed linear addressing (address
modulo N where N is the size of the hash table) which would tend to map these addresses
to neighbouring slots in the table. Instead he used a universal hashing function. He chose
a 58-bit prime p and assigned to each remembered set hash table parameters a and b,
generated by repeated use of a pseudo-random function [Park and Miller, 1988] so that
0 < a, b < p. An address r is hashed by the function (( ar + b) mod p) mod N. Open-
addressing requires a tactic for probing alternative slots when a collision occurs. Linear
and quadratic probing (in which the current slot’s index is incremented by an amount d
and d is incremented by a constant i) suffer from clustering as subsequent insertions follow
the same probing sequence, so he used double hashing in which the increment used in
quadratic probing is a function of the key. Given a hash table whose size is a power of two,
quadratic probing with any odd increment i applied to the probing step d ensures that the
entire table will be visited. This scheme doubles the available set of probing sequences by
checking whether d is odd. If so, i is set to zero (linear probing). Otherwise, both d and i
are set to d + 1. Finally, a hash table may need to be expanded when its load becomes too
high. An alternative may be to rebalance the table by modifying the insertion process. At
each collision, we must decide whether to continue probing with the item being inserted
or whether to place it in the current slot and probe with the contents of that slot. In another
implementation, Garthwaite et al. [2005] used robin hood hashing [Celis et al., 1985]. Each
entry is stored in its slot along with its depth in the probing sequence, taking advantage of
the fact that the least significant bits of an item (such as the address of a card) will be zero.
If a slot already contains an item, its depth is compared with the depth of the new item:
we leave the value that is deeper in its probing sequence and continue with the other.

Sequential store buffers
Pointer recording can be made faster by using a simpler sequential store buffer (SSB), such as
a chain of blocks of slots. A buffer per thread might be used for all generations to save the
mutator write barrier from having to select the appropriate one and to eliminate contention
between threads.
    In the common case, adding an entry requires very few instructions: it is simply nec-
essary to compare a next pointer against a limit, store to the next location in the buffer
and bump the next pointer. The MMTk toolkit [Blackburn et al., 2004b] memory man-
agement toolkit implements a sequential store buffer as a chain of blocks. Each block is
power-of-two sized and aligned, and filled from high addresses to low. This allows a sim-
ple overflow test by comparing the low order bits of the next pointer with zero (which
is often a fast operation). A number of tricks can be used to eliminate the explicit over-

Algorithm 11.5: Misaligned access boundary check

 1   atomic insert(fld):
 2      *(next − 4) ← fld                                     /* add the entry in the previous slot */
 3      tmp ← next >> (n−1)
 4      tmp ← tmp & 6                                                             /* tmp = 4 or 6 */
 5      next ← next + tmp

Example: n = 4 (4 word buffers):
     insert at 32: next=40, next>>(n−1)=4, tmp=4
     insert at 36: next=44, next>>(n−1)=5, tmp=4
     insert at 40: next=48, next>>(n−1)=5, tmp=4
     insert at 44: next=54, next>>(n−1)=6, tmp=6
     insert at 50: UTRAP!

flow check, in which case the cost of adding an entry to the sequential store buffer can be
as low as one or two instructions if a register can be reserved for the next pointer, as in
Algorithm 11.4. With a dedicated register this might be as low as one instruction on the
PowerPC: stwu fld,4(next).
    Appel [1989a], Hudson and Diwan [1990] and Hosking et al. [1992] use a write-protected
guard page. When the write barrier attempts to add an entry on this page, the trap han-
dler performs the necessary overflow action, which we discuss later. Raising and handling
a page protection exception is very expensive, costing hundreds of thousands of instruc-
tions. This technique is therefore effective only if traps are very infrequent: the trap cost
must be less than the cost of the (many) software tests that would otherwise be performed:

                        cost of page trap ≤ cost of limit test × buffer size

Appel ensures that his guard page trap is triggered precisely once per collection by storing
the sequential store buffer as a list in the young generation. The guard page is placed at
the end of the space reserved for the young generation, thus any allocation — for objects
or remembered set entries — may spring the trap and invoke the collector. This technique
relies on the young generation’s area being contiguous. It might appear that a system can
simply place the heap at the end of the data area of the address space and use the brk
system call to grow (or shrink) the heap. However, protecting the page beyond the end
of the heap interferes with use of brk by malloc, as noted by Reppy [1993], so it may be
better to use a higher region of address space and manage it with mmap.
    Architecture-specific mechanisms can also be used to eliminate the overflow check.
One example is the Solaris UTRAP fault, which is designed to handle misaligned accesses
and is about a hundred times faster than the Unix signal handling mechanism. Detlefs
et al. [2002a] implement their sequential store buffer as a list of 2n -byte buffers, aligned on
2n+1 boundaries but not 2n+2 ones, which sacrifices some space. The insertion algorithm
is shown in Algorithm 11.5. The next register normally points to 4 bytes beyond the next
entry, except when the buffer is full (that is, when next points at the slot before a 2n+2 -
aligned boundary), in which case the increment on line 5 adds 6, causing a UTRAP on the
next access.
    Sequential store buffers may be used directly as remembered sets or as a fast logging
front-end to hash tables. A simple, two-generation configuration with en masse promotion
can discard the remembered set at each minor collection since the nursery is emptied:
there is no need for more complex remembered set structures (provided the sequential

store buffer does not overflow before a collection). However, other configurations require
remembered sets to be preserved between collections. If multiple generations are used, the
records of pointers spanning older generations must be preserved regardless of whether
survivors of the condemned generations are promoted en masse. If the generations being
collected have steps or other mechanisms for delaying promotion (Section 9.4), then the
record of older generation pointers to surviving, but not promoted objects, must be kept.
    One solution might be simply to remove entries that are no longer needed from the
sequential store buffer. An entry for a field will not be needed if the field’s value is null, or
refers to an object that is only considered at full heap collections (or never). By extension,
an entry for an object can be deleted if the object similarly does not contain any interesting
pointers. However, this solution encourages unrestrained growth of the remembered set
and leads to the collector processing the same long-lived entries from one collection to the
next. A better solution is to move entries that need to be preserved to the remembered
set of the appropriate generation. These remembered sets might also be sequential store
buffers or the information might be transferred into a hash table as we saw above.

Overflow action
Hash tables and sequential store buffers may overflow; this can be handled in different
ways. The MMTk acquires and links a fresh block into the sequential store buffer [Black-
burn et al., 2004b]. Hosking et al. [1992] fix the size of their sequential store buffer by emp-
tying it into hash tables whenever it overflows. In order to keep their hash tables relatively
sparse, they grow a table whenever a pointer cannot be remembered to its natural location
in the table or one of the k following slots, or when the occupancy of the table exceeds a
threshold (for example, 60%). Tables are grown by incrementing the size of the hash key,
effectively doubling the table’s size; a corollary is that the key size cannot be a compile-
time constant, which may increase the size and cost of the write barrier. As Appel [1989a]
stores his sequential store buffer in the heap, overflow triggers garbage collection. The
MMTk also invokes the collector whenever the size of its metadata (such as the sequential
store buffer) grows too large.

Cards and card tables
Card table (card marking) schemes divide the heap conceptually into fixed-size, contiguous
areas called cards [Sobalvarro, 1988; Wilson and Moher, 1989a,b]. Cards are typically small,
between 128 and 512 bytes. The simplest way to implement the card table is as an array
of bytes, indexed by the cards. Whenever a pointer is written, the write barrier dirties an
entry in the card table corresponding to the card containing the source of the pointer (for
example, see Figure 11.3). The card’s index can be obtained by shifting the address of the
updated field. The motivation behind card tables is to permit a small and fast write barrier
that can be inlined into mutator code. In addition, card tables cannot overflow, unlike
hash tables or sequential store buffers. As always, the trade-off is that more overhead is
transferred to the collector. In this case, the collector must search dirtied cards for fields
that have been modified and may contain an interesting pointer: the cost to the collector is
proportional to the number of cards marked (and to card size) rather than the number of
(interesting) stores made.
    Because they are designed to minimise impact on mutator performance, card marking
schemes are often used with an unconditional write barrier. This means that the card table
is sufficiently large that all locations that might be modified by Write can be mapped to
a slot in it. The size of the table could be reduced if it were guaranteed that no interesting
pointers would ever be written to some region of the heap, and a conditional test was used

Algorithm 11.6: Recording stored pointers with a card table on SPARC

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      add %src, %i, %fld                                              /* fld := &src[i] */
 3      st %ref, [%fld]                                                   /* src[i] := ref */
 4      srl %fld, LOG_CARD_SIZE, %idx                   /* idx := fld >> LOG CARD SIZE */
 5      stb ZERO, [%BASE+%idx]                                         /* CT[idx] := dirty */

Algorithm 11.7: Recording stored pointers with Hölzle’s card table on SPARC

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      st %ref, [%src + %i]
 3      srl %src, LOG_CARD_SIZE, %idx                       /* calculate approximate byte index */
 4      clrb [%BASE + %idx]                                             /* clear byte in byte map */

Algorithm 11.8: Two-level card tables on SPARC

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      add %src, %i, %fld                                                /* fld := &src[i] */
 3      st %ref, [%fld]                                                          /* do the write */
 4      srl %fld, LOG_CARD_SIZE, %idx                                   /* get the level 1 index */
 5      stb ZERO, [%BASE+%idx]                                    /* mark the level 1 card dirty */
 6      srl %fld, LOG_SUPERCARD_SIZE, %idx                              /* get the level 2 index */
 7      stb ZERO, [%BASE+%idx]                                    /* mark the level 2 card dirty */

to filter out such uninteresting pointers. For example, if the area of the heap above some
fixed virtual address boundary was reserved for the nursery (which is scavenged at every
collection), then it is only necessary to map the area below that boundary.
    While the most compact implementation of a card table is an array of bits, this is not
the best choice for several reasons. Modern processor instruction sets are not designed
to write single bits. Therefore, bit manipulations require more instructions than primitive
operations: read a byte, apply a logical operator to set or clear the bit, write the byte back.
Worse, this sequence of operations is not atomic: card updates may be lost if threads race
to update the same card table entry even though they may not be modifying the same
field or object in the heap. Some processors offer atomic instructions to update bits, but
they tend to be slow. For these reasons, card tables generally use arrays of bytes. Because
processors often have fast instructions for clearing memory, ‘dirty’ is often represented
by 0. For example, using a byte array, the card can be dirtied in just two SPARC instruc-
tions [Detlefs et al., 2002a] (most other popular architectures can do the same), as shown
in Algorithm 11.6. For clarity, we write ZERO to represent the SPARC register %g0 which
always holds 0. A BASE register needs to be set up so that it holds the higher order bits of
CT1−(H>>LOG_CARD_SIZE) where CT1 and H are the starting addresses of the card table
and the heap, respectively, and both are aligned on a card-size boundary, say 512 bytes.
Detlefs et al. [2002a] use a SPARC local register for that, set up once on entry to a method
that might perform a write, and preserved across calls by the register window mechanism.
    Hölzle [1993] further reduced the cost of the write barrier in most cases by reducing
the precision with which the modified field is recorded, as in Algorithm 11.7. Suppose that
marking byte i in the card table indicated that any card in the range i . . . i + L may be dirty.

Provided that the offset of the updated word is less than L cards from the beginning of the
object, the byte corresponding to the object’s address can be marked instead. A leeway of
one (L = 1) is likely to be sufficient to cover most stores except those into array elements:
these must be marked exactly in the usual way. With a 128-byte card, any field of a 32-word
object can be handled. Ambiguity arises only when the last object on a card extends into
the next card, and in that case the collector also scans that object or the necessary initial
portion of it.
    The space required for the card table is usually modest, even for small card sizes. For
example, a byte array for 128-byte cards occupies less than 1% of the heap. Card size is a
compromise between space usage and the collector’s root scanning time, since larger cards
indicate the locations of modified fields less precisely but occupy smaller tables.
    At collection time, the collector must search all dirty cards for interesting pointers.
There are two aspects to the search. First, the collector must scan the card table, looking
for dirty cards. The search can be sped up by observing that mutator updates tend to have
good locality, thus clean and dirty cards will tend to occur in clumps. If bytes are used in
the card table, four or eight cards can be checked by comparing whole words in the table.
    If a generational collector does not promote all survivors en masse, some objects will
be retained in the younger generation, while others are promoted. If a promoted object
refers to an object not promoted, then the older-to-younger reference leads unavoidably to
a dirty card. However, when a promoted object is first copied into the older generation,
it may refer to objects in the younger generation, all of which end up being promoted. In
that case it would be better not to dirty the promoted object’s card(s), since doing so will
cause needless card scanning during the next collection. Hosking et al. [1992] take care to
promote objects to clean cards, which are updated as necessary as the cards are scanned
using a filtering copy barrier.
    Even so, a collector may spend significant time in a very large heap skipping clean
cards. Detlefs et al. [2002a] observe that the overwhelming majority of cards are clean,
whilst cards with more than 16 cross-generational pointers are quite rare. The cost of
searching the card table for dirty cards can be reduced at the expense of some additional
space for a two-level card table. The second, smaller card table uses more coarsely grained
cards, each of which corresponds to 2n fine-grained cards, thus speeding up scanning of
clean cards by the same factor. The write barrier can be made very similar to that of Al-
gorithm 11.6 (just two more instructions are needed) by sacrificing some space in order to
ensure that the start of the second level card table CT2 is aligned with the first such that
CT1−(H>>LOG_CARD_SIZE)=CT2−(H>>LOG_SUPERCARD_SIZE), as in Algorithm 11.8.

Crossing maps
As a card table is searched, each dirty card discovered must be processed, which requires
finding the modified objects and slots somewhere in the card. This is not straightforward
since the start of the card is not necessarily aligned with the start of an object, but in order
to scan fields we must start at an object. Worse, the field that caused the card to be dirtied
may belong to a large object whose header is several cards earlier (this is another reason
for storing large objects separately). In order to be able to find the start of an object, we
need a crossing map that decodes how objects span cards.
    The crossing map holds as many entries as cards. Each entry in the crossing map indi-
cates the offset from the start of the corresponding card to an object starting in that card.
Entries in the crossing map corresponding to old generation cards are set by the collector
as it promotes objects, or by the allocator in the case of cards for spaces outside the genera-
tional world. Notice that the nursery space does not need cards since objects there cannot
point to other objects that are younger still — they are the youngest objects in the system.

       card table                                                            dirty

                                                                                search
     crossing map        102 words        -1 card         -2 cards          50 words

                            scan

            Heap

                        408 bytes                                      200 bytes

Figure 11.3: Crossing map with slot remembering card table. One card has
         been dirtied (shown in black). The updated field is shown in grey. The cross-
         ing map shows offsets (in words) to the last object in a card.

Algorithm 11.9: Search a crossing map for a slot-recording card table; trace is the collector’s
marking or copying procedure.

 1   search(card):
 2      start ← H + (card << LOG_CARD_SIZE)
 3      end ← start + CARD_SIZE                           /* start of next card */
 4      card ← card − 1
 5      offset ← crossingMap[card]
 6      while offset < 0
 7         card ← card + offset              /* offset is negative: go back */
 8         offset ← crossingMap[card]
 9      next ← H + (card << LOG_CARD_SIZE) + offset
10      repeat
11         trace(next, start, end)                /* trace the object at next */
12         next ← nextObject(next)
13      until next ≥ end

Promotion also requires that the crossing map be updated. The design of the crossing map
depends on whether the card table records objects or slots.
    Used with a slot-recording write barrier, the crossing map must record the offset to the
last object in each card, or a negative value if no object starts in a card. Because objects can
span cards, the start of the modified object may be several cards earlier than the dirty one.
For example, in Figure 11.3, objects are shown as white rectangles in the heap. We assume
a 32-bit architecture and 512-byte cards. The last object in the first card starts at an offset of
408 bytes (102 words) from the start of the card, indicated by the entry in the crossing map.
This object spans four cards so the next two crossing map entries are negative. A field
in the fifth object has been updated (shown as grey) so the corresponding card (card 4) is
marked (shown as black). To find the start of this object, the collector consults the crossing
map, moving backwards from the dirtied card (to the left) until it finds a non-negative
offset (Algorithm 11.9). Note that the negative value indicates a distance to go back — a
process that may need to be repeated a number of times if the preceding object is quite
large. Alternatively, the system can reserve a single value, such as -1, to mean ‘back up,’
making backing up slower over a large object.
    Old generations are commonly managed by a non-moving collector which mixes used
and free blocks in the heap. Parallel collectors are especially likely to create islands of

 Entry v           Encoded meaning
 v=0               The corresponding card contains no references.
 0 < v ≤ 128       The first object starts v words before the end of this card.
 256 < v ≤ 384     The first v − 256 words of this card are a sequence of references at the
                   end of an object.
 v > 384           Consult the card v − 384 entries before.

Table 11.3: The crossing map encoding of Garthwaite et al. [2006]

promoted data separated by large areas of free space, as each collector thread will promote
to its own heap area in order to avoid contention. To aid heap parsability, each free area
can be filled with a self-describing pseudo-object. However, slot-based crossing map al-
gorithms are predicated on the assumption that heap usage is dense. If a very large, say
10 megabyte, free chunk protrudes into a dirty card, the first loop of the search algo-
rithm in Algorithm 11.9 will iterate tens of thousands of times to discover the head of the
pseudo-object describing this free chunk. One way to reduce this search is to store logarith-
mic backup values when no object starts in the card. Thus, an entry −k would indicate ‘go
back 2k−1 cards and then do what it says there’ (and similarly for a linear backup scheme).
Note also that if future allocation starts from the beginning of this free block, then only
logarithmically many entries (up the ‘spine’ of this list) have to be changed to restore the
crossing table to the correct state.
    However, Garthwaite et al. [2006] show that a clever encoding of the crossing map
can usually eliminate the search loop. The simplest way to consider their scheme is to
assume that each crossing map entry v is a 16-bit unsigned integer (two bytes). Table 11.3
shows their scheme. If the value v of a crossing map entry is zero, then no objects in
the corresponding card contain any references. A value for v less than 128 indicates the
number of words between the start of the first object and the end of the card. Notice that
this is different from the scheme above which gives the offset to the last word in a card.
Finding the first word eliminates the need to search back possibly many cards. Large
objects, such as arrays, may span cards. The second encoding deals with the case that such
an object spans two or more cards, and that the first v − 256 words of the second card are
all references and that this sequence terminates the object. The benefit of this encoding is
that the references can be found directly, without accessing the object’s type information.
However, this encoding would not work if the portion of the object overlapping this card
contains both references and non-references. In this case, the crossing map entry should
be set to a value greater than 384 to indicate that collector should consult the entry v − 384
entries earlier. Garthwaite et al. also include a scheme in which, if an object completely
spans two crossing map slots, then the four bytes of these slots should be treated as the
address of the object. In this discussion, we have assumed that a crossing map entry should
be two bytes long. However, a single byte suffices if, for example, we use 512-byte cards
and 64-bit alignment.

Summarising cards
Some generational collectors do not promote objects en masse. Whenever the collector scans
a dirty card and finds an interesting pointer but does not promote its referent, the card
must be left dirty so that it is found at the next collection and scanned again. It would be
preferable to discover interesting pointers directly rather than by searching through cards.
Fortunately, it is common for very few dirty cards to contain more than a small number

of interesting pointers. Hosking and Hudson [1993] therefore suggest moving interesting
pointers to a hash table as a card is cleaned, in the same way as Hosking et al. [1992] did
with sequential store buffers.
    Sun’s Java virtual machines optimised card rescanning by having the scavenger sum-
marise dirty cards that retain interesting pointers, taking advantage of card map entries
being bytes not bits [Detlefs et al., 2002a]. The state of an old generation card may now be
‘clean’, ‘modified’ or ‘summarised’. If the scavenger finds up to k interesting pointers in a
‘modified’ card, it marks the card as ‘summarised’ and records the offsets of these pointer
locations in the corresponding entry of a summary table. If the card contains more than k
interesting pointers (for example, k = 2), it is left ‘modified’ and the summary entry is
recorded as ‘overflowed’. The k interesting fields can therefore be processed directly at the
next collection (unless the card is dirtied again) rather having to search the card using the
crossing map. Alternatively, if cards are reasonably small, each byte-sized entry in the card
table itself can store a small number of offsets directly.
    Reppy [1993] encodes additional generational information in the card table to save
scanning effort. As it cleans cards, his multi-generational collector summarises a dirty
card with the lowest generation number of any referent found on it (0 being the nursery).
In future, when collecting generation n, cards in the table with values larger than n need
not be processed. Used with 256-byte cards, this gave an 80% improvement in garbage
collection times in a five-generation Standard ML heap.

Hardware and virtual memory techniques
Some of the earliest generational garbage collectors relied on operating system and hard-
ware support. Tagged pointer architectures allowed pointers and non-pointers to be dis-
criminated, and hardware write barriers could set bits in a page table [Moon, 1984]. How-
ever, it is possible to use operating system support to track writes without special purpose
hardware. Shaw [1988] modified the HP-UX operating system to use its paging system for
this purpose. The virtual memory manager must always record which pages are dirty so
that it knows whether to write them back to the swap file when they are evicted. Shaw
modified the virtual memory manager to intercept a page’s eviction and remember the
state of its dirty bit, and added system calls to clear a set of page bits and to return a map
of pages modified since the last collection. The benefit of this scheme is that it imposes no
normal-case cost on the mutator. A disadvantage is that it overestimates the remembered
set since the operating system does not distinguish pages dirtied by writing a pointer or a
non-pointer, plus there are the overheads of the traps and operating systems calls.
    Boehm et al. [1991] avoided the need to modify the operating system by write-protecting
pages after a collection. The first write to a page since it was protected leads to a fault; the
trap handler sets the dirty bit for the page before unprotecting it to prevent further faults
in this collection cycle. Clearly, pages to which objects are promoted should be presumed
dirty during collection to avoid incurring traps. Page protection does impose overhead on
the mutator but, as for card tables, the cost of the barrier is proportional to the number
of pages written rather than the number of writes. However, these schemes incur further
expense. Reading dirty page information from the operating system is expensive. Page
protection mechanisms are known to incur ‘trap storms’ as many protection faults are trig-
gered immediately after a collection to unprotect the program’s working set [Kermany
and Petrank, 2006]. Page protection faults are expensive, particularly if they are referred
to user-space handlers. Operating system pages are much larger than cards, so efficient
methods of scanning them will be important (perhaps summarising them in the same way
that we summarised cards above).

Write barrier mechanisms: in summary
Studies by Hosking et al. [1992] and Fitzgerald and Tarditi [2000] found no clear win-
ner amongst the different remembered set mechanisms for generational garbage collec-
tors, although neither study explored Sun-style card summarising. Page-based schemes
performed worst but, if a compiler is uncooperative, they do provide a way to track
where pointers are written. In general, for card table remembered sets, card sizes around
512 bytes performed better than much larger or much smaller cards.
    Blackburn and Hosking [2004] examined the overheads of executing different genera-
tional barriers alone on a range of platforms. Card marking and four partial barrier mech-
anisms were studied: a boundary test, a logging test, a frame comparison and a hybrid
barrier. They excluded the costs of inserting an entry into remembered set for the par-
tial barriers. The boundary test checked whether the pointer crossed a space boundary
(a compile-time constant). The logging test checked a ‘logged’ field in the source of the
pointer’s header. The frame barrier compared whether a pointer spanned two 2n - sized
and aligned areas of the heap by xoring the addresses of its source and target: such bar-
riers can allow more flexibility in the choice of space to be collected [Hudson and Moss,
1992; Blackburn et al., 2002]. Finally, a hybrid test chose statically between the boundary
test for arrays and the logging test for scalars.
    They concluded that the costs of the barrier (excluding the remembered set insertion in
the case of the partial techniques) was generally small, less than 2% of execution time. Even
where a write barrier’s overhead was much higher, the cost can be more than balanced
by improvements in overall execution time offered by generational collection [Blackburn
et al., 2004a]. However, there was substantial architectural variation between the platforms
used (Intel Pentium 4, AMD Athlon XP and PowerPC 970), especially for the frame and
card barriers. For example, the frame barrier was significantly more expensive than the
others on x86 but among the cheapest on PowerPC; Blackburn and Hosking observed that
xor is required to use the eax register on x86 which may increase register pressure (this
restriction seems no longer to hold). On the other hand, card marking on the PowerPC
(their compiler generated a longer instruction sequence than the ones shown above) was
very much more expensive than the partial techniques. All of this may be different on
newer microarchitectures. We conclude that, as always, design decisions must be informed
by careful experimentation with realistic benchmarks on a range of hardware platforms,
and for each platform a different technique may be best.

Chunked lists
It is common to find list-like data structures in collectors where an array is attractive be-
cause it does not require a linked list pointer or object header for each element, and it
achieves good cache locality, but where the unused part of large arrays, and the possible
need to move and reallocate a growing array, are problematic. A remembered set in a gen-
erational collector is such an example. A chunked list offers the advantage of high storage
density but without the need to reallocate, and with relatively small waste and overhead.
This data structure consists of a linked-list, possibly linked in both directions for a general
deque, of chunks, where a chunk consists of an array of slots for holding data, plus the one
or two chaining pointers. This is illustrated in Figure 11.4.
     A useful refinement of this data structure is to make the size of the chunks a power of
two, say 2k , and align them on 2k boundaries in the address space. Then logical pointers
into a chunk, used for scanning, inserting or removing, do not need a separate ‘current
chunk’ pointer and an index, but can use a single pointer. Algorithm 11.10 shows code
for traversing a bidirectional chunked list in either direction, as a sample of the technique.
11.9. MANAGING ADDRESS SPACE                                                                        215

                           NEXT             NEXT                  null
                           null             PREV                  PREV

                2k bytes
                                                                                   ptr

Figure 11.4: A stack implemented as a chunked list. Shaded slots contain
        data. Each chunk is aligned on a 2k byte boundary.

Algorithm 11.10: Traversing chunked lists

 1   /* Assume chunk is of size 2k bytes and aligned on a 2k byte boundary */
 2   /* Assume pointer size and slot size is 4 here */
 3   NEXT = 0 /* byte offset in a chunk of pointer to data of next chunk */
 4   PREV = 4 /* byte offset in a chunk of pointer to end of data of previous chunk */
 5   DATA = 8 /* byte offset in a chunk of first data item */
 6

 7   bumpToNext(ptr):
 8      ptr ← ptr + 4
 9      if (ptr % 2k ) = 0                                                    /* went off the end. . . */
10         ptr ← *(ptr − 2k + NEXT)                     /* . . .back up to start of chunk and chain */
11      return ptr
12

13   bumpToPrev(ptr):
14      ptr ← ptr − 4
15      if (ptr % 2k ) < DATA                             /* went off the beginning of the data... */
16         ptr ← *ptr                                                                 /* . . .chain */
17      return ptr

The modular arithmetic can be performed with shifting and masking.
     An important additional motivation for chunking is related to parallelism. If a chunked
list or deque represents a work queue, then individual threads can grab chunks instead of
individual items. If the chunk size is large enough, this greatly reduces contention on
obtaining work from the queue. Conversely, provided that the chunk size is small enough,
this approach still admits good load balancing. Another application for chunking is for
local allocation buffers (Section 7.7), though in that case the chunks are just free memory,
not a dense representation of a list data structure.

11.9      Managing address space
In other chapters we have described a variety of algorithms and heap layouts, some of
which have implications for how a system uses available address space. Some algorithms
require, or at least are simpler with, large contiguous regions. In a 32-bit address space it
can be difficult to lay out the various spaces statically and have them be large enough for
all applications. If that were not problematic enough, on many systems we face the added
difficulty that the operating system may have the right to place dynamic link libraries
(also called shared object files) anywhere it likes within large swaths of the address space.
Furthermore, these libraries may not end up in the same place on each run — for security
11.9. MANAGING ADDRESS SPACE                                                               216

Algorithm 11.11: Frame-based generational write barrier

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      ct ← frameTableBase
 3      srcFrame ← src >>> LOG_FRAME_SIZE
 4      refFrame ← ref >>> LOG_FRAME_SIZE
 5      srcGen ← ct[srcFrame]
 6      refGen ← ct[refFrame]
 7      if srcGen > refGen
 8         remember(src, &src[i], ref)
 9      src[i] ← ref

purposes, the operating system may randomise their placement. Of course one solution
is the larger address space of a 64-bit machine. However, the wider pointers needed in a
64-bit system end up increasing the real memory requirements of applications.
    One of the key reasons for using certain large-space layouts of the address space is to
make address-oriented write barriers efficient, that is, to enable a write barrier to work
by comparing a pointer to a fixed address or to another pointer rather than requiring a
table lookup. For example, if the nursery of a generational system is placed at one end of
the address space used for the heap, a single check against a boundary value suffices to
distinguish writes of pointers referring to objects in the nursery from other writes.
    In building new systems, it may be best not to insist on large contiguous regions of
address space for the heap, but to work more on the basis of frames, or at least to allow
‘holes’ in the middle of otherwise contiguous regions. Unfortunately, this may then require
table lookup for write barriers.
    Assuming table lookup costs that are acceptable, the system can manage a large logical
address space by mapping it down to the available virtual address space. This does not
allow larger heaps, but it does give flexibility in that it removes some of the contiguity re-
quirements. To do this, the system deals with memory in power-of-two sized and aligned
frames, generally somewhat larger than a virtual memory page. The system maintains
a table indexed by frame number (upper bits of virtual address) that gives each frame’s
logical address. This table then supports the address comparisons used in a variety of
address-oriented write barriers. It may lead to even better code to associate a generation
number (for a generational write barrier) with each frame. Algorithm 11.11 gives pseudo-
code for such a write barrier. Each line can correspond to one instruction on a typical
processor, particularly if entries in the frame table are a single byte each, simplifying the
array indexing operation. Notice also that the algorithm works even if ref is null — we
simply ensure that the entry for null’s frame has the highest generation number so the
code will always skip the call to remember.
    It is further possible to arrange true multiplexing of a large address space into a smaller
one — after all, that is what operating systems do in providing virtual memory. One
approach would be to use wide addresses and do a check on every access, mimicking in
software what the virtual memory hardware accomplishes. This could use the software
equivalent of translation lookaside buffers, and so on. The performance penalty might
be high. It is possible to avoid that penalty by leveraging the virtual memory hardware,
which we discuss in more detail in Section 11.10.
    It is good to build into systems from the start the capability to relocate the heap. Many
systems have a starting heap or system image that they load as the system initialises. That
image assumes it will reside at a particular location in the address space — but what if a
11.10. APPLICATIONS OF VIRTUAL MEMORY PAGE PROTECTION                                      217

dynamic link library lies right in the middle of it? If the image includes a table indicating
which words need adjusting when the image is moved, not unlike many code segments,
then it is relatively straightforward for the image loader to relocate the image to another
place in the address space. Likewise, it might be desirable to support relocating the entire
heap, or segments of it, during system operation.
    In actually managing virtual memory, we can distinguish between the managed sys-
tem’s notion of address space dedicated to particular uses, which we call reserving the
space, and actual allocation of pages via a call to the operating system. If the operating sys-
tem might map new dynamic link libraries into the address space on the fly, to guarantee
a reservation that the managed system has in mind, it must actually allocate the pages —
typically as demand-zero pages. This has relatively low cost, but may involve the oper-
ating system in reserving resources such as swap space, and all virtual memory mapping
calls tend to be expensive. Allocating pages in advance can also determine earlier that
there are not adequate resources for a larger heap. However, operating systems do not
always ‘charge’ for demand-zero pages until they are used, so simply allocating may not
give an early failure indication.

11.10      Applications of virtual memory page protection
There are a variety of checks that a system can arrange to happen as part of virtual mem-
ory protection checking. Implemented in this way, the checks have little or no normal case
overhead and furthermore require no explicit conditional branches. A general considera-
tion is that the overhead of fielding the trap, all the way through the operating system to
the collector software and back again, can be quite high. Also, changing page protections
can be costly, especially in a multiprocessor system where the operating system may need
to stop processes currently executing and update and flush their page mapping informa-
tion. So sometimes an explicit check is cheaper even when the system could use protection
traps [Hosking et al., 1992]. Traps are also useful in dealing with uncooperative code, in
which it is not possible to cause barriers or checks in any other way.
    A consideration is that there are hardware performance reasons to increase page size.
In particular, programs use more memory now than when these techniques were first de-
veloped, and systems tend to have more main memory available to map. At the same
time, translation lookaside buffer size is not likely to grow because of speed and power
concerns. But given that translation lookaside buffer size is more or less fixed, staying
with a small page size while programs’ memory use increases implies more translation
lookaside buffer misses. With larger pages some of the virtual memory ‘tricks’ may not be
as desirable.
    We assume a model in which data pages can have their protection set for read-write
access, read-only access or no-access. We are not concerned about execute privileges since
we are unaware of garbage collection-related exploitation of no-execute protection; it is
also less well supported across platforms.

Double mapping
Before considering specific applications, we describe a general technique called double map-
ping, by which the system maps the same page at two different addresses with different
protections. Consider for example an incremental copying collector with a tospace invari-
ant. To prevent mutators from seeing fromspace pointers in pages not yet processed, the
collector can set those pages to no-access, effectively creating a hardware supported read
barrier. But how is the collector to process the pages? If the system is concurrent and the
11.10. APPLICATIONS OF VIRTUAL MEMORY PAGE PROTECTION                                       218

collector unprotects the page, some other mutator may see the contents before the collec-
tor processes them. However, if the page is mapped a second time in another place, with
read-write access, then the collector can process the contents via that second mapping,
then unprotect the page and wake up any mutator waiting for it.
    In a smaller address space (32 bits is often small now) it may be difficult to double map.
A solution to that problem is to fork a child process that holds the second version of the ad-
dress space with the same pages but different protections. The collector can communicate
with the child, requesting the child to process a page, and so forth.
    Note also that double mapping is problematic on some systems. One problem arises
when caches are indexed by virtual address. In the presence of double mapping, the cache
could potentially become incoherent. Typically, the hardware avoids that by preventing
aliased entries from residing in the cache at the same time. This can cause extra cache
misses. However, in the case at hand it applies only to accesses by the mutator and collec-
tor near in time on the same processor. Another problem arises if the system uses inverted
page tables. In this scheme, each physical page can have only one virtual address at a time.
The operating system can support double mapping by effectively invalidating one of the
virtual addresses and then connecting the other one. This may involve cache flushing.
    While the relationship between the double mapped addresses may be arbitrary, by em-
ploying bit stealing of some high-order bits, the different addresses can function as pointer
tags, as discussed in Section 15.1.

Applications of no-access pages
In describing double mapping, we have already given one example of using no-access
pages: for an unconditional read barrier. There are at least three more applications for no-
access pages in common use. One use is to suspend mutator threads at a GC check-point.
When the virtual machine needs to initiate a collection, it makes a well-known page no-
access. At GC check-points mutators attempt to access this page and will trap if a collection
has been requested.
   Another is to detect dereferences of null pointers, which we assume to be represented
by the value 0. This works by setting page 0, and possibly a few more pages after it, no-
access. If a mutator tries to access a field through a null pointer, it will attempt to read or
write the no-access page. Since fielding a null pointer dereference exception is generally
not required to be fast, this application can be a good trade-off. In the rare case of an
access that has a large offset, the compiler can emit an explicit check. If the object layout
places headers or other fields at negative offsets from the object pointer, the technique still
works provided that one or more pages with very high addresses are set no-access. Most
operating systems reserve the high addresses for their own use anyway.
   The other common use for a no-access page is as a guard page. For example, the se-
quential store buffer technique for recording new remembered set entries consists of three
steps: ensure there is room in the buffer; write the new element to the buffer; and incre-
ment the buffer pointer. The check for room, and the call to the buffer overflow handler
routine, can be removed if the system places a no-access guard page immediately after the
buffer. Since write barriers can be frequent and their code can be emitted in many places,
the guard page technique can speed up mutators and keep their code smaller.
   Some systems apply the same idea to detecting stack or heap overflow by placing a
guard page at the end of the stack (heap). To detect stack overflow, it is best if a procedure’s
prologue touches the most remote location of the new stack frame it desires to build. That
way the trap happens at a well-defined place in the code. The handler can grow the stack
by reallocating it elsewhere, or add a new stack segment, and then restart the mutator
with an adjusted stack and frame pointer. Likewise, when using sequential allocation the
11.10. APPLICATIONS OF VIRTUAL MEMORY PAGE PROTECTION                                      219

allocator can touch the most remote word of the desired new object and cause a trap if it
falls into the guard page that marks the end of the sequential allocation area.
     In either case, if the new stack frame or object is so large that its most remote word
might lie beyond the guard page, the system needs to use an explicit check. But such large
stack frames and objects are rare in many systems, and in any case a large object will take
more time to initialise and use, which amortises the cost of the explicit check.
     No-access pages can also help in supporting a large logical address space in a smaller
virtual address space. An example is the Texas persistent object store [Singhal et al., 1992].
Using the strategy for persistence (maintaining a heap beyond a single program execution)
is treated in Chapter 21, but the mechanism is suitable for the non-persistent case as well.
In this approach the system works in terms of pages, of the same size as virtual memory
pages or some power-of-two multiple of that. The system maintains a table that indicates
where each logical page is: either or both of an address in (virtual) memory and a location
in an explicitly managed swapping file on disk. A page can be in one of four states.
   • Unallocated: Not yet used, empty.
   • Resident: In memory and accessible; it may or may not have a disk copy saved yet.
   • Non-resident: On disk and not accessible.
   • Reserved: On disk and not accessible, but with specific virtual memory reserved.
Initially, a new page starts Resident and has a new logical address, not determined by
its virtual memory address. As virtual memory fills, some pages may be evicted to disk,
saved according to their logical address. Also, the system converts all pointers in the page
to their long logical form, a process called ‘unswizzling’ in the literature [Moss, 1992]. Thus
the saved form of a page is typically larger than its in-memory form. Also, the system
must be able to find all the pointers in a page accurately. After evicting a page, its state is
Reserved, and the system sets the virtual memory it occupied to no-access. This guarantees
that if the program follows a pointer to an evicted object, there will be a page trap, which
alerts the system to fetch the page back.
    How can the system free up the Reserved virtual space for reuse? It must determine
that there are no longer any Resident pages referring to the Reserved page. It can help
make this happen by evicting pages that refer to the Reserved page. At that point the page
can become Non-resident and the system can reuse the space. Notice that Resident pages
refer to each other and to Reserved pages, but never directly to data in Non-resident pages.
    Now consider what happens if the program accesses a Reserved page (and if there are
evicted data that are reachable in the object graph, then there must be Reserved pages). The
system looks up the page’s logical address and fetches it from disk. It then goes through
the page’s pointers and replaces long logical addresses with short virtual addresses (called
pointer swizzling). For referents on pages that are Resident or Reserved, this consists of just
a table lookup. If the referent is itself on a Non-resident page, then the system must reserve
virtual address space for that page, and then replace the long address with a pointer to the
newly Reserved page. Acquiring virtual address space for these newly Reserved pages
may require evicting other pages so that some page(s) can be made Non-resident and their
virtual address space recycled.
    Just as an operating system virtual memory manager needs good page replacement
policies, so the Texas approach needs a policy, though it can reasonably borrow from the
vast store of virtual memory management algorithms.
    How does the scheme work in the presence of garbage collection? It is clear that a
full heap garbage collection of a heap larger than the virtual address space is probably
going to involve significant performance penalties. Collection of persistent stores has its
11.11. CHOOSING HEAP SIZE                                                                  220

own literature, covered in Chapter 21. However, we can say that partitioned schemes can
help and techniques like Mature Object Space collector [Hudson and Moss, 1992] can offer
completeness.
    Related techniques include the Bookmarking collector [Hertz et al., 2005; Bond and
McKinley, 2008]. However, the purpose of bookmarking is more to avoid thrashing real
memory — it does not extend the logical address space beyond the physical. Rather it
summarises the outgoing pointers of pages evicted by the operating system so that the
collector can avoid touching evicted pages and thus remain within the working set, at a
possible loss of precision similar to that occasioned by remembered sets and generational
collection: the collector may trace from pointers in dead objects of evicted pages.

11.11      Choosing heap size
In Section 9.7, we considered the effect of the size of the young generation on average pause
times. In general, a smaller young generation tends to obtain shorter pauses for minor
collections at the expense of promoting soon-to-die objects. For this reason, generational
collectors usually provide automatic mechanisms that adjust the sizes of the generations,
adapting to the behaviour of the running program. HotSpot’s Ergonomics is one example
of such a mechanism.
    Here we focus on heap sizes in general. Other things being equal, larger sizes typ-
ically result in higher mutator throughput and lower collection cost. In some cases, a
smaller heap size may improve mutator throughput by improving mutator locality by re-
ducing cache or translation lookaside buffer misses. However, too big a heap may lead to
a working set larger than can be accommodated in real memory, resulting in thrashing,
particularly when the collector is active. Therefore, choosing an appropriate heap size of-
ten involves aiming to keep a program’s real memory footprint small enough. Knowing
how small is small enough typically involves the run-time system and the operating sys-
tem. We now review a number of schemes that automatic memory managers have used to
adjust heap size. Alternative approaches to adjusting the size of the heap include choosing
which pages to page out, as in the Bookmarking collector [Hertz et al., 2005; Hertz, 2006],
and having the collector save rarely accessed objects to disk [Bond and McKinley, 2008].
    Alonso and Appel [1990] devised a scheme where an ‘advice server’ tracks virtual
memory usage using information available from ordinary system calls, vmstat in par-
ticular. After each full collection (the Appel collector for Standard ML is generational), the
collector reports its minimal space need, how much space more than that it is currently
using for the heap, how long it has been since the last full collection and how much mu-
tator and collector CPU time it has expended since the last collection. The advice server
determines an additional amount of space that appears safe for the process to use, and
the process adjusts its heap size accordingly. The aim is to maximise throughput of the
managed processes without causing other processes to thrash either.
    In contrast to Alonso and Appel, Brecht et al. [2001, 2006] control the growth in heap
size for Java applications without reference to operating system paging information. Rather,
for a system with a given amount of real memory — they considered 64 and 128 megabytes
— they give a series of increasing thresholds, T1 to Tk , stated as fractions of the real memory
of the system. At any given time, a process uses a heap size of Ti for some i. If collecting
at size Ti yields less than Ti+1 − Ti fraction of the space reclaimed, the system increases the
threshold from Ti to Ti+1 . They considered the Boehm-Demers-Weiser collector [Boehm
and Weiser, 1988], which cannot shrink its heap, so their approach only deals with heap
growth. The thresholds must be determined empirically, and the approach further as-
sumes that the program in question is the only program of interest running on the system.
11.11. CHOOSING HEAP SIZE                                                                  221

     Cooper et al. [1992] present an approach that aims for a specified working set size for an
Appel-style Standard ML collector running under the Mach operating system. They adjust
the nursery size to try to stay within the working set size, and they also do two things
specific to Mach. One is that they use a large sparse address space and avoid the need to
copy tospace to lower addresses in order to avoid hitting the end of the address space. This
has little to do with heap sizing, but does reduce collector time. The second thing specific
to Mach is having the collector inform the Mach pager that evacuated fromspace pages can
be discarded and need not be paged out and, if referenced again, such pages can be offered
back to the application with arbitrary contents — the allocator will zero them as necessary.
Cooper et al. obtain a fourfold improvement in elapsed time for a small benchmark suite,
with about half of the improvement coming from the heap size adjustment. However, the
target working set size must still be determined by the user.
     Yang et al. [2004] modify a stock Unix kernel to add a system call whereby an applica-
tion can obtain advice as to how much it may increase its working set size without thrash-
ing, or how much to decrease it to avoid thrashing. They modify garbage collectors of
several kinds to adjust their heap size using this information. They demonstrate the im-
portance of adaptive heap sizing in obtaining the best performance as memory usage by
other processes changes. They introduce the notion of the footprint of a program, which
is the number of pages it needs in memory to avoid increasing the running time by more
than a specified fraction t, set to five or ten percent. For a garbage collected program, the
footprint depends on the heap size, and for copying collectors, also on the survival rate
from full collections, that is, the live size. However, an observation they make, not unlike
Alonso and Appel, is that the key relationship is between how the footprint changes for a
given change in heap size. In particular, the relationship is linear, with the ratio determined
by the particular collection algorithm. The ratio is 1 for mark-sweep based collectors, while
it is 2 for copying collectors.
     Grzegorczyk et al. [2007] consider the relative helpfulness of several pieces of informa-
tion related to paging that can be obtained from a standard Unix kernel. Specifically they
look at page outs, the number of pages written to the swap area by the kernel swapping
daemon, page faults, the number of pages missing when referenced that had to be fetched
from disk, and allocation stalls, the number of times the process had to wait when trying to
obtain a fresh page. These counts are all related to the particular executing process in that
page outs have to do with the pages of that process, and page faults and allocation stalls
occur because of actions of the process. Of these three possible indicators that a system
is under so much memory load that shrinking the heap might be wise, they find that the
number of allocation stalls is the best indicator to use. When a collection sees no allocation
stalls, it will grow the heap by an amount originally set to 2% of the user-specified heap
size; values between 2% and 5% gave similar results. If a collection experiences allocation
stalls, the collector shrinks the nursery so that the total heap space, including the reserve
into which the nursery is copied, fits within the space used the last time that there were
no allocation stalls. This leaves the nursery cut by up to 50%. In the absence of memory
pressure, the scheme performs similar to a non-adjusting baseline, while in the presence
of memory pressure, it performs close to the non-pressure case while the baseline system
degrades substantially.
     The schemes we have discussed so far concern adjusting individual processes’ use of
memory dynamically, perhaps in response to general use of memory within a system at
any given time. If, on the other hand, the set of programs to be run is known in advance
and does not vary, the approach of Hertz et al. [2009] aims to indicate the best heap size
to give to each program. In this scheme ‘best’ means ‘gives the least overall execution
time’, which can also be stated as ‘give the highest overall throughput’. At run time, their
Poor Richard’s Memory Manager has each process observe its recent page fault counts and
11.12. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                 222

resident set size. If the number of page faults observed in one time increment is greater
than the number observed in the previous increment by more than a threshold amount,
the collector triggers a full collection in order to reduce the working set size. Likewise, it
triggers a full collection if the resident set size decreases. The resulting system appears to
size competing processes’ heaps well to achieve the best throughput.
    The dynamic heap sizing mechanism proposed by Zhang et al. [2006] is similar in spirit
to that of Hertz et al., but has the program itself check the number of page faults at each
collection and adjust the target heap size itself, rather than building the mechanism into
the collector. Unlike the other mechanisms we have discussed, they assume that the user
has somehow identified the phases of the program and inserted code to consider forcing
collection at phase changes. They showed that dynamic adaptive heap sizing can substan-
tially improve performance over any single fixed heap size.

11.12      Issues to consider
The allocation interface presents a number of questions that the implementer must answer.
Some answers may be dictated by the language semantics or by the level of concurrency
in the environment (can objects ‘leak’ from their allocating thread?). Others may be at
the discretion of the implementer and the decisions may be made in order to improve
performance or the robustness of the run-time system.
    We need to consider what requirements are made of allocation and initialisation. Is the
language run-time’s job simply to allocate some space of sufficient size, must some header
fields be initialised before the object can be usable or must initialising values for all the
newly allocated object’s fields be provided? What are the alignment requirements for this
object? Should the run-time distinguish between different kinds of objects, such as arrays
and other objects? Is it beneficial to treat objects that may contain pointers from those that
do not? Such a distinction may help to improve tracing since pointer-free objects do not
need to be scanned. Avoiding scanning such objects is known to be particularly beneficial
for conservative collectors.
    Often we will want to consider carefully how much of the allocation code sequence
can be inlined. Typically, we might inline a fast path in which an object can be allocated
with the least work but not the other slower paths which might involve obtaining space
from a lower-level allocator or invoking the collector. However, too much inlining can
explode the size of the code and negate the benefit hoped for. Similarly, it might be desir-
able to dedicate a register to a particular purpose, such as the bump-pointer for sequential
allocation. However, doing so may place too much pressure on the register allocator on a
register-poor platform.
    Depending on the language supported, for safety or for debugging, the run-time may
zero memory. Space could be zeroed as objects are allocated but bulk zeroing with a well-
optimised library routine is likely to be more efficient. Should memory be zeroed shortly
before it is used (for best cache performance) or immediately when it is freed, which may
help with debugging (though here writing a special value might be more useful)?
    Collectors need to find pointers in order to determine reachability. Should the run-time
provide a precise or a conservative estimate to the collector? Or might it provide a conser-
vative estimate of the pointers in program threads and a more precise estimate of pointer
locations in the heap? Conservative pointer finding can ease aspects of an implementation,
but risks space leaks and may lead to worse performance than type-accurate collection.
Finding pointers in the stack, especially if it contains a mixture of frame types (optimised
and unoptimised subroutines, native code frames, bridging frames), can be challenging to
implement type-accurately. On the other hand, scanning stacks for pointers constrains the
choice of collection algorithm as objects directly reachable from stacks cannot be moved.
11.12. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                  223

    Systems generally provide stack maps to determine from a return address the function
within which the address lies. Polymorphic functions and language constructs such as
Java’s jsr bytecode complicate their use. The implementer must also decide when stack
maps should be generated and when they can be used. Should the maps be generated
in advance or should we defer generating until the collector needs one, thereby saving
space? Is a map only valid at certain safe points? Stack maps can be large: how can they
be compressed, especially if they must be valid at every instruction? Stack scanning also
raises the question of whether the stack should be scanned in its entirety, atomically, or
incrementally. Incremental stack scanning is more complex but offers two benefits. First,
it can bound the amount of work done in an increment (which may be important for real-
time collectors). Second, by noting the portion of the stack that has not changed since the
last time it was scanned, we can reduce the amount of work that the collector has to do.
    Language semantics and compiler optimisations raise further questions. How should
interior and derived pointers be handled? Language may allow access to objects from
outside the managed environment, typically from code written in C or C++, and every
language needs to interact with the operating system for input/output. The run-time must
ensure that objects are not reclaimed while they are being used by external code and that
external code can find these objects. Typically, this may involve pinning such objects or
providing access to them through handles.
    Some systems may allow a garbage collection at any point. However, it is usually
simpler to restrict where collection can happen to specific GC safe-points. Typically these
include allocation, backward branches, and function entry and return. There are alterna-
tive ways to cause a thread to suspend at a GC-point. One way is to have threads poll
by checking a flag that indicates that a collection has been requested. An alternative is
to patch the code of a running thread to roll it forward to the next GC-point. The hand-
shake between collector and mutator thread can be achieved by having threads check a
thread-local variable, by setting a processor condition code in the saved thread state of a
suspended thread, by hijacking return address or through operating system signals.
    Several classes of garbage collection algorithm require ‘interesting’ pointers to be de-
tected as mutators run. This opens up a wide range of design policies and implementations
for the detection and recording of these pointers. As barrier actions are very common, it
is essential to minimise any overhead they incur. Barriers may be short sequences of code
inserted by the compiler before pointer loads or stores, or they may be provided through
operating system support, such as page protection traps. As always, there are trade-offs
to be considered. In this case, the trade-offs are between the cost to the mutator and the
cost to the collector, between precision of recording and speed of a barrier. In general, it is
better to favour adding overhead to relatively infrequent collector actions (such as discov-
ering roots) than to very frequent mutator actions (such as heap stores). Adding a write
barrier can increase the instruction count for a pointer write by a factor of two or more,
though some of this cost may be masked by cache access times.
    How accurately should pointer writes be recorded? Unconditional logging may impose
less overhead on the mutator than filtering out uninteresting pointers but the implemen-
tation of the remembered set is key to this decision. How much filtering should be inline?
Careful tuning is essential here. At what granularity is the location of the pointer to be
recorded? Should we record the field overwritten, the object or the card or page on which
it resides? Should we allow the remembered set to contain duplicate entries? Should ar-
rays and non-arrays be treated in the same way?
    What data structures should be used to record the locations of interesting pointers:
hash tables, sequential store buffers, cards or a combination of these? How does this choice
vary the overheads between the mutator and the collector? Data structures may overflow:
how can this be handled safely and efficiently? Card tables offer an imprecise recording
mechanism. At collection time, they must be scanned to find dirty cards and hence objects
11.12. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                              224

that may contain interesting pointers. This raises three performance questions. What size
should a card be? Card tables are often sparse: how can we speed up the search for dirty
cards? Should a two-level card table be used? Can we summarise the state of a card,
for example if it contains only one modified field or object? Once a dirty card is found,
the collector needs to find the first object on that card, but that object may start on an
earlier card. We need a crossing map that decodes how objects span cards. How does
card marking interact with multiprocessor cache coherency protocols? If two processors
repeatedly write to different objects on the same card, both will want exclusive access to
the card’s cache line. Is this likely to be a problem in practice?
    In systems run with virtual memory, it is important that garbage collected applications
fit within available real memory. Unlike non-managed programs, garbage collected ones
can adjust their heap size so as to fit better within available memory. What events and
counts does the particular operating system provide that a collector might use to adjust
heap size appropriately? Which of these events or counts are most effective? What is a
good heap growth policy, and an appropriate one for shrinking, if shrinking is possible?
How can multiple collected processes cooperate so as to offer good throughput for all?
    In summary, many of the details raised here are subtle, but both design choices and
implementation details have substantial effect on performance. In later chapters, we shall
see how the solutions discussed here can be used by garbage collection algorithms.
