Chapter 12

Language-specific concerns

Many programming languages assume the availability of garbage collection. This has led
to the development of various means for interacting with the collector in ways that ex-
tend the basic semantics of programming language memory management. For example,
a program might want to be informed and take some action when a given object is about
to be, or has been, reclaimed. We describe such finalisation mechanisms in Section 12.1.
Conversely, it is sometimes helpful to support references that do not of themselves force an
object to be retained. We consider such weak pointer mechanisms in Section 12.2. Lastly,
so far we have considered only the case of objects that do not change their size or type
(for garbage collection purposes) after allocation. Languages like JavaScript allow objects’
layout to evolve more dynamically; we describe techniques to support changing layouts
in Section 12.3.

12.1     Finalisation
Automatic storage reclamation with a garbage collector provides the appropriate seman-
tics for most objects. However, if a managed object refers to some other resource that lies
outside the scope or knowledge of the collector, automatic garbage collection does not
help, and in fact can lead to resource leaks that are hard to fix. A typical case is open files.
The interface to the operating system usually represents each open file with a small inte-
ger called a file descriptor, and the interface limits the number of files that a given process
may have open at one time. A language implementation will generally have, for each open
file, an object that the programmer uses to manage that file stream. Most of the time it is
clear when a program has finished with a given file stream, and the program can ask the
run-time system to close the stream, which can close the corresponding file descriptor at
the operating system interface, allowing the descriptor number to be reused.
    But if the file stream is shared across a number of components in a program, it can be
difficult to know when they have all finished with the stream. If each component that uses
a given stream sets its reference to the stream to null when the component is finished with
the stream, then when there are no more references the collector can (eventually) detect
that fact. We show such a situation in Figure 12.1. Perhaps we can arrange for the collector
somehow to cause the file descriptor to be closed.
    To do so, we need the ability to cause some programmer-specified action to happen
when a given object becomes no longer reachable — more specifically, when it is no longer
reachable by any mutator. This is called finalisation. A typical finalisation scheme allows
the programmer to indicate a piece of code, called a finaliser, that is to be run when the

                       Garbage collected
                       applicaon

                                                 FileStream
                                                 int desc 3
                                                 ...

                    Operang System
                               Open File
                                  Table 0
                                         1
                                         2
                                                               open file’s
                                         3                    informaon
                                           ...

                                           63

Figure 12.1: Failure to release a resource: a FileStream object has become
       unreachable, but its file descriptor has not been closed.

collector determines that a particular object is no longer mutator reachable. Commonly,
the implementation of this has the run-time system maintain a special table of objects for
which the programmer has indicated a finaliser. The mutators cannot access this table, but
the collector can. We call an object finaliser-reachable if it is reachable from this table but
not from mutator roots. In Figure 12.2 we show the previous situation but with a finaliser
added. The finaliser’s call to close the descriptor is conditional, since the application may
have already closed the file.
    In a reference counting system, before freeing an object the collector checks the finali-
sation table to see if the object requires finalisation. If it does, then the collector causes the
finaliser to run, and removes the object’s entry from the table. Similarly, in a tracing sys-
tem, after the tracing phase the collector checks the finalisation table to see if any untraced
object has a finaliser, and if so, the collector causes the finaliser to run, and so on.
    There is a range of subtly different ways in which finalisation can work. We now con-
sider some of the possibilities and issues.

When do finalisers run?
At what time do finalisers run? In particular, finalisation might occur during collection, as
soon as the collector determines the need for it. However, the situation during collection
might not support execution of general user code. For example, it may not be possible
for user code to allocate new objects at this time. Therefore most finalisation approaches
run finalisers after collection. The collector simply enqueues the finalisers. To avoid the
need to allocate space for the queue during collection, the collector can use a linked-list
representation for both the table of objects that have a finaliser but have not been enqueued
and for the queue of objects to be finalised. When the collector determines an object should
be enqueued for finalisation, it simply moves a linked-list node from one list to the other.
    In general, finalisers affect shared state; there is little reason to operate only on finalis-
able objects since they are about to disappear. For example, finalisers may need to access

                      Garbage collected
                      applicaon

             Table of objects
          that have finalisers

                                                FileStream                    Method table
                                                int desc 3
                                                ...                           finalize(){
                                                                                if isOpen
                                                                                  close(desc);
                  Operang System                                             }
                                Open File
                                   Table 0
                                          1
                                          2
                                                                 open file’s
                                          3                     informaon
                                          ...

                                          63

Figure 12.2: Using a finaliser to release a resource: here, an unreachable
        FileStream object has a finaliser to close the descriptor.

some global data to release a shared resource, and so often need to acquire locks. This is
another reason not to run finalisers during collection: it could result in a deadlock. Worse,
if the run-time system provides re-entrant locks — locks where the same thread can ac-
quire a lock that it already holds — we can have a finaliser run at a time when a critical
data structure is in the middle of being changed and its invariants do not hold. Thus we
can have absence of deadlock and silent corruption of the state of the application.1
    Even assuming that finalisers run after collection, there remain several options as to
exactly when they run. One possibility is immediately after collection, before mutator
thread(s) resume. This improves promptness of finalisation but perhaps to the detriment
of mutator pause time. Also, if finalisers communicate with other threads, which remain
blocked at this time, or if finalisers compete for locks on global data structures, this policy
could lead to communication problems or deadlock.
    A last consideration is that it is not desirable for a language’s specification of finali-
sation to constrain the possible collection techniques. In particular, collection on the fly,
concurrent with mutation, most naturally leads to running finalisers at arbitrary times,
concurrently with mutator execution.

Which thread runs a finaliser?
In a language that permits multiple threads, the most natural approach is to have a back-
ground finalisation thread run the enqueued finalisers asynchronously with the mutator
threads. In this case, the finalisers may run concurrently with mutators and must therefore
be safe for concurrent execution. Of particular concern is the possibility that a finaliser for
   1 Java has avoided this by indicating that a finalisation thread will invoke a finaliser with no locks held. Thus

the finalisation thread must be one that does not hold a lock on the object being finalised. In practice this pretty
much requires finalisation threads to be distinct threads, used only for that purpose. However, finalisation has
long been deprecated (since Java 9) and is now scheduled for removal.

an object of type T might run at the same time as the allocation and initialisation code for a
new instance of T. Any shared data structures must be synchronised to handle that case.2
    In a single-threaded language, which thread runs a finaliser is not a question — though
it does re-raise the question of when finalisers run. Given the difficulties previously men-
tioned, it appears that the only feasible and safe way, in general, to run finalisers in a
single-threaded system is to queue them and have the program run them under explicit
control. In a multithreaded system, as previously noted it is best that distinct finalisation
threads invoke finalisers, to avoid issues around locks.

Can finalisers run concurrently with each other?
If a large concurrent application uses finalisers, it may need more than one finalisation
thread in order to be scalable. Thus, from the standpoint of language design it appears
better to allow finalisers to run concurrently with each other, as well as concurrently with
mutators. Since, in general, programmers must code finalisers carefully so that they oper-
ate correctly in the face of concurrency — because finalisers are essentially asynchronous
with respect to mutator operations — there should be no additional problem with running
finalisers concurrently with each other.

Can finalisers access the object that became unreachable?
In many cases it is convenient for a finaliser to access the state of the object being reclaimed.
In the file stream example, the operating system file descriptor number, a small integer,
might most conveniently be stored as a field in the file stream object, as we showed in
Figure 12.2. The simplest finaliser can read that field and call on the operating system to
close the file (possibly after flushing a buffer of any pending output data). Notice that if the
finaliser does not have access to the object, and is provided no additional data but is just
a piece of code to run, then finalisation will not be very useful — the finaliser needs some
context for its work. In a functional language, this context may be a closure; in an object-
oriented language it may be an object. Thus the queuing mechanism needs to provide for
the passing of arguments to the finaliser.
    On balance it seems more convenient if finalisers can access the object being finalised.3
Assuming finalisers run after collection, this implies that objects enqueued for finalisation
survive the collection cycle in which they are enqueued. So that finalisers have access
to everything they might need, the collector must also retain all objects reachable from
objects enqueued for finalisation. This implies that tracing collectors need to operate in
two passes. The first pass discovers the objects to be finalised, and the second pass traces
and preserves objects reachable from the finaliser queue. In a reference counting collector
the system can increment the object’s reference count as it enqueues it for finalisation, that
is, the finalisation queue’s reference to the object ‘counts’. Once the object is dequeued
and its finaliser runs, the reference count will become zero and the object can be reclaimed.
Until then, objects reachable from it will not even be considered for reclamation.

    2 Java has a special rule to help prevent this: if an object’s finaliser can cause synchronisation on the object, then

the object is considered mutator reachable whenever its lock is held. This can inhibit removal of synchronisation
(because an object otherwise reachable only from the thread that allocated it will now be reachable also from the
finalisation thread, though not at the same time).
    3 However, using something like Java’s cleaners, which are built using phantom references, avoids the pitfalls

of finalisers while not restricting what the programmer can accomplish. See Section 12.2.

When are finalised objects reclaimed?
The fact that finalisers usually hold a reference to the object being finalised means that
they might store that reference in a global data structure. This has been called resurrection.
In a mechanical sense resurrection is not a problem, though it may be surprising to the
programmer. Since it is probably difficult to detect stores that resurrect objects, and since
setting up an object for future finalisation tends to happen as part of allocation and initial-
isation, resurrected objects will generally not be re-finalised. Java, for example, guarantees
that an object will not be finalised more than once. A language design in which setting up
finalisation works more dynamically might allow the programmer to request finalisation
for a resurrected object — because it allows such requests for any object.
    If a finalised object is not resurrected, then the next collection cycle can reclaim it. In a
system with partitioned spaces, such as a generational collector, the finalised object might
reside in a space that will not be collected again for a long time, so making it available to
the finaliser can substantially extend the object’s physical lifetime.

What happens if there is an error in a finaliser?
If finalisation is run synchronously at times known to the application, then programmers
can easily wrap finalisation actions with recovery handlers for when a finaliser returns an
error or throws an exception. If finalisers run asynchronously, it may be best to catch and
log exceptions for later handling by the application at an appropriate time. This is more a
concern of software engineering than of the garbage collection algorithm or mechanism.

Is there any guaranteed order to finalisation?
Finalisation order can matter to an application. For example, consider a BufferedStream
object connected to a FileStream that holds an open operating system file descriptor, as
shown in Figure 12.3. Both objects may need finalisers, but it is important to flush (write)
the buffer of the BufferedStream before closing the file descriptor.4
     Clearly, in a layered design like this, the sensible semantics will finalise from higher
layers to lower ones. In this case, because the lower level object is reachable from the
higher level one, it is possible for finalisation to occur in the sensible order automatically.
Notice that if we impose order on finalisations, ultimate finalisation may be slow, since we
only finalise one ‘level’ in the order at each collection. That is, in a given collection we only
finalise those unreached objects that are not themselves reachable from other unreached
objects.
     This proposal has a significant flaw: it does not handle cycles of unreachable objects
where more than one needs finalisation. Given that such cases appear to be rare, it seems
simpler and more helpful to guarantee finalisation in order of reachability; that is, if B is
reachable from A, the system should invoke the finaliser for A first.
     In the rare case of cycles, the programmer will need to get more involved. Mechanisms
such as weak references (see Section 12.2) may help, though using them correctly may be
tricky. A general technique is to separate out fields needed for finalisation in such a way
as to break the cycle of objects needing finalisation, as suggested by Boehm [2003]. That
is, if A and B have finalisers and cross-reference each other as shown in Figure 12.4a, we
can split B into B and B′ , where B does not have a finaliser but B′ does (see Figure 12.4b).
A and B still cross-reference each other, but (importantly) B′ does not refer to A. In this
scenario, finalisation in reachability order will finalise A first and then B′ .
   4 As a more subtle point, note that unless we can guarantee that the FileStream is used only by the

BufferedStream, then the BufferedStream should not close the FileStream. Unfortunately, this implies
that it may require two collection cycles before the file descriptor is closed.

                                              Garbage collected
                                              applicaon

         Method table
                                       BufferedStream
         finalize(){                   file                         FileStream
           if isOpen                   buffer                       int desc 3
             flush();                  ...                          ...
         }

                                                                  StringBuffer

Figure 12.3: Object finalisation order. Unreachable BufferedStream and
       FileStream objects, which must be finalised in that order.

         A                  B                                A                   B

         finaliser               finaliser                    finaliser              B'

                                                                                      finaliser

                (a) Original order                         (b) Refactored to handle cycles

Figure 12.4: Restructuring to force finalisation order in cyclic object graphs

The finalisation race problem
Lest we think that finalisation can be used straightforwardly without risk of subtle bugs,
even in the case of objects not requiring special finalisation order, there is a subtle kind of
race condition that can arise [Boehm, 2003]. Consider the FileStream example shown in
Figure 12.2. Suppose that the mutator is making its last call to write data to the file. The
writeData method of FileStream may fetch the descriptor, and then as its last action
call write on the descriptor, passing the data. Significantly, at this point the method’s
reference to the FileStream object is dead, and the compiler may optimise it away. If
collection happens during the call to write, the finaliser on FileStream may run and
close the file, before write actually invokes the operating system to write the data. This is a
difficult problem and Boehm’s experience is that the bug is pervasive, but rarely triggered
because the window of vulnerability is short.
    One fix for this is the Java rule mentioned previously that an object must be considered
live whenever its lock is held and a finaliser could run that requires synchronisation on the
object. A more general way to avoid the race is to force the compiler to retain the reference
to the FileStream longer. The trick to doing this is to pass the FileStream reference
in a later call (to a routine that does nothing) that the compiler cannot optimise away. The
.NET framework and C# (for example) provide a function for this called GC.KeepAlive.
Java similarly provides the Reference.reachabilityFence method.

Algorithm 12.1: Process finalisation queue

 1   process_finalisation_queue():
 2      while not isEmpty(Queue)
 3         do
 4            obj ← remove(Queue)
 5            obj.finalize()
 6         until isEmpty(Queue)
 7         if desired                                   /* whatever condition is appropriate */
 8            collect()

Finalisers and locks
As noted, for example by Boehm [2003], the purpose of a finaliser is usually to update some
global data structure in order to release a resource connected with the object that becomes
unreachable. Since such data structures are global, they generally require synchronised
access. In cases such as closing open file handles, some other software component (in this
case, the operating system) handles the synchronisation implicitly, but for data structures
within the program, it must be explicit. The concern is that, from the standpoint of most
code in the program, finalisers are asynchronous.
    There are two general approaches a programmer can take to the situation. One is to
apply synchronisation to all operations on the global data structure — even in the single-
threaded case (because a finaliser could run in the middle of a data structure operation
otherwise). This counts on the underlying implementation not to elide synchronisation on
an apparently private object if that object has a finalisation method. The other approach
is to arrange for the collector only to enqueue the object for finalisation, but not to begin
the actual finalisation work. Some language implementations offer such queueing mech-
anisms as built-in features; if a particular implementation does not, then the programmer
can code the finalisation method so that all it does is place the object in a programmer-
defined queue. In the queueing approach, the programmer will add code to the program,
at desirable (that is, safe) points. The code will process any enqueued objects needing
finalisation. Since running finalisers can cause other objects to be enqueued for finalisa-
tion, such queue-processing code should generally continue processing until the queue is
empty, and may want to force collections if it is important to reclaim resources promptly.
Suitable pseudocode appears in Algorithm 12.1. As previously noted, the thread that runs
this algorithm should not be holding a lock on any object to be finalised, which constrains
the places where this processing can proceed safely.
    The pain involved in this approach is the need to identify appropriate places in the code
at which to empty the finalisation queue. In addition to sprinkling enough invocations
throughout the code, the programmer must also take care that invocations do not happen
in the middle of other operations on the shared data structures. Locks alone cannot prevent
this, since the invoking thread may already hold the lock, and thus can be allowed to
proceed. This is the source of the statement in the Java Language Specification that the
system will only invoke finalize methods while holding no user-visible locks.

Finalisation and weak references
Finalisation and weak references can have complex interactions and require subtle imple-
mentation in a collector. This topic is discussed further in Section 12.2.

Finalisation in particular languages
Java. The Object class at the top of the Java class hierarchy provides a method named
finalize, which does nothing. Any subclass can override the method to request final-
isation. Java does not guarantee finalisation order, and with respect to concurrency only
says that finalisation runs in a context starting with no (user-visible) synchronisation locks
held. This pretty much means that finalisation runs in one or more separate threads, even
though the specification is not quite worded that way. If finalize throws an exception,
the Java system ignores it and moves on. If the finalised object is not resurrected, a future
collection will reclaim it. Java also provides support for programmer-controlled finalisa-
tion through appropriate use of the java.lang.ref API, as we describe in Section 12.2.
Note that finalisation has been officially deprecated since Java 9 and is now scheduled for
removal in a future release.

Lisp. Liquid Common Lisp offers a kind of object called a finalisation queue. The program-
mer can register an ordinary object with one or more finalisation queues. When the reg-
istered object becomes otherwise unreachable, the collector enters it into the finalisation
queues with which it was registered. The programmer can extract objects from any finali-
sation queue and do with them what she will. The system guarantees that if objects A and
B are both registered and become unreachable in the same collection, and B is reachable
from A but not vice versa, then the collector will enter A in the finalisation queue before
it enters B. That is, it guarantees order of finalisation for acyclic object graphs. These
finalisation queues are similar to the guardians described by Dybvig et al. [1993].
    CLisp offers a simpler mechanism: the programmer can request that the collector call
a given function f when it detects that a given object O is no longer reachable. In this
case f must not refer to O or else O will remain reachable and the system will never call
the finaliser. Since f receives O as an argument, this system permits resurrection. Also,
f could register O again, so O can be finalised more than once. A variant of the basic
mechanism allows the programmer to specify a guardian G in addition to the object O and
function f . In this case, when O becomes unreachable the system calls f only if G is still
reachable. If at this time G is unreachable, then the system reclaims O but does not call f .
This can be used to implement guardians of the kind described by Dybvig et al. [1993] —
f can add O to the internal queue of G.

C++. The C++ language offers destructors to handle disposal of objects, as a converse to
constructors which initialise new objects. The primary role of most destructors is to cause
explicit freeing of memory and its return to the allocator for reuse. However, since pro-
grammers can offer any code they want, C++ destructors can handle the case of closing a
file, and so forth. Destructors also provide a hook through which a programmer can sup-
port reference counting to reclaim (acyclic) shared data structures. In fact, C++ templates
allow a general smart pointer mechanism to drive the reference counting. But this shows
again that destructors are mostly about reclaiming memory — a job that a garbage col-
lector already handles. Thus, true finalisation remains relatively rare, even for C++. The
memory reclamation aspect of destructors is relatively safe and straightforward, not least
because it does not involve user-visible locks. However, as soon as the programmer veers
into the realm of ‘true’ finalisation, all the issues we mention here arise and are dropped
into the programmer’s lap. This includes dealing with locking, order of invocation of fi-
nalisers, and so on. Placing the responsibility for all this on the programmer’s shoulders
makes it difficult to ensure that it is done correctly.

.NET. The .NET framework adds finalisers to the existing notion of destructors in C, C++,
and the other languages supported by the framework. Destructors are called determin-
istically, starting with compiler-generated code for cleaning up objects as they go out of
scope. A destructor may call other objects’ destructors, but all destructors are concerned
with reclaiming managed resources, that is, resources known to the language and .NET run-
time system, primarily memory. Finalisers, on the other hand, are for explicitly reclaiming
unmanaged resources, such as open file handles and the like. If a kind of object needs fi-
nalisation, then the destructor should call the finaliser, to cover the case when the object
is reclaimed explicitly by compiler-generated code. However, the collector will call the
finaliser if the object is being reclaimed implicitly, that is, by the collector. In that case the
destructor will not be called. In any case, the finalisation mechanism itself is very similar
to that of Java. The end result is a mixture of C++ destructors and something close to Java
finalisation, with both synchronous and asynchronous invocation of finalisers possible.

JavaScript Core. JavaScript Core (JSC) is a JavaScript implementation in the WebKit brow-
ser. Its heap objects may have destructors that must be called before the storage is reused.
These destructors are typically concerned with things like references to items in the brow-
ser’s DOM (Document Object Model, representation of HTML objects), which may need
explicit reclamation when JSC objects are reclaimed. Kim et al. [2014] describe a technique
to speed up the processing of these destructors. They sweep a block at a time in JSC’s
lazy sweeping scheme, doing so concurrently with the mutators, invoking the destructors
of the dead objects of the block. Note that this finalisation is run entirely by the collector
and cannot refer to any other objects in the JSC heap — only the contents of the dead ob-
ject, which may hold non-JSC references into other spaces such as the DOM. More recently
JavaScript added a more typical finalisation scheme similar to Java’s phantom references.

For further study
Various languages have supported finalisation for decades and have evolved mechanisms
suitable to their contexts. Systematic consideration of the issues and various design ap-
proaches across several languages appears more recently in the literature in works such as
Hudson [1991] and Hayes [1992]. More careful inspection of the semantics of finalisation
and some of the thorny problems at its heart was performed by Boehm [2003], to whom
we are indebted as a primary source.

12.2     Weak references
Garbage collection determines which memory to retain and which to reclaim using reach-
ability through chains of pointers. For automatic reclamation this is a sound approach.
Still, there are a number of situations in which it is problematic.
    For example, in a compiler it can be useful to ensure that every reference to a given
variable name, say xyz, uses exactly the same string instance. Then, to compare two vari-
able names for equality, it suffices to compare their pointers. To set this up, the compiler
builds a table of all the variable names it has seen so far. The strings in the table are the
canonical instances of the variable names, and such tables are therefore sometimes called
canonicalisation tables. But consider what happens if some names fall into disuse as the
compiler runs. There are no references to the names from other data structures, but the
canonical copy remains. It would be possible to reclaim a string whose only reference is
from the table, but the situation is difficult for the program to detect reliably.

     Weak references (also called weak pointers) address this difficulty. If an object is reach-
able from a root via a chain consisting only of ordinary strong references, we call the object
strongly-reachable. A weak reference continues to refer to its target, also called its referent,
as long as the target is strongly-reachable. Conversely, if there is no path from the roots to
an object consisting only of strong references, yet the object is reachable from one or more
weak references, we call the object weakly-reachable. (This implies that every path from
the roots to the object includes at least one weak reference.) The collector may reclaim any
weakly-reachable object, and in that case must set any weak references from which the
object is strongly-reachable to null. (This is also called clearing the weak reference.) As we
will see, the collector may also take additional action, such as notifying the mutator that a
given weak reference has been cleared.
     In the case of the canonicalisation table for variable names, if the reference from the
table to the name is a weak reference, then once there are no ordinary references to the
string, the collector can reclaim the string and set the table’s weak reference to null. Notice
that the table design must take this possibility into account, and it may be necessary or
helpful for the program to clean up the table from time to time. For example, if the table
is organised by hashing with each hash bucket being a linked list, defunct weak references
result in linked list entries whose referent is null. We should clean those out of the table
from time to time. This also shows why a notification facility might be helpful: we can use
it to trigger the cleaning up.
     Here is how we can we support weak references in a collector. We consider first the case
of tracing collectors. In this case, the collector performs tracing in two passes. In the first
pass, the collector does not trace the target of a weak reference. Rather, it records where
the weak reference is, for processing in a second pass. Thus, the first tracing pass finds all
strongly-reachable objects. In the second pass the collector examines the weak references
that it found and noted in the first pass. If a weak reference’s target was reached in the first
pass, then the collector retains the weak reference, and in copying collectors it updates the
weak reference to refer to the new copy. If a weak reference’s target is found to be not
strongly-reachable, then the collector clears the weak reference, thus making the referent
no longer reachable (strongly or weakly). At the end of the second pass, the collector can
reclaim all unreached objects.
     The technique just described requires that the collector be able to identify any weak
reference. It may be possible to use a bit in the reference to indicate that it is weak. For
example, if objects are aligned on word boundaries in a byte-addressed machine, then
pointers normally have some low bits that are zero. One of those bits could indicate a
weak reference if the bit is set to 1. This approach has the disadvantage that it requires
the low bits to be cleared before trying to use a reference that may be weak. That may
be acceptable if weak references only arise in certain restricted places in a given language
design. Some languages and their implementations may use tagged values anyway, and
this simply requires one more possible tag value.
     An alternative to using a low bit is to use a high-order bit and double-map the heap.
In this case every heap page appears twice in the virtual address space, once in its natural
place, lower in the address space, and again at a high memory address. The addresses
only differ in the value of a chosen bit near the high-order end of the address. Thus the
heap address space is duplicated at a fixed offset from its natural position. This technique
avoids the need to mask pointers before using them, and its test for weakness is simple
and efficient (test the chosen high-order bit). However, it doubles the use of address space,
which may make it undesirable except in large address spaces.
     Perhaps the most common implementation approach is to use indirection, so that spe-
cially marked weak objects hold weak references. The disadvantage of the weak object
approach is that it is less transparent to use — it requires an explicit dereferencing opera-

tion on the weak object — and it imposes a level of indirection. It also requires allocating a
weak object in addition to the object whose reclamation we are trying to control. However,
an advantage is that weak objects are only special to the allocator and collector — to all
other code they are like ordinary objects. A system can distinguish a weak object from an
ordinary one by examining its type, which may have a field reserved for this purpose. An
alternative design is to reserve a bit in the object header. A third possibility, if objects have
custom-generated tracing methods, is to give weak objects a special one.
    An implementation must also provide means for a programmer to obtain a weak refer-
ence (weak object) in the first place. In the case of true weak references, the system supplies
a primitive that, when given a strong reference to object O, returns a weak reference to O.
In the case of weak objects, the weak object types similarly supply a constructor that, given
a strong reference to O, returns a new weak object whose target is O. It is also possible for
a system to allow programs to change the referent field in a weak object.

Additional motivations
Canonicalisation tables are but one example of situations where weak references of some
kind help solve a programming problem, or solve it more easily or efficiently. Another
example is managing a cache whose contents can be retrieved or rebuilt as necessary. Java
SoftReference objects are intended for this purpose; see below.
    Sometimes it is useful to let a program know when an object is weakly-reachable but
not strongly-reachable, and to allow it to take some action before the collector reclaims the
object. This is a generalisation of finalisation, a topic we took up in Section 12.1. Among
other things, suitable arrangements of these sorts of weak references can allow better con-
trol of the order in which the program finalises objects.

Weak references in Java: the short story
Java has what is probably the most complex weak reference design to date. To describe it,
we start with a simple subset — one arguably sufficient for all the purposes of the full de-
sign — and then cover the full design. Our starting point is Java with phantom references,
with no other non-strong references and without finalisation. Java uses weak objects, as
opposed to weak references. These objects are instances of subclasses of the abstract class
Reference, a special class known to the allocator and collector. PhantomReference is
one of those subclasses. Its particular behavior is that you cannot fetch its contained refer-
ence. It is possible, however, to test whether it has been cleared or still refers to some object.
The collector will clear the contained reference when the referent is no longer strongly-
reachable.5
    Another feature of Java weak references is that when a Reference object’s referent is
no longer strongly-reachable, the Reference object can be placed on a queue for special
processing. These queues are ordinary Java objects, and ordinary Java threads can process
Reference objects placed in a queue. This makes phantom references more useful — they
can accomplish finalisation in a more user-controlled fashion than the built-in finalisation
mechanism can. To facilitate this usage pattern, Java now has a Cleaner class. A Cleaner
maintains a collection of registered objects, each with an associated cleaning action. When the
program registers an object O with the cleaner, it provides the cleaning action at the same
time. The cleaner then creates a PhantomReference to O, and associates that phantom
reference with the provided cleaning action. Cleaning actions have a run() method and
can include any other state needed by the action — but should definitely not include O it-
self. The cleaner has a ReferenceQueue into which its phantom references will be placed
  5 In the full model, Phantomly-reachable.

by the collector when the original referents (such as O) are no longer strongly-reachable.6
The cleaner will then find and run the associated cleaning action, exactly once.
     In contrast to Java finalisation, cleaners support application controlled resurrection and
re-finalisation, as follows. For a managed object O, the application (i) creates a wrapper
object W, which has a reference to O; (ii) registers W with a cleaner, along with an action
that has a reference to O; and (iii) only hands out references to W, not to O. When W is no
longer reachable, the collector eventually detects that and the cleaner’s phantom reference
to W is cleared and enqueued. The cleaner will then run the action, which can do whatever
it likes with O, including creating and registering another wrapper for O, and so on. The
wrapper W will be reclaimed.
     This cleaner pattern can support the use cases previously mentioned: canonicalisation
tables, caches and finalisation. Cleaners naturally support finalisation in topological order
in the object graph, and give the user control over the degree of concurrency of finalisation.
Cleaners also avoid direct resurrection, while allowing the application-defined state to be
set up for finalisation-like handling again, if that is desirable. Using cleaners for canoni-
calisation tables and caches may require an additional level of wrapping or indirection in
the user objects, but again is a general solution that puts control in the hands of the user
rather than the collector.
     The Java weak reference model has evolved over time, and may well continue to do so.
Finalisation is now deprecated, and cleaners have been added. For simplicity and to guard
against future change, future Java code might well restrict itself to cleaners and Phantom
references. However, current collector implementers still need to deal with the full model,
to which we now turn.

Weak references in Java: the full story
We have endeavoured to explain the Java weak reference and finalisation model correctly
as of the time of writing, but note that it may well continue to change. The full model
includes three Reference classes: WeakReference, SoftReference and Phantom-
Reference. It also interacts with Java finalisation — objects with a non-empty finalize
method can be viewed as referenced by a finaliser reference known only to the collector.
We describe the semantics and implementation strategy as if finaliser references exist as
another kind of Reference object, but they are more likely implemented as just a list or
table of all the objects that have non-empty finalize methods.
    These four kinds of weak references we will henceforth write as Soft reference, Weak
reference, Finaliser reference and Phantom reference, to distinguish the general notion of
weak reference from the particlar kinds of references of Java. Each kind of Java weak
reference has a different (reachability) strength. To define this concept precisely, consider
n strengths, s1 , ..., sn , where s1 is the strongest. Every reference (pointer) has a designated
strength. Ordinary pointers are strong references and thus have strength s1 . An object
O is at least si -reachable if there is a sequence of pointers from a root to O each of which
has strength si or stronger. O is si -reachable if it is at least si -reachable and it is not at least
si−1 -reachable.7
    The Java strengths, in order from strongest to weakest, are: Strong, Soft, Weak, Fi-
naliser and Phantom. In principle, it would seem that up to four passes over the object
graph might be needed to determine the level of reachability of each object, but the seman-
tics of the different kinds of weak references simplify this to two: Strongly-reachable and
Finaliser-reachable, as we describe below.
  6 See footnote 5.
  7 Being ‘at least s -reachable’ is the same as being ‘s -reachable.’
                     1                                   1

   Any Java weak object may have a ReferenceQueue associated with it. After it clears
the weak object, the collector will add the weak object to the queue. Finaliser references
have as their queue the internal finalisation queue of the system.
   The differences in semantics between these kinds of weak references are as follows.
Soft: The collector can clear a Soft reference at its discretion, based on current space usage,
      if the referent is not Strongly-reachable. If a Java collector clears a Soft reference to
      object O (that is, sets the reference to null), it must at the same time atomically8 clear
      all other Soft references from which O is Strongly-reachable. This rule ensures that
      after the collector clears the references, O will no longer be Softly-reachable.
       The recommendation is that collectors clear Soft references based on time, either how
       recently the reference was created or when it was last accessed.9 We call this the Soft
       reference’s timestamp. To support the recommendation, a collector can trace through
       a Soft reference if its timestamp is sufficiently recent, treating the Soft reference as if
       it is Strong. After tracing, the collector will then clear Soft references whose referent
       is found to be not Strongly-reachable.
Weak: The collector must clear a Softly-reachable Weak reference if it determines that its
    referent is Weakly-reachable (and thus not at least Softly-reachable). As with Soft
    references, if the collector clears a Weak reference to object O, it must simultane-
    ously clear all other at least Softly-reachable Weak references from which O is at least
    Softly-reachable.
Finaliser: Finaliser references are special in that their implementation is entirely internal
      to the system, and they enqueue the referent, not the reference.
Phantom: Phantom references differ in that they do not allow the program to obtain a
     reference to their referent. Hence, as previously discussed, they avoid the issues of
     resurrection of the referent. However, like other Java weak references, they can be
     enqueued, which is basis for Java cleaners, previously discussed.
   We now describe an implementation strategy,10 followed by an explanation of why it
works. This strategy involves using two mark bits. One of these records Strong reachability
and the other records Finaliser reachability. The procedure is as follows. Threads that mark
from roots trace through all Strong references, plus those Soft references that the collector
determines it definitely will not clear. These threads set the Strong mark bit for each object
they reach. They also remember all reference objects they encounter. Threads that mark
from the internal Finaliser references set the Finaliser mark bit of unmarked objects they
encounter. They do not trace through any object with either mark bit set, but should trace
through Soft references in the same way the other threads do, and they should also remem-
ber reference objects they encounter. When using a single thread, it can do the marking
    8 By atomically the Java specification seems to mean that no thread can see just some of the references from

which a given object is reachable cleared and not others: either all of them are cleared or none are. This can
be accomplished by having the reference objects consult a shared flag that indicates whether the referent field
should be treated as possibly cleared, even if it is not yet set to null. The reference object can itself contain a
flag that indicates whether the single global flag should be consulted, that is, whether the reference is being
considered for clearing. Doing this safely requires synchronisation in concurrent collectors. On-the-fly collection
is particularly complex [Ugawa et al., 2014].
    9 The documentation for the SoftReference class in Java SE 18 and JDK 18, 2022, (https://docs.

oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/ref/SoftReference.html),
after noting both the required atomicity of clearing Soft references, and that implementations cannot throw
OutOfMemoryError unless they first try clearing all Soft references, reads, “Virtual machine implementations
are, however, encouraged to bias against clearing recently-created or recently-used soft references.”
   10 The ZGC concurrent collector, discussed in Section 17.5, takes this approach, which allows concurrent mark-

ing from both roots and Finaliser references.

from roots and then the marking from Finaliser references as two separate passes. In that
case it is possible to use a single mark bit, clearing and enqueueing Phantom references
after the second pass, but handling the other kinds before the second pass.
    After marking, the collector examines the referent of each reference object it encoun-
tered. If the referent’s Strong mark bit is set, then do not clear the reference.
    If neither mark bit is set, this object must be the target of a Soft reference that is not
being retained, or it must be the target of a Weak or Phantom reference. Clear the reference
and enqueue it as necessary.
    If only the Finaliser mark bit is set, then for the target of a Soft or Weak reference, clear
the reference and enqueue as necessary. For the target of a Finaliser reference, enqueue the
referent for finalisation. For the target of a Phantom reference, leave the reference alone.
    Recall that clearing references must be done atomically, as previously discussed, so
where we say ‘clear the reference’ above, we mean that it should be included in the set of
references to be cleared atomically.
    We now argue that these two marking passes (whether concurrent or sequential) are
sufficient, as opposed to the four one might imagine to be necessary. We consider each kind
of reference in turn. A Soft reference is only cleared / enqueued if (i) the collector did not
choose it as one to keep alive (in that case the referent has its Strong mark bit set because
the collector traced through the reference) and (ii) it was not otherwise Strongly-reachable.
That behaviour matches the specification. A Weak reference is cleared / enqueued if it is
not Strongly-reachable. This might seem too eager — what if it were Softly-reachable? We
can see that the behaviour is in fact correct if we imagine that the Soft references that will be
cleared were already clear when the collector started. In that imagined view, a Soft reference
that was not cleared causes objects reachable from it to have their Strong mark bit set. Thus
the Softly-reachable objects have their Strong mark bit set, as do the Strongly-reachable
ones. Concerning Finaliser references, we can make a similar argument, imagining that
the appropriate Weak references have already been cleared. Lastly, Phantom references
are appropriately sensitive to whether they are Finaliser-reachable because they check the
Finaliser mark bit. In fact, it is Phantom references that require the second marking pass.
    While we worded the description above in terms of a mark-sweep collector, it works
just as well for copying collection, and also generalises to generational collection if one
considers older generation objects as Strongly-reachable.
    Here is how one might construct a reference counting version of the Java semantics.
An object’s reference count will record just the number of strong references to the object.
However, it will have an additional bit to indicate that it is a referent of a weak reference
(of any kind). It is also convenient if an object has a separate bit indicating that it has a
non-trivial finaliser. We assume that there is a global table that, for each object O that is the
referent of at least one Reference object, indicates those Reference objects that refer to
O. We call this the Reverse Reference Table.
    Before proceeding, we observe that a weakly-reachable cycle of objects connected via
strong references will not be reclaimed without special cycle collection techniques, so we
ignore that case for the moment. Regardless, if an object’s reference count decreases to
zero, it is not Strongly-reachable.
    Consider what should happen when a reference count goes to zero and the object is
a referent of a weak reference or has a finaliser. The collector can handle the situation
in order of strength. If the object is the target of any Soft references, then if any of those
Soft references should be retained, the object will be retained for now, and handling will
be revisited when a weak reference object is reclaimed. If all of the Soft references can
be cleared, do so atomically, enqueue the Soft references as necessary, and proceed to the
next strength. If there are any Weak references, clear them atomically, enqueue them as
necessary, and proceed to the next strength. If there is a finaliser, enqueue the object for

finalisation, clear the object’s ‘I have a finaliser’ bit and stop. (Note: the reference from
the finalisation queue will count as a strong reference.) If the object’s ‘I have a finaliser’
bit is not set, but there are any Phantom references, clear the Phantom references and
enqueue them as necessary. If there was no finaliser and all the weak references were
cleared, then the object can be reclaimed. Achieving atomicity of these special reference
count adjustments can be tricky, and requires either locking or a technique similar to that
described by Ugawa et al. [2014].
    There are some more cases to note. When we reclaim a Reference object, we need to
remove it from the Reverse Reference Table. We also need to do that when a Reference
object is cleared. We further need to check the referent. If its reference count is zero, we
need to redo the processing described above since the situation has changed.
    A tricky case is when a detector of garbage cycles finds such a cycle. It appears that, be-
fore doing anything else, we need to see if any of the objects is the referent of a Soft object,
and in that case retain them all, but keep checking periodically somehow. If none are Soft
referents but some are Weak referents, then we need to clear all those Weak objects atomi-
cally, and enqueue any objects requiring finalisation. Finally, if none of the previous cases
apply but there are some Phantom referents to the cycle, we need to clear and enqueue all
the Phantoms. If no object in the cycle is a Soft or Weak referent, or requires finalisation,
we can reclaim the whole cycle.
    As perhaps an historical note, we observe that Java11 defines an object as “phantomly-
reachable if it is neither strongly-, softly-, nor weakly-reachable, it has been finalized, and
some phantom reference refers to it.” This definition is inadequate: consider the following
example12 where F1 and F2 are objects with non-trivial finalisers, and P is the referent of a
PhantomReference. Initially, F1 holds a reference to P and some root points to F2 which
holds a null reference. Then,

   1. F1 ’s finaliser runs and notionally P’s (empty) finaliser runs. F1 updates F2 with a
      strong reference to P. At this point, P has now been finalised and the root points to
      F2 which points to P.

   2. The root is cleared, making F2 unreachable. P is now neither strongly, softly or
      weakly referenced, and it has been finalised. Therefore P is phantom-reachable.

   3. The PhantomReference to P is enqueued, resulting in running a Cleaner which
      maybe deallocates native memory required by P.

   4. F2 ’s finaliser runs and accesses P, which can no longer access the native memory it
      needs. . .

The ‘has been finalized’ check required by java.lang.ref is the wrong check; what
matters is whether it is reachable from a not yet finalised object with a non-trivial finaliser.
This requires a reachability analysis such as the one we described above.

Race in weak pointer clearing
We note that, just as certain compiler optimisations can lead to a race that can cause pre-
mature finalisation, the same situations can lead to premature clearing of weak pointers.
We described the finalisation case in Section 12.1.
  11 Java SE 18 and JDK 18, 2022, https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/18/docs/api/java.

base/java/lang/ref/package-summary.html
  12 Example due to Hans Boehm.

Weak pointers in other languages
We discussed Java separately because of its multiple strengths of weak references. Other
languages offer alternative or additional weak reference features.

Lisp. A number of Lisp implementations support weak arrays and vectors.13 These are
simply multi-entry weak objects: when a referent O is no longer strongly-reachable, the
collector sets to nil any weak array or vector slots that refer to O.
    Some Lisp implementations also support weak hash tables. These often come in three
varieties. One offers weak keys, in which the keys, but not the values, are weak. In this
case, once the key of a given key-value pair is no longer strongly-reachable, the collector
removes the entire pair from the hash table. This is useful for things like canonicalisation
tables and certain kinds of caches. A second variety offers weak values, where the collector
removes the key-value pair once the value is no longer strongly-reachable. The third va-
riety supports weak keys and values, removing the pair once either the key or the value is
no longer strongly-reachable.
    Some Lisp implementations support weak-AND and weak-OR objects. The elements of
these objects are potentially weak, but in the following way. A weak-AND will set all
its elements to nil if one or more of them becomes not strongly-reachable. Thus, it is
analogous to a Lisp AND, which returns nil if any argument to AND is nil. A weak-OR
is the converse: it retains all its arguments until none of them are strongly-reachable, and
then sets all of its fields to nil. We refer readers to the documentation on the Platform
Independent Extensions to Common Lisp14 for more details and further generalisations,
including weak associations, weak AND- and OR-mappings, weak association lists and a
version of weak hash tables similar to what we discussed above.

Ephemerons. Ephemerons15 [Hayes, 1997] are a particular form of weak key-value pairs
useful for maintaining information attached to other objects. Several languages and di-
alects provide ephemerons, for example GNU Smalltalk and Squeak, .NET languages such
as C#, F# and VB.NET, OCaml and the Racket dialect of Lisp. Suppose we wish to asso-
ciate information I with object O through a side table. We can use an ephemeron with key
O and value I. The semantics of an ephemeron are as follows. Its reference to the key is
weak. Its reference to the value is strong while the key is non-null, but is weak after the
key is set to null. In the example, the reference to the base object O is weak, and initially
the reference to the associated information I is strong. Once O is reclaimed and the weak
reference to it is set to null, the reference to I is treated as weak. Thus, I is not reclaimable
while O is alive, but may become reclaimable once O has gone. A weak-key/strong-value
pair with notification (to allow the value reference to be set to null, or to be replaced with
a weak reference to the value) more or less simulates an ephemeron. A subtle difference,
though, is that it does not ‘count’ toward reachability of the ephemeron’s key if it is reach-
able from the ephemeron’s value. Thus, if I refers to O, as it well might, an ephemeron
can still collect O, but the weak-pair approach would prevent O from being reclaimed. The
only way around this without ephemerons would seem to be to ensure that any path from
I to O includes a weak reference.
    Here is a sketch of how to implement ephemerons (ignoring any other forms of weak
pointers or other finalisation mechanisms). First, trace through strong pointers from the
roots, recording ephemerons but not tracing through them. Iterate over the recorded
 13 Arrays may be multi-dimensional while vectors have only one dimension, but the distinction does not affect

weak reference semantics.
 14 https://clisp.cons.org.
 15 Hayes credits George Bosworth with the invention of ephemerons.

ephemerons repeatedly. If an ephemeron’s key has been traced, then trace through the
ephemeron’s value field and remove the ephemeron from the set of recorded ephemerons.
Such tracing may reach other ephemerons’ keys and may also find new ephemerons to con-
sider. Eventually we obtain a set, possibly empty, of ephemerons that we have recorded
whose keys are not reachable.16 We clear the key fields of these ephemerons, and the value
fields if the value object is not yet traced. Alternatively, we can use a notification mech-
anism and enqueue the ephemerons, at the risk of possible object resurrection. It may be
better to clear the ephemeron’s fields and enqueue a new pair that presents the key and
the value to a finalisation function.

Swift. The Swift language provides three reference flavours: strong, weak and unowned.
Its Automatic Reference Counting (ARC) manages strong references in the usual way, re-
taining an object until its (strong) reference count is zero. The Swift Programming Guide
[Apple, 2021] advocates resolving cycles of strong references by including a weak or an
unowned reference in the cycle. Weak references are intended for scenarios in which the
referent has a shorter lifetime than the referrer. A weak reference does not prevent its
target from being reclaimed but instead, when the target is deallocated, Swift’s ARC auto-
matically sets the weak reference to nil. For example, a Tenant type may hold a (strong)
reference to the apartment they rent, but the Apartment instance should be defined with
a weak reference to the tenant. In contrast, an unowned reference is intended to be used
when the referent has the same or a longer lifetime than the referrer. An unowned refer-
ence is always expected to have a value and is never set to nil by ARC. For instance, a
Customer may have an optional credit card property, but a CreditCard would have a
(non-optional) unowned customer property, initialised when the CreditCard instance is
created. If an unowned reference is marked as optional, it is the programmers’s responsi-
bility to ensure that it always refers to a valid object or is set to nil.
    It is possible to create strong reference cycles inadvertently. For example, a property
of a class may be a closure whose body refers to the instance of the class, self. Swift
has two mechanisms to address this. First, the language requires the programmer to
write self.someProperty or self.someMethod rather than just someProperty or
someMethod as a reminder that it is possible to capture self. Second, Swift allows a
closure to provide a ‘capture list’ defining whether each captured reference is weak or
unowned. Captured references should be unowned if both the closure and the instance it
captures will be deallocated at the same time, and weak if the reference may become nil.

Other languages. Other languages with weak pointer support, at least in some implemen-
tations, include ActionScript, C++ (earlier in the Boost library and now in the standard
library), Haskell, JavaScript, OCAML, Python, Rust and Smalltalk. There has also been at
least one attempt to give a formal semantics for the feature [Donnelly et al., 2006].

12.3       Changing object layout
In many languages the layout of an object — its number of fields and also usually which
of those fields contain pointers — is fixed when the object is allocated and cannot change
thereafter. In languages that are more dynamically typed, however, the layout of an object
may change over time. If only the type of fields may change, a language may tag values
  16 This process is a bit tricky, epecially in a concurrent collection context, and a subtle error in processing

ephemerons resulted in a critical defect in the V8 JavaScript engine [Mo, 2021]. The specific setting was the
WeakMap built-in object class of JavaScript, which has semantics equivalent to ephemerons.

(see Section 11.2) to allow discrimination of pointers from non-pointers at run time. How-
ever, some languages, for example Python and JavaScript, allow objects to change their
entire layout and size dynamically.
     Clifford et al. [2015] describe a design for objects in the V8 implementation of JavaScript.
Each object has a map (or ‘hidden class’) that describes its layout. The map can change as
fields are added to and deleted from the object, leading to a transition tree of maps for
a particular allocation site. The design separates an object’s integer-indexed properties
from those indexed by name, with the integer-indexed properties acting like a dynamically
adjustable array. For efficiency, arrays that contain only small integers and arrays that
contain only numbers (represented as double length floating point numbers) are special
cases. A small integer array will transition to a double array if a double is stored into
it, and either form of numeric array will transition to a general array, where individual
elements are tagged, if a non-numeric value is stored into it. These transitions will never
be undone. Further, the design distinguishes between arrays where all elements in a given
range are present from ones where elements may have been deleted. The latter are called
holey, and in them deleted elements are indicated using a distinguished value.
     An interesting feature of their system is that it uses instrumentation called mementos to
collect information on a per allocation site basis to determine the common eventual map
for arrays allocated at that site, so as to avoid expensive transitions of array layouts. A
memento is a small object that is allocated immediately after an object that the run-time
systems wishes to track. The memento refers back to the object, describes the allocation
site, and includes whatever other information the run-time system will find useful. The
Clifford et al. system allocates mementos only for objects allocated in the nursery, and
only for allocation sites in unoptimised code. Allocating mementos only for nursery ob-
jects keeps the space overhead lower, and allocating them only in unoptimised code keeps
the time overhead lower. A nursery collection will detect mementos associated with sur-
vivors by checking the object immediately following the survivor in memory (mementos
are distinguishable from regular objects), and trigger collection of statistics.
     Concerning layout, a memento will trigger recording of the object’s layout as of the
time of the collection. This is generally long enough after allocation to give good guidance
if an allocation site’s code is later optimised. Mementos can also be used for optimizations
such as pretenuring.
     Ugawa et al. [2022] similarly aim to identify the maps eventually used by objects allo-
cated at each site, but in the context of the closed world of a JavaScript virtual machine for
embedded systems. They use the garbage collector to gather the transitions of each site’s
map off-line. Using this profile, they are able to eliminate some intermediate maps, biasing
chains of transitions to favour the most frequently used cases.
     Accomplishing layout changes concurrently with reading and writing fields, without
sacrificing too much performance, can be a challenge. Pizlo [2017] describes an obstruction-
free scheme for updating object layout metadata that is used in Riptide’s JavaScript imple-
mentation. Objects in Riptide consist of a structure id that identifies the object’s layout, a
fixed-size area for fields and a pointer to an object extension (initially null). The structure
id includes what is effectively a lock bit. A reader of an object, using strongly ordered
load instructions, reads the structure id, then data or metadata, and then rereads the struc-
ture id. If the two versions of the structure id match and show it to be unlocked, then
the reader can trust the data or metadata it read. In the case of an object with immutable
structure, the rereading of the structure id is not necessary. A writer of an object first ac-
quires the structure id lock using a compare-and-swap, then updates the information (data
or metadata) and releases the lock. Each update of structure information leads to a new
structure id value, even if the structure is equivalent to a previous one, which avoids any
ABA problem.

    Degenbaev et al. [2019] describe a different approach to managing layout changes in
a concurrent collector. Their objects can be thought of as having a starting address s, an
address u of the beginning of a slack (currently unused) area and an address e, of the word
beyond the end of the object. Additionally, an object has a map that indicates for addresses
a such that s ≤ a < u whether the value at that address is tagged or raw. A tagged value
is a reference if the low bit is 1 and a small integer otherwise. The layout of an object
consists of the values of s, u and e along with its map, which can be determined from one
of the initial fields of the object. A key idea that Degenbaev et al. introduce is that some
layout changing operations are safe with respect to concurrent collection and some are not.
The safe operations are ones that cannot lead to confusion as to whether a word read by
the collector is tagged or raw. These can proceed with minimal synchronisation, generally
needing only acquiring loads and releasing stores. It should be noted that the write barrier
is a Dijkstra-style insertion one (we discuss the barriers needed for concurrent collection
in Section 15.2) that always ensures that the referent of a stored reference will be marked.
Thus races with respect to whether the collector has visited a given field are not an issue.
Unsafe layout changes while the collector is running require the mutator to ensure that the
object is visited, trying to do so itself if the object is not yet black.
    Degenbaev et al. consider two ways to process unsafe layout changes. One is for the
collector to snapshot the object. It does this by using an acquiring load on the object’s class
word (which implies the object’s layout), copying the tagged fields to a private buffer, and
doing a releasing compare-and-swap on the mark bits of the object. If the compare-and-
swap fails, it knows the mutator is dealing with the object and ignores it. Otherwise, it can
correctly use the snapshot. The second way they consider to handle unsafe layout changes
is to lock the object (which requires the collector to lock each object as it visits it). They
found the snapshot algorithm to be superior to locking, and while concurrent collection
unsurprisingly costs a bit more compared with incremental collection, it clearly improved
minimum mutator utilisation.

12.4     Issues to consider
While we have termed finalisation and weak pointers ‘language-specific’ concerns, they
are now largely part of the accepted landscape of automatic memory management. Auto-
matic management is a software engineering boon, enabling easier construction of more
complex systems that work correctly, but various specific problems motivate finalisation
and weak pointers as extensions to language semantics — extensions that have been intro-
duced precisely because of the assumption that memory will be managed automatically.
    If the collector and run-time system implementer receive the language being imple-
mented as a given, then many of the design considerations mentioned here have already
been decided: the language is what it is. The design questions mentioned earlier, partic-
ularly with respect to choices in the design of support for finalisation, are more relevant
in the context of designing a new programming language. Likewise, the varieties of weak
pointer mechanisms, such as which ‘weak’ data structures to offer, how many strengths of
references to support, and so on, are also more the province of language design.
    Where a collector and run-time system implementer has more scope is in the choice
and design of allocation and collection techniques. Here are some of the considerations of
how those choices relate to the mechanisms discussed in this chapter.
    Weak pointers and finalisation tend to require additional tracing ‘passes’. These typi-
cally complete quickly — their performance is typically not of unusual concern. However,
they complicate otherwise basic algorithms and require considerable care in their design.
It is best to design in the necessary support from the beginning rather than to attempt

to add it on later. Needless to say, it is very important to gain a solid understanding of
the semantics of the features and of how proposed implementation strategies enact those
semantics.
    Some mechanisms, notably some of the ‘strengths’ of Java’s weak references, require
that a whole group of related weak references be cleared at the same time. This is rela-
tively easy to accomplish in a stop-the-world collector, but in a more concurrent setting
it requires additional mechanism and care. As mentioned earlier, traversing the weak
references needs to include a check of a shared flag and possibly some additional synchro-
nisation, to ensure that collector and mutator threads make the same determination as to
which weakly referenced objects are live — they need to resolve the race between any mu-
tator thread trying to obtain a strong reference and the collector trying to clear a group
of weak references atomically. This race is by no means peculiar to Java’s weak reference
mechanisms, and is a potentiality in supporting weak pointers in any concurrent setting.
    Given the concerns about atomic clearing of sets of weak references and the general
complexity of weak pointer and finalisation support, it may be reasonable to handle those
features in a stop-the-world phase of an otherwise concurrent collector, or at least to use
locks rather than lock-free or wait-free techniques. Chapter 13 discusses these different
approaches to controlling concurrent access to data structures.
    Java soft references require a collector mechanism to decide whether it is appropriate
to clear them during a given collection cycle.
    Dynamic languages such as JavaScript may change the layout of objects on the fly. For
such languages it can be important to consider common cases, detecting them statically,
dynamically or both, to reduce impacts on both the mutator and the collector. Special care
must be taken in the presence of concurrency so that layout changes do not confuse the
collector into treating a pointer as a non-pointer, vice versa or missing fields entirely.
