Chapter 13

Concurrency preliminaries

Concurrent collection algorithms have been studied for a long time, going back at least to
the 1970s [Steele, 1975]. For a long time, though, they were relevant to a small minority of
users. Now, multiprocessors enjoy widespread commercial availability — even the laptop
on which this text was written has an 8-core processor. Moreover, programmers need to
deploy multiple cores to cooperate on the same task since that has become the only way
to get a job done faster: clock speed increases can no longer deliver the regular perfor-
mance boost they used to. Therefore, language implementations need to support concur-
rent programming, and their run-time systems, and their garbage collectors in particular,
need to support the concurrent world well. Later chapters explore parallel, concurrent
and real-time collection in depth. Here we consider concepts, algorithms and data struc-
tures fundamental to collection in presence of logical and physical parallelism, including
an introduction to the relevant aspects of hardware, memory consistency models, atomic
update primitives, progress guarantees, mutual exclusion algorithms, work sharing and
termination detection, concurrent data structures and the emerging model called transac-
tional memory. Concurrency and the number of cores available in processors continues to
grow in both scale and relevance.

13.1      Hardware
In order to understand both the correctness and the performance of parallel and concurrent
collection, it is necessary first to understand relevant properties of multiprocessor hard-
ware. This section offers definitions and overviews of several key concepts: processors
and threads, including the various ‘multis’, multiprocessor, multicore, multiprogrammed,
and multithreaded; interconnect; and memory and caches.1

Processors and threads
A processor (CPU) is a unit of hardware that executes instructions. A thread is a sequential
program, that is, an execution of a piece of software. A thread can be running (also called
scheduled), ready to run, or blocked awaiting some condition such as arrival of a message,
completion of input/output or for a particular time to arrive. A scheduler, which is usually
an operating system component, chooses which threads to schedule onto which processors
at any given time. In general, if a thread is descheduled (moved from running to ready or
  1 We are indebted to Herlihy and Shavit [2008] for the organisation of our discussion, and recommend that

book for additional study.

blocked), when it is next scheduled it may run on a different processor than the one on
which it ran previously, though the scheduler may recognise and offer some degree of
affinity of a thread to a particular processor; this is now offered by most operating systems.
    A slight complication in these definitions is that some processor hardware supports
more than one logical processor using a single execution pipeline. This is called simulta-
neous multithreading (SMT) or hyperthreading, and unfortunately for our terminology, the
logical processors are often called threads. Here thread will always mean the software en-
tity and SMTs will be viewed as providing multiple (logical) processors, since the logical
processors are individually schedulable, and so on.
    A multiprocessor is a computer that provides more than one processor. A chip multipro-
cessor (CMP), also called a multicore or even many-core processor, is a multiprocessor that
has more than one processor on a single integrated circuit chip. Except in the case of SMT,
multithreaded refers to software that uses multiple threads, which may run concurrently
on a multiprocessor. Multiprogrammed refers to software executing multiple processes or
threads on a single processor.

Interconnect
What distinguishes a multiprocessor from the general case of cluster, cloud or distributed
computing is that it involves shared memory, accessible to each of the processors. This
access is mediated by an interconnection network of some kind. The simplest interconnect
is a single shared bus, through which all messages pass between processors and memory.
It is helpful to think of memory accesses as being like the sending of messages between
a processor and a memory unit, given how long the accesses take in terms of processor
cycles — now in the hundreds of cycles. A single bus can be reasonably fast in terms of its
raw speed, but it can obviously be a bottleneck if multiple processors request service at the
same time. The highest bandwidth interconnect would provide a private channel between
each processor and each memory, but the hardware resources required grow as the product
of the number of processor and number of memory units. Note that for better overall
bandwidth (number of memory accesses per second across the entire system), splitting
the memory into multiple units is a good idea. Also, transfers between processors and
memories are usually in terms of whole cache lines (on the next page) or possibly larger
units rather than single bytes or words.
     In larger CMPs a memory request may need to traverse multiple nodes in an intercon-
nection network, such as a grid, ring or torus connection arrangement. Details lie beyond
our scope, but the point is that access time is long and can vary according to where a pro-
cessor is in the network and where the target memory unit is. Concurrent traffic along the
same interconnect paths can introduce more delay.
     Note that the bus in single-bus systems generally becomes a bottleneck when the sys-
tem has more than about eight to sixteen processors. However, buses are generally simpler
and cheaper to implement than other interconnects, and they allow each unit to listen to all
of the bus traffic (sometimes called snooping), which simplifies supporting cache coherence.
     If the memory units are separate from the processors, the system is called a symmetric
multiprocessor (SMP), because processors have equal access times to each memory. It is also
possible to associate memory with each processor, giving that processor more rapid access
to that portion of the memory, and slower access to other memory. This is called non-
uniform memory access (NUMA). A system may have both global SMP-style memory and
NUMA memory, and processors may also have private memory, though it is the shared-
access memory that is most relevant to garbage collection.2
   2 Private memory is suitable for thread-local heaps if the threads can be bound to processors (only allowed to

run on the specific processor where their heap resides). It is also suitable for local copies of immutable data.

    The most relevant properties of interconnect are that memory takes a long time to ac-
cess, that interconnect can be a bottleneck, and that different portions of memory may take
relatively longer times to access from different processors.

Memory
From the standpoint of garbage collection, shared memory appears as a single address
space of words or bytes, even though it may be physically spread out across multiple
memory units or processors. Because memory consists of multiple units accessed concur-
rently, it is not necessarily possible to describe it as having a single definite global state at
any given moment. However, each unit, and thus each word, has a well-defined state at
each moment.

Caches
Because memory accesses take so long, modern processors typically add one or more lay-
ers of cache to hold recently accessed data and thus statistically reduce the number of mem-
ory accesses a program requires as it runs. Caches generally operate in terms of cache lines
(also called cache blocks), typically 32 or 64 bytes in size. If an access finds its containing line
in the cache, that is a cache hit, otherwise the access is a cache miss, which requires accessing
the next higher level of cache, or memory if this was the highest level. In CMPs it is typi-
cal for some processors to share some higher levels of cache. For example, each processor
might have its own Level One (L1) cache but share its L2 cache with a neighbour. The line
sizes of different levels are usually, but need not be, the same.
    When there is a cache miss and there is not room for the new line in the cache, then
a line currently in the cache, chosen according to the cache’s replacement policy, must be
evicted before loading the new line. The evicted line is called the victim. Some caches are
write-through, meaning that updates to lines in the cache are passed on to the next level as
soon as practicable, while some caches are write-back, meaning that a modified line (also
called a dirty line) is not written to the next higher level until it is evicted, explicitly flushed
(which requires using a special instruction) or explicitly written back (which also requires
a special instruction).
    A cache’s replacement policy depends substantially on the cache’s internal organisa-
tion. A fully associative cache allows any set of lines, up to the cache size, to reside in the
cache together. Its replacement policy can choose to evict any line. At the opposite end
of the spectrum are direct-mapped caches, where each line must reside in a particular place
in the cache, so there is only one possible victim. In between these extremes are k-way set-
associative caches, where each line is mapped to a set of k lines of cache memory, and the
replacement policy can choose any of the k lines as its victim. A variety of other organi-
sations occur, such as victim caches, whereby a small number of recent victims are held in
a fully associative table on the side of the primary cache, with the primary usually being
direct mapped. This gives the hit rate of higher associativity with lower hardware cost.
    Another aspect of cache design concerns the relationship between different levels of
cache. A design of two adjacent levels of cache is called (strictly) inclusive if every line in
the lower level must be held by the higher level. Conversely, a design is exclusive if a line
can be held in at most one of the two levels. A design need not be either: it may allow a
line to reside in both caches, but not require it.

Coherence
Caches hold copies of memory data that is potentially shared. Because not all copies are
updated at the same moment, particularly with write-back caches, the various copies in

general do not contain the same value for each address. Thus, it may be possible for two
processors to disagree on the value at a particular location. This is undesirable, so the
underlying hardware generally supports some degree of cache coherence. Cache coherence
is generally defined to mean that the memory system, including the caches, obeys two
properties, namely (i) that writes to a given memory location happen in an order consis-
tent with the order in which writes are executed by each processor, and (ii) all processors
see those writes as happening in that order. Note that this says nothing about memory
consistency, the order of stores to different memory locations, discussed in Section 13.2.
    To enforce cache coherence, the hardware enforces a coherence protocol. One of the com-
mon coherence protocols is MESI, from the initial letters of the names it gives to the possi-
ble states of a given line of memory in each cache.

Modified: This cache is the only one holding a copy of the line, and its value has been
    updated but not yet written back to memory.

Exclusive: This cache is the only one holding a copy of the line, but its value corresponds
     with that in memory.

Shared: Other caches may hold a copy of this line, but they all have the same value as in
     memory.

Invalid: This cache does not hold a copy of this line.

What MESI and similar protocols guarantee is that there is only one writer at a time for any
given line, and that two caches never hold disagreeing values for the same line. We omit
details of the state transitions, but note that in order to modify a line a given processor must
first get the line into its cache in the M or E state, which implies that if other caches hold
the line, they need to drop it. Following a coherence protocol requires sending low-level
messages between processors, caches and memory.
    While some experimental processors have tried dispensing with hardware supported
cache coherence in favor of explicitly managed software coherence, because hardware co-
herence can have difficulties scaling to large numbers of processors, so far most multipro-
cessors provide coherence in hardware.
    Cache coherence introduces an issue called false sharing. If two processors access and
update different data that happen to lie in the same cache line, then they will tend to
cause a lot of coherence message traffic on the interconnect and possibly extra reads from
memory, as the line ‘ping-pongs’ between the two processors’ caches, since each must
acquire it in an exclusive state before updating it. Of course, true sharing can likewise
result in considerable coherence traffic.

Cache coherence performance example: spin locks
A typical mutual exclusion lock can be implemented with an AtomicExchange primitive,
as shown in Algorithm 13.1. We distinguish primitive atomic instructions by starting their
name with an upper case letter. We also denote low-level read and write operations by
load and store, respectively, in order to avoid any confusion with the interface between
the user program and the mutator. The initial value of the lock should be zero, meaning
‘unlocked’. This is called a spin lock because the processor is said to ‘spin’ in the while
loop. Each invocation of the atomic read-modify-write operation will try to acquire the
lock’s cache line exclusively. If multiple processors contend for the lock, then the line will
ping-pong, even while some other processor holds the lock. And even that processor will
need to contend for the line just to unlock! This form of lock is also called a test-and-set lock,
even though it does not use the TestAndSet primitive, discussed a little later.

Algorithm 13.1: AtomicExchange spin lock

 1    exchangeLock(x):
 2       while AtomicExchange(x, 1) = 1
 3          /* do nothing */
 4

 5    exchangeUnlock(x):
 6       *x ← 0
 7

 8    AtomicExchange(x, v):
 9       atomic
10          old ← *x
11          *x ← v
12       return old

Algorithm 13.2: Test-and-Test-and-Set AtomicExchange spin lock

 1    testAndTestAndSetExchangeLock(x):
 2       while testAndExchange(x) = 1
 3          /* do nothing */
 4

 5    testAndTestAndSetExchangeUnlock(x):
 6       *x ← 0
 7

 8    testAndExchange(x):
 9       while *x = 1
10          /* do nothing */
11       return AtomicExchange(x, 1)

    Because the code of Algorithm 13.1 can cause extreme cache contention, many pro-
grams use a more subtle version that has the same semantics, called a test-and-test-and-set
lock, shown in Algorithm 13.2. The important difference is in line 9, which does ordinary
read accesses outside the AtomicExchange. This spins accessing the processor’s (coher-
ent) cache, without going to the bus. If the lock is not in cacheable memory, then a thread
might want to delay between tests using an idle loop or a hardware idle instruction,
possibly using exponential back-off or some similar algorithm so as to consume fewer re-
sources in longer waits. For even longer waits the thread might involve the operating
system scheduler, by giving up the rest of its quantum, or moving to wait on an explicit
signal, in which case things must be arranged so that the lock holder will send the signal
when the lock is released.
    While Section 13.3 covers the range of most frequently available atomic hardware prim-
itives, it is edifying to consider test-and-set and test-and-test-and-set locks implemented
with a TestAndSet primitive, as shown in Algorithm 13.3. A possible advantage of the
TestAndSet primitive is that the overall intent and use of the values 0 and 1 are implicit
in its semantics. This implies that a processor can avoid a bus access and avoid requesting
the cache line for exclusive access if the value of the lock is 1 in the cache. In principle,
hardware could do that same thing for AtomicExchange, but it would require detecting
that the old and new values are the same as opposed to looking for the specific value 1.3
     3 Certain Intel x86 processors do something like this, called hardware lock elision (HLE).
13.2. HARDWARE MEMORY CONSISTENCY                                                                          250

Algorithm 13.3: Spin locks implemented with the TestAndSet primitive

 1   testAndSetLock(x):
 2      while TestAndSet(x) = 1
 3         /* do nothing */
 4

 5   testAndSetUnlock(x):
 6      *x ← 0
 7

 8   TestAndSet(x):
 9      atomic
10         old ← *x
11         if old = 0
12            *x ← 1
13            return 0
14         return 1
15

16   testAndTestAndSetLock(x):
17      while testAndTestAndSet(x) = 1
18         /* do nothing */
19

20   testAndTestAndSet(x):
21      while *x = 1
22         /* do nothing */
23      return TestAndSet(x)
24

25   testAndTestAndSetUnlock(x)
26      testAndSetUnlock(x)

13.2       Hardware memory consistency
We assume that shared memory provides coherence as discussed above: all processors
perceive writes to the same location as occurring in the same order. This implies that,
in the absence of pending incomplete writes, if two processors read the same memory
location, they will obtain the same value.4
    However, a program’s view of the order of writes (and reads) to more than one location
does not necessarily correspond with the order of those actions at caches or memories, and
thus as perceived by other processors. That is, program order is not necessarily consistent
with memory order. This raises two questions: why, and what are the implications? To
answer the ‘why’ question, it is a matter of both hardware and software. Broadly, the
reasons are tied up with performance: strict consistency requires either more hardware
resources, or reduces performance or both. One hardware reason is that many processors
contain a write buffer (also called a store buffer), that receives pending writes to memory. A
write buffer is basically a queue of ⟨address, data⟩ pairs. Normally these writes may be
performed in order, but if a later write is to an address already in the buffer, the hardware
may combine it with the previous pending write. This means the later write can effectively
pass an earlier write to a different location and appear in memory sooner. Designers are
   4 The Java memory model is looser: if two writes are not otherwise synchronised, then a processor can observe

either value on any future read, and thus the value may oscillate.
13.2. HARDWARE MEMORY CONSISTENCY                                                                           251

careful to provide each processor with a consistent view of its own actions. Thus a read of
a location that has a pending write in the write buffer will ultimately produce the value in
the write buffer, either with a direct hardware path (faster but more costly) or by waiting
for the write buffer to empty and then reading the value from cache. Another reason
program actions can be reordered at the memory is cache misses. Many processors will
continue executing later instructions past a (data) cache miss, and thus reads can pass
reads and writes (and so can writes). Further, write-back caches present writes to memory
only when dirty lines are evicted or flushed, so writes to different lines can be drastically
reordered. This summary of hardware reasons is illustrative but not exhaustive.
    Software reasons for reordering mostly come from compilers. For example, if two reads
are known to go to the same location and there are no intervening writes that can affect
that location, the compiler may just use the value originally fetched. More generally, if the
compiler can show that variables are not aliased (do not refer to the same memory loca-
tion), it can freely reorder reads and writes of the locations, since the same overall result
will obtain (on a uniprocessor in the absence of thread switches). Languages allow such
reordering and reuse of the results of previous accesses because it leads to more efficient
code, and much of the time it does not affect the semantics.5
    Obviously, from a programmer’s standpoint lack of consistency between program and
memory order is potentially problematic — but from an implementation perspective it can
boost performance and reduce cost.
    What are the implications of looser consistency? First, it should be obvious that it can
be easy for programmers’ intuitions to go completely wrong and for code that works under
strict consistency to fail in confusing ways — though perhaps only rarely — under more
relaxed models. Second, for techniques such as locks to work, there needs to be some
way to guarantee particular ordering between accesses to two different locations when
ordering is needed. There are three primary kinds of accesses that an ordering model
distinguishes: reads, writes and atomic operations.6 Atomic operations apply an atomic
read-modify-write primitive, often conditionally, such as test-and-set. It can also be useful
to consider dependent loads, where the program issues a load from address x and then later
issues a load from address y where the value y depends on the value returned by loading
x. An example is following a pointer chain. There are many different kinds of memory
access orderings weaker than strict consistency.

Fences and happens-before
A memory fence is an operation on a processor that prevents certain reorderings of memory
accesses. In particular it can prevent certain accesses issued before the fence, or certain
accesses issued after the fence, or both, from being performed in an order that places them
on the other side of the fence. For example, a total read fence requires all reads before the
fence to happen before all reads issued after the fence.
    This notion of happens-before can be formalised, and refers to requirements on the order
in which operations occur on memory. Thus, the total read fence imposes a happens-before
relationship between each previous read and each later read. Typically, atomic operations
imply a total fence on all operations: every earlier read, write and atomic operation must
happen-before each later read, write and atomic operation. However, other models are
possible, such as acquire-release. In that model, an acquiring operation (think of it as being
like acquiring a lock) prevents later operations from being performed before the acquire,
   5 To force the compiler to emit a load (or store) for each access to a given variable, languages such as C/C++

and Java have a declaration modifier, volatile, one can apply to variables.
  6 Some authors use the word ‘synchronising’ where we use ‘atomic’, but this conflates the atomicity of these

operations with their usual influence on ordering, which is a strictly different notion.
13.2. HARDWARE MEMORY CONSISTENCY                                                           252

Algorithm 13.4: The CompareAndSwap and CompareAndSet primitives

 1    CompareAndSwap(x, old, new):
 2       atomic
 3          curr ← *x
 4          if curr = old
 5             *x ← new
 6          return curr
 7

 8    CompareAndSet(x, old, new):
 9       atomic
10          curr ← *x
11          if curr = old
12             *x ← new
13             return true
14          return false

but earlier reads and writes can happen after the acquire. A releasing operation is symmet-
rical: it prevents earlier operations from happening after the release, but later reads and
writes may happen before the release. In short, operations outside an acquire-release pair
may move inside it, but ones inside it may not move out. This is suitable for implementing
critical sections.

Consistency models
The strongest consistency model is strict consistency, where every read, write and atomic op-
eration occurs in the same order everywhere in the system.7 Strict consistency implies that
happens-before is a total order, with the order defined by some global clock. This is the
easiest model to understand, and probably the way that most programmers think, but it is
prohibitive to implement efficiently. In fact, given concurrently acting components, a total
order may not even be well defined: some actions may happen at exactly the same clock cy-
cle. A slightly weaker model is sequential consistency, in which the global happens-before
order is any partial order consistent with every processor’s program order. Small scale
multiprocessors usually aim for sequential consistency or something close to it, because it
is easier to program to than more relaxed models. Weak consistency is the model resulting
from treating all atomic operations as total fences and otherwise allowing all reorderings.8
The acquire-release model mentioned above is usually called release consistency. Intermedi-
ate in strength between sequential and weak consistency is causal consistency. This enforces
happens-before between previous reads by a program and its subsequent writes, since the
reads may causally influence the value written, and it enforces happens-before between a
read and the write that stored the value obtained by the read. The term relaxed consistency
is not a specific model but refers to any model weaker than sequential consistency.
    While allowed reorderings depend to some extent on the interconnect and memory
system, that is they may lie outside total control by the processor, difference processors
enforce more strict or more relaxed consistency models. For example, Intel processors per-
form all store instructions in program order without any fences while ARM processors do
not. All popular processors of which we are aware implement at least weak or release
     7 By ‘occurs’ we mean ‘appears to occur’ — a program cannot tell the difference.
     8 This is more or less what is called relaxed consistency in the C++11 memory model.

Algorithm 13.5: Trying to advance state atomically with compare-and-swap

 1   compareThenCompareAndSwap(x):
 2      if *x = interesting
 3         z ← value for the desired next state
 4         CompareAndSwap(x, interesting, z)

consistency. There are many subtleties that arise. For more background on memory con-
sistency models, see Adve and Gharachorloo [1995, 1996].
    Given the subtleties and variations that exist across hardware platforms, how might a
programmer write portable but high performing code across them? From the program-
mer’s perspective, the main question is how to prevent undesired reorderings that would
harm program correctness. To assist with that, the C++ libraries provide a collection of
accessing functions where the programmer can explicitly specify the desired ordering con-
straint. The compiler then takes care of emitting the right instructions for the target hard-
ware that meet that constraint. For example, atomic_store_explicit allows choice
among relaxed, release and sequentially consistent orders, and atomic_load_explicit
allows the symmetrical choices of relaxed, acquire or sequentially consistent. The libraries
also allow explicitly specifying orders on atomic update operations and on fences. These
are based on what is known as the C++11 memory model. A number of other languages,
such including C and Rust, now provide similar functions.

13.3     Hardware primitives
From some of the earliest computers onwards, processors have supported atomic read-
modify-write primitives for locking and synchronisation. Section 13.1 introduced two
primitives. AtomicExchange is perhaps the simplest in that it involves no computation
or conditional action — it simply writes a new value to a memory location and returns the
old value atomically, implying that no other write (atomic or otherwise) can interleave.
TestAndSet is also quite simple in that it sets a single bit to 1 and returns the bit’s pre-
vious value. However, it can be viewed as a conditional primitive that only sets the bit
if its current value is zero. The other widely known and used atomic primitives include:
compare-and-swap, also called compare-and-exchange; load-linked/store-conditionally,
also called load-and-reserve/store-conditional or load-exclusive/store-exclusive (on ARM);
and various atomic increment, decrement, add, and fetch-and-or primitives, notably fetch-
and-add, also called exchange-and-add. We consider the most common of these below.

Compare-and-swap
The CompareAndSwap primitive and its close relation, CompareAndSet, are presented in
Algorithm 13.4. CompareAndSet compares a memory location to an expected value old,
and if the location’s value equals old, it sets the value to new. In either case it indicates
whether or not it updated the memory location. CompareAndSwap differs only in that
it returns the value of the memory location observed by the primitive before any update,
rather than returning a boolean truth value. The utility of the two primitives is essentially
the same, although their semantics are not strictly equivalent.
    CompareAndSwap is often used to advance a location from one state to another, such
as ‘locked by thread t1’ to ‘unlocked’ to ‘locked by thread t2’. It is common to examine the
current state and then try to advance it atomically, following the pattern of Algorithm 13.5,

Algorithm 13.6: Semantics of load-linked/store-conditionally

 1    LoadLinked(address):
 2       atomic
 3          reservation ← address                            /* reservation is a per−processor variable */
 4          reserved ← true                                      /* reserved is a per−processor variable */
 5          return *address
 6

 7    StoreConditionally(address, value):
 8       atomic
 9          if reserved
10             store(address, value)
11             return true
12          return false
13

14    store(address, value):     /* at all processors, not necessarily simultaneously */
15       if address = reservation /* granularity may be same cache line, and so on */
16          reserved ← false
17       *address ← value

sometimes called compare-then-compare-and-swap. There is a lurking trap in this ap-
proach, namely that it is possible that at the CompareAndSwap the state has changed mul-
tiple times, and is now again equal to the value sampled before. In some situations this
may be all right, but in others it could be that the bit pattern, while equal, actually has a
different meaning. This can happen in garbage collection if, for example, two semispace
collections occur, and along the way a pointer was updated to refer to a different object
that by coincidence lies where the original object was two collections ago. This inability
of CompareAndSwap to detect whether a value has changed and then changed back to its
original value is called the ABA problem.

Load-linked/store-conditionally
LoadLinked and StoreConditionally solve the ABA problem by having the proces-
sor remember the location read by the LoadLinked and use the processor’s coherence
mechanism to detect any update to that location. Assuming that the processor applies the
semantics of the store function, Algorithm 13.6 describes LoadLinked/StoreCond-
itionally more precisely. It still falls short, though, because the reservation is cleared
not only by writes by the same processor, but also by writes coming from other processors.
Because any write to the reserved location resets the reserved flag, the compare-then-
compare-and-swap code can be rewritten to avoid the possible ABA problem, as shown
in Algorithm 13.7.9 LoadLinked/StoreConditionally is thus strictly more powerful
than CompareAndSwap. In fact, it should be clear that the LoadLinked/StoreCond-
itionally primitives allow a programmer to implement any atomic read-modify-write
operation that acts on a single memory word. Algorithm 13.8 shows how to implement
compare-and-swap with LoadLinked/StoreConditionally, and also an implemen-
tation of compare-and-set. One more behaviour of LoadLinked/StoreConditionally
is worth mentioning: it is legal for a StoreConditionally to fail ‘spuriously’, that is,
even if no processor wrote the location in question. There might be a variety of low-level
     9 A thread also loses its reservation on a context-switch.

Algorithm 13.7: Atomic state transition with load-linked/store-conditionally

 1     observed ← LoadLinked(x)
 2     compute desired new value z, using observed
 3     if not StoreConditionally(x, z)
 4        go back and recompute or otherwise handle interference

Algorithm 13.8: Implementing compare-and-swap with load-linked/store-conditionally

 1     compareAndSwapByLLSC(x, old, new):
 2        previous ← LoadLinked(x)
 3        if previous = old
 4           StoreConditionally(x, new)
 5        return previous
 6

 7     compareAndSetByLLSC(x, old, new):
 8        previous ← LoadLinked(x)
 9        if previous = old
10           return StoreConditionally(x, new)
11        return false

hardware situations that can cause spurious failures, but notable is the occurrence of inter-
rupts, including such things as page and overflow traps, and timer or I/O interrupts, all
of which induce kernel activity. This is not usually a problem, but if some code between
LoadLinked and StoreConditionally causes a trap every time, then the StoreCond-
itionally will always fail.
    Because LoadLinked/StoreConditionally solves ABA problems so neatly, code
presented here will most generally prefer LoadLinked/StoreConditionally where
CompareAndSwap would exhibit an ABA problem. It would typically be straightforward
to convert such instances to use CompareAndSwap with an associated counter.
    Strictly speaking, StoreConditionally’s effect may be undefined if it writes to an
address other than the one reserved. Some processor designs allow that, however, giving
an occasionally useful atomic primitive that acts across two arbitrary memory locations.

Atomic arithmetic primitives
For completeness, Algorithm 13.9 defines several atomic arithmetic primitives. It is also
easy to offer versions of AtomicIncrement and AtomicDecrement that return either
the old or the new value using AtomicAdd or FetchAndAdd.10 Furthermore, processors
often set condition codes when executing these primitives, which can reveal whether the
value is (or was) zero, and so on. In the realm of garbage collection, FetchAndAdd might
be used to implement sequential allocation (that is, with a ‘bump pointer’) in a concurrent
setting — though usually it is preferable to set up local allocation buffers as described in
Section 7.7. FetchAndAdd could similarly be used to add or remove items from a queue,
though wrap-around in a circular buffer requires care (see Section 13.8).
    It has been shown that these atomic arithmetic primitives are strictly less powerful than
CompareAndSwap, and thus also less powerful than LoadLinked/StoreCondition-
     10 Some processors offer atomic and, or and other arithmetic operators that may be of occasional use.

Algorithm 13.9: Atomic arithmetic primitives

 1   AtomicIncrement(x):
 2      atomic
 3         *x ← *x + 1
 4

 5   AtomicDecrement(x):
 6      atomic
 7         *x ← *x − 1
 8

 9   AtomicAdd(x, v):
10      atomic
11         new ← *x + v
12         *x ← new
13         return new
14

15   FetchAndAdd(x, v):
16      atomic
17         old ← *x
18         *x ← old + v
19         return old
20

21   FetchAndOr(x, v):
22      atomic
23         old ← *x
24         *x ← old | v
25         return old

ally (see Herlihy and Shavit [2008]). In particular, each primitive has what is called a con-
sensus number. If the consensus number of a primitive is k, then it can be used to solve the
consensus problem among k threads, but not among more than k. The consensus problem
is a multiprocessor algorithm where (i) each thread proposes a value, (ii) all threads agree
on the result, (iii) the result is one of the values proposed and (iv) all threads always com-
plete in a finite number of steps, that is, the algorithm is wait-free (see Section 13.4). Primi-
tives that either set a value unconditionally, such as AtomicExchange, or that when com-
muted result in the same value for the variable being updated, such as AtomicIncrement
and FetchAndAdd, have consensus number 2. On the other hand, CompareAndSwap and
LoadLinked/StoreConditionally have consensus number ∞, that is, they can solve
consensus in a wait-free manner for any number of threads, as will be illustrated presently
in Algorithm 13.13.
  One potential advantage to unconditional arithmetic primitives is that they will al-
ways succeed, whereas an emulation of these primitives with LoadLinked/StoreCond-
itionally or CompareAndSwap can starve in the face of contention.11

  11 Of course if contention is that high, there may be the possibility of starvation at the hardware level, in trying

to gain exclusive access to the relevant cache line.

Algorithm 13.10: Fallacious test and set patterns

 1   testThenTestAndSetLock(x):                                               /* fallacious! */
 2      if *x = 0
 3         TestAndSet(x)
 4

 5   testThenTestThenSetLock(x):                                              /* fallacious! */
 6      if *x = 0
 7         other work
 8         if *x = 0
 9             *x ← 1

Algorithm 13.11: CompareAndSwapWide

 1   CompareAndSwapWide(x, old0, old1, new0, new1):
 2      atomic
 3         curr0, curr1 ← x[0], x[1]
 4         if curr0 = old0 && curr1 = old1
 5            x[0], x[1] ← new0, new1
 6         return curr0, curr1
 7

 8   CompareAndSetWide(x, old0, old1, new0, new1):
 9      atomic
10         curr0, curr1 ← x[0], x[1]
11         if curr0 = old0 && curr1 = old1
12            x[0], x[1] ← new0, new1
13            return true
14         return false

Test then test-and-set
The ‘test then test-and-set’ pattern was illustrated in function testAndTestAndSet (see
Algorithm 13.3). Because of the way that algorithm iterates, it is correct. Programmers
should avoid two fallacious attempts at the same semantics, here called test-then-test-
and-set and test-then-test-then-set, illustrated in Algorithm 13.10. Test-then-test-and-set
is fallacious because it does not iterate, yet the TestAndSet could fail if x is updated be-
tween the if and the TestAndSet. Test-then-test-then-set is even worse: it fails to use
any atomic primitive, and thus anything can happen in between the first and second read
of x and the second read and the write. Notice that making x volatile does not solve
the problem. There are similar patterns that might be called compare-then-compare-and-
set or compare-then-compare-then-set that are equally fallacious. These traps illustrate the
difficulty programmers have in thinking concurrently.

More powerful primitives
As mentioned above, LoadLinked/StoreConditionally is fully general, and hence
the most powerful among single-word atomic update primitives. However, primitives
that allow updating multiple independent words are even more powerful. In addition to

Algorithm 13.12: CompareAndSwap2

 1   CompareAndSwap2(x0, x1, old0, old1, new0, new1):
 2      atomic
 3         curr0, curr1 ← *x0, *x1
 4         if curr0 = old0 && curr1 = old1
 5            *x0, *x1 ← new0, new1
 6         return curr0, curr1
 7

 8   CompareAndSet2(x0, x1, old0, old1, new0, new1):
 9      atomic
10         curr0, curr1 ← *x0, *x1
11         if curr0 = old0 && curr1 = old1
12            *x0, *x1 ← new0, new1
13            return true
14         return false

single-word primitives, some processors include double-word primitives such as double-
word compare-and-swap, here called CompareAndSwapWide/CompareAndSetWide, in
addition to single-word CompareAndSwap (see Algorithm 13.11). These are not of greater
theoretical power. However, a wide double-word compare-and-swap can solve the ABA
problem of single-word compare-and-swap by using the second word for a counter of the
number of times the first word has been updated. It would take so long — 232 updates
for a 32-bit word — for the counter to wrap around that it may be safe to ignore the pos-
sibility. The same would hold even more strongly for updating two adjacent 64-bit words.
Thus CompareAndSwapWide can be more convenient and efficient even if it has the same
theoretical power as a regular compare-and-swap.
    But while double-word atomic primitives are useful, it is even more useful to be able to
update two arbitrary (not necessarily adjacent) words in memory atomically. The Motorola
88000 and Sun’s Rock design offered a compare-and-swap-two instruction (also called
double-compare-and-swap). Algorithm 13.12 illustrates this CompareAndSwap2 primi-
tive. CompareAndSwap2 is complex to implement in hardware, so it is not surprising
that no commercially produced machines presently support it. CompareAndSwap2 can
be generalised to compare-and-swap-n, also called n-way compare-and-swap. This was
the inspiration for transactional memory, which is to LoadLinked/StoreCondition-
ally what n-way compare-and-swap is to compare-and-swap. We discuss transactional
memory in Section 13.9.

Overheads of atomic primitives
One reason programmers fall into the traps just mentioned is that they know that atomic
primitives are expensive, so they try to avoid them. Another reason may be that they
improperly replicate the pattern of testAndTestAndSet. The primitives tend to be ex-
pensive for the two reasons previously mentioned, but it is helpful to distinguish them.
One reason is the cost of cache coherence: an atomic read-modify-write primitive must
acquire exclusive access to the relevant cache line. Also, it must do that, read the contents,
compute the new value and write it, before the instruction is complete. While modern
processors may overlap multiple instructions, often there are few instructions available in
the pipeline since the next thing to do often depends strongly on the result of the atomic
13.4. PROGRESS GUARANTEES                                                                       259

Algorithm 13.13: Wait-free consensus using compare-and-swap

 1   shared proposals[N]                                                 /* one entry per thread */
 2   shared winner ← −1                                  /* indicates which thread got here first */
 3   me ← myThreadId
 4

 5   decide(v):
 6      proposals[me] ← v                                                  /* 0 ≤ thread id < N */
 7      CompareAndSwap(&winner, −1, me)
 8      return proposals[winner]

operation. Because of the need for coherence, an atomic update primitive often includes a
bus or memory access, which consumes many cycles.
   The other reason atomic primitives tend to be slow is that they either include memory
fence semantics or else, by the way they are used, the programmer will need to insert
fences manually, typically on both sides of the atomic operation. This undermines the
performance advantage of overlapped and pipelined processing, and makes it difficult for
the processor to hide the cost of any bus or memory access the primitive requires.

13.4     Progress guarantees
It is important to guarantee progress among threads that may be contending on the same
data structure, such as a shared collected heap or collector data structures. This is espe-
cially true in real-time programming. It is also helpful to know the relative power of the
various atomic hardware primitives in supporting progress guarantees. From strongest to
weakest, useful progress guarantees include: wait-freedom, lock-freedom and obstruction-
freedom. A concurrent algorithm is wait-free if every thread can always make progress,
regardless of the actions of other threads. A concurrent algorithm is lock-free if, infinitely
often, some thread finishes within a finite number of steps. A concurrent algorithm is
obstruction-free if, given a long enough period of isolated execution, any thread will fin-
ish in a finite number of steps. Progress guarantees are almost always conditional in real
systems. For example, an algorithm might be wait-free as long as it does not exhaust free
storage. See Herlihy and Shavit [2008] for a thorough discussion of these concepts, how to
implement them, and so on.
     A wait-free algorithm typically involves the notion of threads helping each other along.
That is, if thread t2 is about to undertake an action that would undermine thread t1 that is
somehow judged to be ahead of t2, t2 will help advance the work of t1 and then do its own
work. Assuming a fixed bound on the number of threads, there is a bound on helping to
accomplish one work unit or operation on the data structure, and thus the total time for
any work unit or operation can be bounded. However, not only is the bound large, but the
typical time for an operation is rather higher than for weaker progress guarantees because
of the additional data structures and work required. For the simple case of consensus,
it is fairly easy to devise a wait-free algorithm with low time overhead, as illustrated in
Algorithm 13.13. It is fairly easy to see that this meets all of the criteria to be a solution to
the consensus problem for N threads, but it does have space overhead proportional to N.
     Lock-freedom is easier to achieve. It only requires that at least one contender make
progress on any occasion, though any particular individual can ‘starve’ indefinitely.
     Obstruction-freedom is easier to achieve than lock-freedom, but may require scheduler
cooperation. If threads can see that they are contending, they can use random increasing
13.4. PROGRESS GUARANTEES                                                                  260

back-off so as to allow some thread to win. That is, each time they detect contention,
they compute a longer possible back-off period T and randomly choose an amount of time
between zero and T to wait before trying again. In a pool of contending threads, each will
eventually succeed, probabilistically speaking.

Progress guarantees and concurrent collection
Parallel collectors use multiple threads simultaneously in the collector, but stop all mutator
threads during collection. Concurrent collectors perform at least some parts of collection
while mutators threads are still running, and generally use multiple collector threads too.
Both parallel and concurrent collection algorithms typically have a number of phases, such
as marking, scanning, copying, forwarding or sweeping, and concurrent collection also has
mutator work trying to proceed at the same time. Multiple collector threads may aim to
cooperate, yet sometimes interfere with one another and with mutator threads. In such
a complex situation, how can collector correctness be described? Certainly the collector
must do nothing blatantly wrong — at the least it must preserve the reachable parts of the
object graph and support the mutations being performed by the mutators. Next, provided
that an invocation of the collector eventually terminates, it should generally return some
unreachable memory for reuse. However, the specific expectations vary by collector al-
gorithm. A conservative (ambiguous roots) collector may over-estimate reachability and
thus fail to reclaim some unreachable objects. Likewise, generational and other partial-
heap collectors intentionally forgo reclaiming unreachable objects from some parts of the
heap on any given invocation. A complete collection algorithm gives a stronger guarantee:
eventually, if invoked enough times, it will reclaim any given piece of garbage.
    Concurrent collectors bring additional interesting issues. One is what can happen to
objects allocated during collection that then become unreachable, or objects previously
allocated that become unreachable during collection. A given collector might or might not
reclaim those during the current invocation.
    But there is a more subtle issue and risk that arises with concurrent and parallel col-
lection. Sequential algorithms have more obvious termination properties. For example,
marking a reachable object graph maintains some representation of marked-and-scanned,
marked-but-not-yet-scanned and unmarked object sets, and obeys rules where the first set
grows, eventually to contain the entire graph of reachable objects. Correctness may some-
times be tricky to prove, but it is relatively easy to see that the algorithm terminates. It is
less obvious with concurrent collection, because the object graph can grow because of allo-
cation of new objects, and it can change during a collection cycle. If each mutator change
forces more collector work, how can we know that the collector will ever catch up? Muta-
tors may need to be throttled back or stopped completely for a time. Even if a proof deals
with the issues of more collector work being created during collection, there remains a
further difficulty: unless the algorithm uses wait-free techniques, interference can prevent
progress indefinitely. For example, in a lock-free algorithm, one thread can continually fail
in its attempts to accomplish a work step. In fact, two competing threads can even each
prevent progress of the other indefinitely, an occurrence called livelock.
    Different phases of collection may offer different progress guarantees — one phase
might be lock-free, another wait-free. However, practical implementations, even of theo-
retically entirely wait-free algorithms, may have some (it is hoped small) portions that are
stop-the-world. Given the code complexity and increased possibility of bugs when trying
to implement stronger progress guarantees, it may not be worth the engineering effort to
make every last corner wait-free. Further, notice that an overall collection algorithm can
be judged wait-free from the standpoint of the mutators only if it can reclaim memory
fast enough to ensure that a mutator will not block in allocation waiting for collection to
13.5. NOTATION USED FOR CONCURRENT ALGORITHMS                                           261

complete. Put another way, the heap must not run out before the collector is done. This
requires more than a wait-free guarantee for each phase — it requires overall balance be-
tween heap size, maximum live size, allocation rate and collection rate. Enough resources
need to be devoted to collection — memory and processing time — for the collector to keep
up. This may be required for critical real-time systems, and Chapter 19 discusses it in more
detail. Most of the algorithms presented in succeeding chapters make weaker guarantees,
such as lock-freedom, possibly only in certain phases. They are easier to implement and
their guarantees are acceptable in many less stringent settings.

13.5     Notation used for concurrent algorithms
Given the considerations discussed previously, particularly atomicity, coherence and con-
sistency, what a programmer writes is not always executed in the exact order presented
— hardware and compilers can reorder and even eliminate some operations. Exactly what
can occur depends strongly on the programming language, its compiler and run-time sys-
tem, and the hardware. Yet here it is best to present algorithms in pseudocode indepen-
dently of any particular hardware-software platform. In an algorithm, the relative order
of some operations is typically important to correctness, but it is not generally necessary
that all operations occur, and be perceived everywhere, in the order presented. Therefore,
the code offered here for algorithms that may execute concurrently follows certain conven-
tions. This makes it easier to translate the pseudocode into a working implementation in a
given environment. Here are the conventions used.

Meaning of atomic: The actions within an atomic must be perceived by all processors
    as if they happened instantaneously — no other shared memory read or write can
    appear to happen in the middle. Moreover, atomic actions must be perceived
    as happening in the same order everywhere if they conflict (one writes and the
    other reads or writes the same shared variable), and in program execution order
    for the thread that executes them. Furthermore, atomic blocks act as fences for all
    other shared memory accesses. Since not all hardware includes fence semantics with
    atomic primitives, the programmer may need to add them. The code here may work
    with acquire-release fence semantics, but is designed assuming total fences.

Ordering effects of LoadLinked and StoreConditionally: Both the LoadLinked and
    StoreConditionally instructions act as total fences with respect to accesses to
    shared memory.

Marking variables: We explicitly mark shared variables; all other variables are private to
    each thread.

Arrays: Where we use arrays, we give the number of elements within brackets, such as
     proposals[N]. Declarations of arrays use shared or private explicitly, so as
     not to look like uses of the arrays, and may be initialised with a tuple, such as
     shared pair[2]←[0,1], including tuples extended to the specified length, such as
     shared level[N]←[−1,...].

References to shared variables: Each reference to a shared variable is assumed to result
     in an actual memory read or write, though not necessarily in the order presented.

Causality obeyed: Code assumes that if, subject to the sequential semantics of the pseudo-
    code language, an action x causally precedes an action y, then x happens-before y in
    the actual system. An example is a dependent memory reference. If code accesses
13.6. MUTUAL EXCLUSION                                                                                 262

      a shared pointer variable p then a field f of the structure that p references, namely
      (*p).f, then reading p causally preceded reading the field f. Similar remarks apply
      to accessing a shared index variable i then a shared array element a[i].
      Obeying causality also implies obeying control dependence: the evaluation of an if,
      while, or similar expression that determines control flow causally precedes execu-
      tion of the code it guards. The programmer must be careful not to allow speculative
      evaluation of conditional code so as to reorder accesses to shared variables. How-
      ever, unconditional code following an if is not causally dependent on evaluation of
      the if expression. Similar remarks apply to moving code across loops.

Explicit fence points: Even with the conventions listed above, many operations may be
     freely reordered — but sometimes an algorithm requires a particular order for its
     correctness. Therefore, our conventions include the possibility of marking a line of
     code with a $, which indicates operations that must occur in the order presented.
     Furthermore, lines so marked also indicate total fences for shared memory accesses.
     It is convenient that pseudocode presented thus far in this chapter has not needed
     these markings. Notice that a line marked with $ may, for some processor architec-
     tures, need a fence of some kind before the line, after the line or both before and
     after. Usually it is a particular action of the line that is important not to reorder, that
     is, one store or one load. While the markers do not offer complete guidance on how
     to translate pseudocode into working code for a given platform, they do serve to
     indicate where caution is necessary.

13.6      Mutual exclusion
One of the most basic problems in concurrent computing is mutual exclusion, by which it
is desired to guarantee that at most one thread at a time can be executing certain code,
called a critical section. While atomic primitives can sometimes achieve a necessary state
transition using one instruction, and techniques with stronger progress guarantees might
be applied — though perhaps at greatest cost and almost certainly greater complexity
— mutual exclusion remains convenient and appropriate in many cases. Atomic read-
modify-write primitives make it fairly easy to construct lock/unlock functions, as shown
in Algorithms 13.1 to 13.3. It is less obvious, but nevertheless true, that mutual exclusion
can be achieved using only (suitably ordered) reads and writes of shared memory without
stronger atomic update primitives. One of the classic techniques is Peterson’s Algorithm
for mutual exclusion between two threads, shown in Algorithm 13.14. Not only does this
algorithm guarantee mutual exclusion, it also guarantees progress — if two threads are
competing to enter the critical section, one will succeed — and that waits are bounded,
that is, the number of turns taken by other processes before a requester gets its turn is
bounded.12 In this case the bound is one turn by the other thread.
    It is not too hard to generalise Peterson’s Algorithm to N threads, as shown in Algo-
rithm 13.15, which highlights its similarity to the two-thread case. How the while loop
works is a bit subtle. The basic idea is that a requesting thread can advance a level in
the competition to enter the critical section if it sees no other thread at the same or higher
level. However, if another thread enters its current level, that thread will change victim
and the earlier arrival can advance. Put another way, the latest arrival at a given level
waits for threads at all higher levels plus earlier arrivals at its own level. Meanwhile, later
  12 The time before this happens is not bounded unless a requesting thread whose turn it is enters and then

leaves within bounded time.
13.6. MUTUAL EXCLUSION                                                                   263

Algorithm 13.14: Peterson’s algorithm for mutual exclusion

 1   shared interested[2] ← [false, false]
 2   me ← myThreadId
 3

 4   petersonLock():
 5      other ← 1 − me                                         /* thread id must be 0 or 1 */
 6      interested[me] ← true
 7      victim ← me                                                                         $
 8      while victim = me && interested[other]                                              $
 9         /* do nothing: wait */
10

11   petersonUnlock():
12      interested[me] ← false

Algorithm 13.15: Peterson’s algorithm for N threads

 1   shared level[N] ← [−1,...]
 2   shared victim[N]
 3   me ← myThreadId
 4

 5   petersonLockN():
 6      for lev ← 0 to N−1
 7         level[me] ← lev                              /* 0 ≤ thread id < N */
 8         victim[lev] ← me                                                  $
 9         while victim[lev] = me && (∃i ̸= me)(level[i] ≥ lev)              $
10            /* do nothing: wait */
11

12   petersonUnlockN():
13      level[me] ← −1

Algorithm 13.16: Consensus via mutual exclusion

 1   shared winner ← −1
 2   shared value                                        /* does not need to be initialised */
 3   me ← myThreadId
 4

 5   decideWithLock(v):                       /* simple, but no strong progress guarantee */
 6      lock()
 7      if winner = −1
 8         winner ← me
 9         value ← v
10      unlock()
11      return value

arrivals at the same and lower levels will come strictly later. It does not matter that the
while loop’s condition is not evaluated atomically. Peterson’s algorithm is illustrative of
what is possible and of techniques for reasoning about concurrent programs, but atomic
locking primitives are more convenient and practical.
    The previous discussion of consensus in Section 13.3 described the wait-free version
of the consensus problem. Mutual exclusion can solve consensus quite easily if stronger
progress guarantees are not needed, as shown in Algorithm 13.16. Since Peterson’s mutual
exclusion algorithm implements mutual exclusion, it can also support this kind of consen-
sus. However, if compare-and-swap is available it is usually a more appropriate solution
(see Algorithm 13.13).

13.7        Work sharing and termination detection
It is common in parallel or concurrent collection algorithms to need a way to detect ter-
mination of a parallel algorithm. Note that this is quite distinct from demonstrating that a
parallel algorithm will terminate; it concerns having the program detect that termination
has actually been achieved in a specific instance. In particular, consider a generic situation
in which threads consume work, and as they process work units, they may generate more
work. If each thread is concerned only with its own work, detecting termination is simple
— just have each thread set a done flag and when all the flags are set, the algorithm has
terminated. However, parallel algorithms generally involve some sort of sharing of work
items so as to try to balance the amount of work done by each thread and gain maximum
speedup from the available processors. This balancing can take two forms: threads with
a relatively large amount of work can push work to more lightly loaded threads, or lightly
loaded threads can steal work from more heavily loaded threads.
     Work movement must be atomic, or at least must guarantee that no work unit is lost.13
Here, though, the concern is detecting termination of a work sharing algorithm. It is rel-
atively easy to detect termination using a single shared counter of work units updated
atomically by each thread, but such counters may become bottlenecks to performance if
the threads update them frequently.14 Therefore, a number of termination detection al-
gorithms avoid atomic update primitives and rely on single word reads and writes. It is
simplest to consider first algorithms in which detection is the responsibility of a separate
thread whose only job is detection.
     Algorithm 13.17 shows a simplified version of the shared-memory work sharing termi-
nation algorithm of Leung and Ting [1997].15 It is designed for the push model. The basic
idea is that workers indicate whether or not they are busy with their busy flags, which
the detector scans. Notice that an idle worker will become busy again only if another
worker pushes a job to it. However, the pusher can then finish processing and go idle.
Since the detector’s scan is not atomic, it might first see the job receiver as idle (because
the job has not been sent yet) and then find the pusher idle (after it sends the job). In this
situation the detector would falsely indicate termination. Hence, the algorithm includes
   13 Sometimes work is idempotent, so if it is done two or more times, the algorithm is still correct, though

possibly wasteful of computing resources.
   14 Flood et al. [2001] use essentially this technique in their parallel collector, but with a single word that has one

‘active’ bit per thread. The termination condition is the same: the algorithm terminates when the status word
becomes zero.
   15 The version shown eliminates the β flags of Leung and Ting [1997], which have to do with operating system

sleeping and wakeup, which we elide here for simplicity. Here, we give their α and γ flags the more memorable
names busy and jobsMoved. Leung            √ and Ting also give a variant that detects termination a little faster by
checking the jobsMoved flag every N iterations of the detector’s scanning loop. Given the time needed to
perform work in a collection algorithm, it is doubtful that such a refinement is worthwhile.

Algorithm 13.17: Simplified αβγ shared-memory termination [Leung and Ting, 1997]

 1    shared jobs[N] ← initial work assignments
 2    shared busy[N] ← [true,...]
 3    shared jobsMoved ← false
 4    shared allDone ← false
 5    me ← myThreadId
 6

 7    worker():
 8       loop
 9          while not isEmpty(jobs[me])
10              if the job set of some thread j appears relatively smaller than mine
11                   some ← chooseAndDequeueJobs()
12                   sendJobs(some, j)                                                           $
13              else
14                   job ← dequeue(jobs[me])
15                   perform job
16          busy[me] ← false                                                                     $
17          while isEmpty(jobs[me]) && not allDone                                               $
18              /* do nothing: wait for work or termination */
19          if allDone return                                                                    $
20          busy[me] ← true                                                                      $
21

22    sendJobs(some, j):                              /* push jobs to more lightly loaded thread */
23       enqueue(jobs[j], some)                                                                  $
24       while (not busy[j]) && (not isEmpty(jobs[j]))                                           $
25            /* do nothing: wait for j to wake up */
26       /* indicate that some work moved */
27       jobsMoved ← true                                                                        $
28

29    detect():
30       anyActive ← true
31       while anyActive
32          anyActive ← (∃i)(busy[i])
33          anyActive ← anyActive || jobsMoved                                                   $
34          jobsMoved ← false                                                                    $
35       allDone ← true                                                                          $

the jobsMoved flag, which indicates whether any jobs have moved recently. The detector
restarts detection in that case. It is also important that sendJobs waits until busy[j] is
true to guarantee that before, during and immediately after the transfer at least one of the
busy[i] is true: all busy[i] can be false only if there is no work in the system.
    Algorithm 13.18 shows the similar algorithm for a work stealing (pull) model of sharing
work. For example, Endo et al. [1997] uses essentially this algorithm to detect termination
in their parallel collector. Also, while the lock-free collector of Herlihy and Moss [1992] is
not based on work sharing, its termination algorithm at its heart uses the same logic as the
busy and jobsMoved flags.
    It is straightforward to refine these detection algorithms so that they wait on a single
variable anyIdle until a scan might be useful, as shown in Algorithm 13.19. Likewise,

Algorithm 13.18: An αβγ-style work stealing termination algorithm

 1   me ← myThreadId
 2

 3   worker():
 4      loop
 5         while not isEmpty(jobs[me])
 6             job ← dequeue(jobs[me])
 7             perform job                                                       $
 8         if another thread j exists whose jobs set appears relatively large
 9             some ← stealJobs(j)                                               $
10             enqueue(jobs[me], some)
11             continue
12         busy[me] ← false                                                      $
13         while no thread has jobs to steal && not allDone                      $
14             /* do nothing: wait for work or termination */
15         if allDone return                                                     $
16         busy[me] ← true                                                       $
17

18   stealJobs(j):
19      some ← atomicallyRemoveSomeJobs(jobs[j])
20      if not isEmpty(some)
21         jobsMoved ← true                 /* indicate that some work moved */
22      return some

Algorithm 13.19: Delaying scans until useful

 1   shared anyIdle ← false
 2   me ← myThreadId
 3

 4   worker():
 5      ...
 6      busy[me] ← false                                                         $
 7      anyIdle ← true                                                           $
 8      ...
 9

10   detect():
11      anyActive ← true
12      while anyActive
13         anyActive ← false
14         while not anyIdle                                                     $
15             /* do nothing: wait until a scan might be useful */
16         anyIdle ← false                                                       $
17         anyActive ← (∃i)(busy[i])                                             $
18         anyActive ← anyActive || jobsMoved                                    $
19         jobsMoved ← false                                                     $
20      allDone ← true                                                           $

Algorithm 13.20: Delaying idle workers

 1   shared anyLarge ← false
 2   me ← myThreadId
 3

 4   worker():
 5      loop
 6         while not isEmpty(jobs[me])
 7             job ← dequeue(jobs[me])
 8             perform(job)                                                                        $
 9             if my job set is large
10                  anyLarge ← true                                                                $
11         if anyLarge
12             anyLarge ← false                                  /* set false before looking */    $
13             if another thread j has a relatively large jobs set                                 $
14                  anyLarge ← true                       /* could be more stealable work */       $
15                  some ← stealJobs(j)                                                            $
16                  enqueue(jobs[me], some)
17                  continue
18         busy[me] ← false                                                                        $
19         while (not anyLarge) && (not allDone)                                                   $
20             /* do nothing: wait for work or termination */
21         if allDone return                                                                       $
22         busy[me] ← true                                                                         $

in the work stealing case there is a similar refinement so that workers wait on a single
anyLarge flag (in addition to allDone), as shown in Algorithm 13.20.
    The algorithms presented so far assume a separate detection thread. It is tempting to
use idle threads to check termination, as shown in Algorithm 13.21. The problem is that
this algorithm does not work. For example, suppose thread A finishes its work, sees no
thread to steal from and starts detection. In its detection scan, it now sees that thread B
has extra work, so A will give up on detection, and may be just about to set its busy flag.
In the meantime, B finishes all of its work, enters detection, sees that all threads are done
and declares termination. A simple approach to fix this is to apply mutual exclusion to
detection as shown in Algorithm 13.22.
    Hassanein [2016] found in a production system that symmetrically coded termination
detection using mutual exclusion, with ever-increasing back-off on acquiring the lock, can
lead to a long tail in the time to complete the termination detection. They found it to be
better to have a distinguished detection thread, the one that first cannot find any work.
    For completeness, Algorithm 13.23 shows termination detection using an atomically
updated shared counter. For discussion of a lock-free data structure to support work shar-
ing implemented as a concurrent double-ended queue (deque), see Section 13.8.
    The discussion above has focused on coordination and termination of work stealing
algorithms. What about how to implement atomicallyRemoveSomeJobs, the primitive
that accomplishes the actual stealing? That will vary according to the data structures being
used, a topic covered in Section 13.8. Historically, collectors that use work stealing have
operated in terms of specific concrete items of work, say the address of one object to mark.
In a design where the work items are more general tasks of some kind, perhaps represented

Algorithm 13.21: Symmetric termination detection

 1   work():
 2      ...
 3      while I have no work && not allDone                                               $
 4          /* this version is broken! */
 5          detectSymmetric()
 6      ...
 7

 8   detectSymmetric():
 9      while not allDone                                                                 $
10         while (not anyIdle) && (not anyLarge)                                          $
11            /* do nothing: wait until a scan might be useful */
12         if anyLarge return                                                             $
13         anyIdle ← false
14         anyActive ← (∃i)(busy[i])                                                      $
15         anyActive ← anyActive || jobsMoved                                             $
16         jobsMoved ← false                                                              $
17         allDone ← not anyActive                                                        $

Algorithm 13.22: Symmetric termination detection repaired

 1   shared detector ← −1
 2   me ← myThreadId
 3

 4   work():
 5      ...
 6      while I have no work && not allDone                                               $
 7          if detector ≥ 0
 8             continue             /* wait for previous detector to finish before trying */
 9          if CompareAndSet(&detector, −1, me)
10             detectSymmetric()                                                          $
11             detector ← −1                                                              $
12      ...

Algorithm 13.23: Termination via a counter

 1   shared numBusy ← N
 2   worker():
 3      loop
 4         while work remaining
 5             perform(work)
 6         if AtomicAdd(&numBusy, −1) = 0
 7             return
 8         while nothing to steal && (numBusy > 0)                                        $
 9             /* do nothing: wait for work or termination */
10         if numBusy = 0
11             return
12         AtomicAdd(&numBusy, 1)

Algorithm 13.24: Rendezvous via a counter

 1   shared numBusy ← N
 2

 3   barrier():
 4      AtomicAdd(&numBusy, −1)
 5      while numBusy > 0
 6         /* do nothing: wait for others to catch up */

Algorithm 13.25: Rendezvous with reset

 1   shared numBusy ← N
 2   shared numPast ← 0
 3

 4   barrier():
 5      AtomicAdd(&numBusy, −1)
 6      while numBusy > 0
 7         /* do nothing: wait for others to catch up */
 8      if AtomicAdd(&numPast, 1) = N                                 /* one winner does the reset */
 9         numPast ← 0                                                                             $
10         numBusy ← N                                                                             $
11      else
12         while numBusy = 0                                 /* the others wait (but not for long) */
13              /* do nothing: wait for reset to complete */

by continuations (in the programming language sense), more general techniques might be
useful, such as those explored by Kumar et al. [2012, 2014].

Rendezvous barriers
Another common synchronisation mechanism in parallel and concurrent collectors is the
need for all participants to reach the same point in the algorithm — essentially a point of
termination of a phase of collection — and then to move on. In the general case one of the
previously presented termination algorithms may be most appropriate. Another common
case occurs when the phase does not involve work sharing or balancing, but it is required
only to wait for all threads to reach a given point, called the rendezvous barrier. This can
use a simplified version of termination detection with a counter (Algorithm 13.23), shown
in Algorithm 13.24. Since a collector is usually invoked more than once as a program
runs, these counters must be reset as the algorithm starts, or in any case before the phase
is run again, and the resetting should be done with care to ensure that no thread can be
depending on the value of the rendezvous counter at the time it is reset. Algorithm 13.25
shows such a resetting barrier.

13.8      Concurrent data structures
There are particular data structures commonly used in parallel and concurrent allocators
and collectors, so it is helpful to review some of the relevant implementation techniques.
It should be plain that data structure implementations for sequential programs are not

Algorithm 13.26: Counting lock

 1   /* the lock packs into one word a thread id and a count */
 2   shared lock ← ⟨thread: −1, count: 0⟩int
 3   me ← myThreadId
 4

 5   countingLock():
 6      old ← lock
 7      if old.thread = me && old.count > 0
 8         /* just increment the count; assume no overflow */
 9         lock ← ⟨old.thread, old.count + 1⟩
10         return
11      loop
12         if old.count = 0
13              if CompareAndSet(&lock, old, ⟨thread: me, count: 1⟩)
14                   return
15         old ← lock
16

17   countingUnlock():
18      /* leaves thread id, but no harm even when count becomes 0 */
19      old ← lock
20      lock ← ⟨old.thread, old.count − 1⟩

suitable as is for parallel and concurrent systems — they will generally break. If a data
structure is accessed rarely enough then it may suffice to apply mutual exclusion to an
otherwise sequential implementation by adding a lock variable to each instance of the
data structure, and have each operation acquire the lock before the operation and release
it after. If operations can be nested or recursive, then a ‘counting lock’ is appropriate, as
shown in Algorithm 13.26.
    Some data structures have high enough traffic that applying simple mutual exclusion
leads to bottlenecks. Therefore, a number of concurrent data structures have been devised
that allow greater overlap between concurrent operations. If concurrent operations are
overlapped, the result must still be safe and correct. An implementation of a concurrent
data structure is said to be linearisable if any pair of overlapping operations produces state
changes on the data structure and responses to the operations consistent with executing
the two operations in a non-overlapped way in one order or the other [Herlihy and Wing,
1990]. Furthermore, if two operations do not overlap in time, they must appear to happen
in the order in which they were invoked. For each operation there is a point in time at
which the operation can be viewed as having taken place. This is called its linearisation
point. Often an operation has many points in time that might be viewed as its linearisation
point, but the relative order of the linearisation points of operations that affect each other
will always be consistent with the logical order of the operations. If operations do not
affect each other then they can linearise in either order. Many memory manager actions,
such as allocation and changes to work lists, must be linearisable.
    There is a range of generic strategies a programmer can employ in building a concur-
rent data structure. In order from lower to higher concurrency, and typically from simplest
to most complex, they are as follows.16
  16 See Herlihy and Shavit [2008], Chapter 9, for details of each of these approaches applied to a set implemented

as a linked list.

Coarse-grained locking: One ‘large’ lock is applied to the whole data structure (already
     mentioned).

Fine-grained locking: In this approach an operation locks individual elements of a larger
     data structure, such as the individual nodes of a linked list or tree. This can increase
     concurrency if the locales of access and update are spread around enough. A general
     concern to keep in mind is that if an operation locks multiple elements, it must ensure
     that no other invocation of the same operation, or of any other operation, will attempt
     to lock the same two elements in the opposite order — in that case, the operations
     can deadlock. A common technique on a data structure only accessed in a single
     direction, such as a singly linked list or a tree, is lock coupling. This locks a node
     A and then a node B pointed to by A. Then it releases the lock on A and acquires
     a lock on a node C pointed to by B, and so on. This ‘hand-over-hand’ walking of
     locks through a data structure guarantees that later-arriving threads cannot pass the
     current thread in the data structure, and supports safe execution of operations such
     as inserting or removing an item from a list or tree. A potential drawback of fine-
     grained locking is that the overhead of going to a shared bus or memory multiple
     times to lock individual elements may swamp the benefit of avoiding a coarser lock.

Optimistic locking: This refines fine-grained locking by doing any searching of the data
    structure without locks, then locking what appear to be the proper elements for the
    operation. However, in general, concurrent updates can have changed things, so
    after locking, the operation validates that it has locked the correct elements for its
    intended action. If the validation fails, it releases the locks and starts over. Avoiding
    locking until the latest time necessary reduces overhead and improves concurrency.
    Optimism is often a good strategy, but can result in poorer performance in the pres-
    ence of frequent conflicting updates.

Lazy update: Even with optimistic locking, read-only operations may still need to lock a
     data structure. This can result in a concurrency bottleneck and also has the effect
     that a read-only operation performs writes (of locks). It is often possible to design
     a data structure so that read-only operations need no locking — but of course the
     updating operations are a bit more complex. Generally speaking, they make some
     change that logically accomplishes the operation, but may need further steps to com-
     plete it and get the data structure into a normalised form. An example may help
     in understanding this. For lazy update of a linked list representation of a set, the
     remove operation will first mark an element as being (logically) removed, by setting
     a boolean flag deleted in the element. After that it will unchain the deleted element
     by redirecting the predecessor’s pointer. All this happens while holding locks in the
     appropriate elements, so as to prevent problems with concurrent updaters. The two
     steps are necessary so that readers can proceed without locking. Adding an element
     needs to modify only one next pointer in the data structure and therefore needs only
     one update (again, with appropriate locks held).

Non-blocking: There are strategies that avoid locking altogether and rely on atomic up-
    date primitives to accomplish changes to the state of data structures. Typically a
    state-changing operation has some particular atomic update event that is its lineari-
    sation point. This is in contrast to lock based methods, where some critical section
    marks the linearisation ‘point’.17 As previously mentioned, these can be charac-
    terised according to their progress guarantees, in order from easiest to implement
 17 Because of mutual exclusion, it is a point as far as any other operations are concerned. However, lazy update

methods also tend to have a single linearisation point.

     to hardest. Lock-free implementations may allow starvation of individual threads;
     obstruction-free implementations may require long enough periods in which a single
     thread can make progress without interference; and wait-free implementations guar-
     antee progress of all threads. Some lock-free implementations are sketched below;
     for wait-free implementation, see Herlihy and Shavit [2008].

    For data structures most relevant to implementing parallel and concurrent collection,
implementation descriptions and code sketches are offered below. The implementation
strategies generally follow those suggested by Herlihy and Shavit.

Concurrent stacks
First, we sketch ways to implement a concurrent stack using a singly linked list. Since
there is only one locus of mutation for a stack, the performance of the various approaches
to locking will be about the same. The code is obvious, so it is not illustrated. Algo-
rithm 13.27 shows a lock-free implementation of a stack. It is easy to make push lock-free;
pop is a little harder. The popABA routine is a simple compare-and-set implementation of
pop that is lock-free — but that also has an ABA problem. Algorithm 13.27 also shows
LoadLinked/StoreConditionally and CompareAndSetWide solutions that avoid
the ABA problem, as concrete examples of how to do that. The problem occurs when
some other thread(s) pop the node referred to by currTop, and that node is pushed later
with its next different from the currTop.next read by this popping thread.
    A concurrent stack based on an array is best implemented using a lock. However, con-
current stacks tend to be a bottleneck not just because of cache and memory issues, but
because all the operations must serialise. It is possible to do better. Blelloch and Cheng
[1999] provide a lock-free solution by requiring all threads accessing a shared stack either
to be popping from it or all to be pushing onto it, thus allowing the stack pointer to be
controlled by a FetchAndAdd instruction rather than a lock. We discuss this in detail in
Chapter 14. Chapter 11 of Herlihy and Shavit discusses a concurrent lock-free stack imple-
mentation where threads that encounter high contention try to find matching operations
in a side buffer. When a pop finds a waiting push, or a push finds a waiting pop, that push
instantly satisfies that pop: the pair of operations eliminate each other. They linearise at
that moment (push before pop, of course), regardless of what is happening at the ‘main’
stack.

Concurrent queue implemented with singly linked list
A concurrent queue is a more interesting example of concurrency than a concurrent stack,
since it has two loci of modification: the head, where items are removed, and the tail,
where they are added. It is convenient to include a ‘dummy’ node, before the next element
to be removed from the queue. The head pointer refers to the dummy node, while the
tail pointer refers to the node most recently added to the queue, or the dummy node if
the queue is empty.
    Algorithm 13.28 shows an implementation that does fine-grained locking. It has one
lock for each locus. Notice that remove changes head to refer to the next node; thus,
after the first successful remove, the original dummy node will be free, and the node with
the value just removed becomes the new head. This version of a queue is unbounded.
Algorithm 13.29 shows a similar implementation for a bounded queue. To avoid update
contention on a single size field, it maintains counts of the number of items added and
the number removed. It is fine if these counts wrap around — the fields storing them just

Algorithm 13.27: Lock-free implementation of a single-linked-list stack

 1   shared topCnt[2] ← [null, any value]
 2   shared topAddr ← &topCnt[0]                                                   /* top */
 3   shared cntAddr ← &topCnt[1]                        /* count, only for popCount below */
 4

 5   push(val):
 6      node ← new Node(value: val, next: null)
 7      loop
 8         currTop ← *topAddr
 9         node.next ← currTop
10         if CompareAndSet(topAddr, currTop, node)
11             return
12

13   popABA():
14      loop
15         currTop ← *topAddr
16         if currTop = null
17              return null
18         /* code below can have an ABA problem if node is reused */
19         next ← currTop.next
20         if CompareAndSet(topAddr, currTop, next)
21              return currTop.value
22

23   pop():
24      loop
25          currTop ← LoadLinked(topAddr)
26          if currTop = null
27             return null
28          next ← currTop.next
29          if StoreConditionally(topAddr, next)
30             return currTop.value
31

32   popCount():
33      loop
34         currTop ← *topAddr
35         if currTop = null
36            return null
37         currCnt ← *cntAddr                                                             $
38         nextTop ← currTop.next
39         if CompareAndSetWide(&topCnt, currTop, currCnt,
40                              nextTop, currCnt+1)
41            return currTop.value

Algorithm 13.28: Fine-grained locking for a single-linked-list queue

 1   shared head ← new Node(value: dontCare, next: null)
 2   shared tail ← head
 3   shared addLock ← UNLOCKED
 4   shared removeLock ← UNLOCKED
 5

 6   add(val):
 7      node ← new Node(value: val, next: null)
 8      lock(&addLock)
 9      tail.next ← node
10      tail ← node
11      unlock(&addLock)
12

13   remove():
14      lock(&removeLock)
15      node ← head.next
16      if node = null
17         unlock(&removeLock)
18         return EMPTY                                 /* or otherwise indicate emptiness */
19      val ← node.value
20      head ← node
21      unlock(&removeLock)
22      return val

Algorithm 13.29: Fine-grained locking for a single-linked-list bounded queue

 1   shared head ← new Node(value: dontCare, next: null)
 2   shared tail ← head
 3   shared addLock ← UNLOCKED
 4   shared removeLock ← UNLOCKED
 5   shared numAdded ← 0
 6   shared numRemoved ← 0
 7

 8   add(val):
 9      node ← new Node(value: val, next: null)
10      lock(&addLock)
11      if numAdded − numRemoved = MAX
12         unlock(&addLock)
13         return false                            /* or otherwise indicate full */
14      tail.next ← node
15      tail ← node
16      numAdded ← numAdded + 1                 /* numeric wrap around is ok */
17      unlock(&addLock)
18      return true                           /* or otherwise indicate success */
19

20   remove():
21      lock(&removeLock)
22      node ← head.next
23      if numAdded − numRemoved = 0
24         unlock(&removeLock)
25         return EMPTY                                 /* or otherwise indicate emptiness */
26      val ← node.value
27      head ← node
28      numRemoved ← numRemoved + 1                         /* numeric wrap around is ok */
29      unlock(&removeLock)
30      return val

need to be able to store all max + 1 values from zero through max. Of course if these counts
lie on the same cache line, this ‘optimisation’ may perform no better than using a single
size field.
    There is an important special case of this implementation: if either adding or removing
or both is limited to one thread, then that end does not need a lock. In particular, if there is
one adder and one remover, then this data structure needs no locks at all. A common case
in collection is multiple adders and one remover, which is still an improvement over the
general case.
   Other locking approaches (such as optimistic or lazy update) offer no real advantage
over fine-grained locking for this data structure.
    Algorithm 13.30 shows a lock-free implementation. A tricky thing here is that adding
a node happens in two steps. First, the current tail node is updated to point to the new
node, and then tail is updated to refer to the new node. A lock-free implementation
must provide for the possibility that other adders — and also removers — may see the
intermediate state. This implementation addresses the issue by having any thread update
tail if it notices that tail is ‘out of sync’. This ensures that tail comes into sync without
any thread waiting for another one to do it. This is a case of the helping typical of wait-free
algorithms, even though this algorithm is not wait-free.

Concurrent queue implemented with array

A queue implemented with an array has higher storage density than one implemented
with a linked list, and it does not require on the fly allocation of nodes from a pool. A
bounded queue can be implemented with a circular buffer. Algorithm 13.31 shows a fine-
grained locking version of that, which can be improved by folding together head and
numRemoved, and also tail and numAdded, using modular arithmetic, shown in Algo-
rithm 13.32. This is particularly attractive if MAX is a power of two, since then the modulus
function can be performed with bit masking. The reason for MODULUS is that we need to
distinguish the MAX+1 possible values for the difference between tail and head, that is,
the number of elements in the buffer. Thus our modulus for the modular arithmetic needs
to be greater than MAX. At the same time, it must be a multiple of MAX so that we can re-
duce head and tail modulo MAX when indexing into the buffer. The value MAX*2 is the
smallest modulus that will work, and has the added virtue of being a power of two when
MAX is. In the code we add MODULUS to tail−head to ensure we are taking the modulus
of a positive number, which is not necessary if using masking or if the implementation
language does a proper modulus (toward −∞ as opposed to toward zero).
   If there is a distinguished value that can mark empty slots in the buffer, then the code
can be further simplified as shown in Algorithm 13.33.
    It is often the case that the buffer has just a single reader and a single writer (for exam-
ple, the channels used by Oancea et al. [2009]). In this case, the code for a circular buffer is
much simpler; it appears in Algorithm 13.34. This algorithm is a good example for men-
tioning the adjustments a programmer needs to make to realise the algorithm on different
platforms. The algorithm works as is on Intel x86 processors because they are strict about
the order of stores to memory as perceived by other processors.
    However, on the PowerPC the lines we mark with $ for ordering require attention. One
approach is to insert fences, as indicated by Oancea et al.. In add we insert an lwsync in-
struction between the stores to buffer[tail] and tail, to serve as a store-store memory

Algorithm 13.30: Lock-free implementation of a single-linked-list queue

 1   shared head ← new Node(value: dontCare, next: null)
 2   shared tail ← head
 3

 4   add(val):
 5      node ← new Node(value: val, next: null)
 6      loop
 7         currTail ← LoadLinked(&tail)
 8         currNext ← currTail.next
 9         if currNext ̸= null
10             /* tail appears to be out of sync: try to help */
11             StoreConditionally(&tail, currNext)
12             continue                                          /* start over after attempt to sync */
13         if CompareAndSet(&currTail.next, null, node)
14             /* added to end of chain; try to update tail */
15             StoreConditionally(&tail, node)
16             /* ok if failed: someone else brought tail into sync, or will in the future */
17             return
18

19   remove():
20      loop
21         currHead ← LoadLinked(&head)
22         next ← currHead.next
23         if next = null
24             if StoreConditionally(&head, currHead)
25                /* head has not changed, so truly empty */
26                return EMPTY                             /* or otherwise indicate emptiness */
27             continue                               /* head may have changed so try again */
28

29            currTail ← tail
30            if currHead = currTail
31               /* not empty; appears to be out of sync; try to help */
32               currTail ← LoadLinked(&tail)
33               next ← currTail.next
34               if next ̸= null
35                    StoreConditionally(&tail, next)
36               continue
37

38            /* appears non−empty and in sync enough; try to remove first node */
39            val ← next.value
40            if StoreConditionally(&head, next)
41                 return val
42            /* on failure, start over */

Algorithm 13.31: Fine-grained locking of a circular buffer

 1   shared buffer[MAX]
 2   shared head ← 0
 3   shared tail ← 0
 4   shared numAdded ← 0
 5   shared numRemoved ← 0
 6   shared addLock ← UNLOCKED
 7   shared removeLock ← UNLOCKED
 8

 9   add(val):
10      lock(&addLock)
11      if numAdded − numRemoved = MAX
12         unlock(&addLock)
13         return false                                                                    /* indicate failure */
14      buffer[tail] ← val
15      tail ← (tail + 1) % MAX
16      numAdded ← numAdded + 1
17      unlock(&addLock)
18

19   remove():
20      lock(&removeLock)
21      if numAdded − numRemoved = 0
22         unlock(&removeLock)
23         return EMPTY                                                                    /* indicate failure */
24      val ← buffer[head]
25      head ← (head + 1) % MAX
26      numRemoved ← numRemoved + 1
27      unlock(&removeLock)
28      return val

fence.18 This will guarantee that if the remover orders its load instructions properly, it will
not perceive the change to tail until after it can perceive the change to buffer. Likewise,
we add an isync instruction, which serves as a load-store memory fence, before the store
to buffer, to ensure that the processor does not speculatively begin the store before the
load of head and thus possibly overwrite a value being read by the remover.19
    Similarly, we insert an lwsync in remove between loading buffer[head] and updat-

   18 The lwsync instruction ensures that memory accesses by the issuing processor for instructions before the

lwsync complete before any memory accesses for instructions after the lwsync, as viewed by all processors. It
stands for ‘light-weight sync’ and is a version of the sync, where the ‘heavy-weight’ version, written just sync,
deals with input/output device memory in addition to ordinary cached memory. Both lwsync and sync are
somewhat expensive since their implementation typically involves waiting for the write buffer to drain before
allowing future memory accessing instructions to issue. This implies waiting for inter-processor cache synchro-
nisation to complete.
   19 The isync instruction ensures that all instructions previously issued by this processor complete before any

future instruction of this processor. It is suitable for separating previous loads from future memory accesses. It
does not guarantee that previous and future stores will be perceived by other processors in the locally issued
order — that requires one of the sync instructions. One reason isync may be more efficient is that it involves
only processor-local waiting, for the instruction pipeline to empty sufficiently; it does not itself require cache
coherence activity.

Algorithm 13.32: Circular buffer with fewer variables

 1   shared buffer[MAX]
 2   MODULUS = MAX * 2                                            /* see text for explanation */
 3   shared head ← 0                                             /* 0 ≤ head < MODULUS */
 4   shared tail ← 0                                             /* 0 ≤ tail < MODULUS */
 5   shared addLock ← UNLOCKED
 6   shared removeLock ← UNLOCKED
 7

 8   add(val):
 9      lock(&addLock)
10      if (tail − head + MODULUS) % MODULUS = MAX
11         unlock(&addLock)
12         return false                                                   /* indicate failure */
13      buffer[tail % MAX] ← val
14      tail ← (tail + 1) % MODULUS
15      unlock(&addLock)
16      return true                                                       /* indicate success */
17

18   remove():
19      lock(&removeLock)
20      if (tail − head + MODULUS) % MODULUS = 0
21         unlock(&removeLock)
22         return EMPTY                                                   /* indicate failure */
23      local val ← buffer[head % MAX]
24      head ← (head + 1) % MODULUS
25      unlock(&removeLock)
26      return val

ing head, and an isync before loading from buffer, to serve as a load-load memory
barrier between loading tail and loading from buffer.
    Oancea et al. proposed a solution that includes writing null in remove as an explicit
EMPTY value, and having both add (remove) watch its intended buffer slot until the slot
appears suitably empty (non-empty), before writing its new value (EMPTY). Because there
is only one reader and only one writer, only one thread writes EMPTY values, and only one
writes non-EMPTY values, and each delays its write until it sees the other thread’s previous
write, accesses to the buffer cannot incorrectly pass each other. Likewise, only one thread
writes each of head and tail, so at worst the other thread may have a stale view. This
solution avoids fences, but the buffer writes by the remover may cause more cache ping-
ponging than fences would. Oancea et al. actually combine both solutions, but as we
just argued, each seems adequate on its own. This all shows the care needed to obtain a
correctly working implementation of concurrent algorithms under relaxed memory orders.
    If the queue is being used as a buffer, that is, if the order in which things are removed
need not match exactly the order in which they were added, then it is not too hard to de-
vise a lock-free buffer. First assume an array large enough that wrap-around will never
occur. Algorithm 13.35 implements a lock-free buffer. It assumes that initially all entries
are EMPTY. This algorithm does a lot of repeated scanning. Algorithm 13.36 adds an index
lower from which to start scans. It requires distinguishing not just empty slots, but also

Algorithm 13.33: Circular buffer with distinguishable empty slots

 1   shared buffer[MAX] ← [EMPTY,...]
 2   shared head ← 0
 3   shared tail ← 0
 4   shared addLock ← UNLOCKED
 5   shared removeLock ← UNLOCKED
 6

 7   add(val):
 8      lock(&addLock)
 9      if buffer[tail] ̸= EMPTY
10         unlock(&addLock)
11         return false                                                     /* indicate failure */
12      buffer[tail] ← val
13      tail ← (tail + 1) % MAX
14      unlock(&addLock)
15      return true                                                        /* indicate success */
16

17   remove():
18      lock(&removeLock)
19      if buffer[head] = EMPTY
20         unlock(&removeLock)
21         return EMPTY                                                     /* indicate failure */
22      val ← buffer[head]
23      head ← (head + 1) % MAX
24      unlock(&removeLock)
25      return val

Algorithm 13.34: Single reader/single writer lock-free buffer [Oancea et al., 2009]

 1   shared buffer[MAX]
 2   shared head ← 0                                 /* next slot from which to try removing */
 3   shared tail ← 0                                            /* next slot into which to add */
 4

 5   add(val):
 6      newTail ← (tail + 1) % MAX
 7      if newTail = head
 8         return false
 9      buffer[tail] ← val                                                                      $
10      tail ← newTail
11      return true
12

13   remove():
14      if head = tail
15         return EMPTY                                   /* or otherwise indicate emptiness */
16      value ← buffer[head]                                                                 $
17      head ← (head + 1) % MAX                                                              $
18      return value

Algorithm 13.35: Unbounded lock-free buffer implemented with an array

 1   shared buffer[ ]← [EMPTY,...]                                          /* unrealisable unbounded buffer */
 2   shared head ← 0                                                                         /* next slot to fill */
 3

 4   add(val):
 5      pos ← FetchAndAdd(&head, 1)
 6      buffer[pos] ← val
 7

 8   remove():
 9      limit ← head
10      pos ← −1
11      loop
12         pos ← pos + 1
13         if pos = limit
14             return null                                /* found nothing */
15         val ← LoadLinked(&buffer[pos])
16         if val ̸= EMPTY
17             if StoreConditionally(&buffer[pos], EMPTY)
18                return val

ones that have been filled and then emptied, indicated by USED in the code. Further re-
finement is needed to produce a lock-free circular buffer implementation along these lines.
In particular there needs to be code in the add routine that carefully converts USED slots to
EMPTY ones before advancing the head index. It also helps to use index values that cycle
through twice MAX as in Algorithm 13.32. The resulting code appears in Algorithm 13.37.

Concurrent deque for work stealing
To support work stealing, Arora et al. [1998] designed a lock-free implementation of a
double-ended queue. The local worker thread can push and pop work items, while other
threads can remove (steal) items. The design has the local worker push and pop at one
end of the deque, while other threads remove from the opposite end (the deque is input-
restricted). Algorithm 13.38 shows an implementation avoids an ABA problem by using
load-linked/store-conditionally.20 It is straightforward to pack a counter with the tail in-
dex to derive a safe implementation in terms of compare-and-swap.
     Pushing a value is simple and involves no synchronisation. Popping checks to see if it
is trying to get the last value remaining. If it is, it may be in a race with a non-local remover.
Both threads will try to update tail; the winner ‘gets’ the value. In any case, the popper
sets tail to zero. This will not confuse a contending remover. Either the remover lost the
race, in which case it does not return a value, or it won and it already has the value and will
leave tail alone. It is also important that pop sets top to zero first, before setting tail
to zero — this keeps the top ≤ tail test working in remove. Notice that the conventions
for top and tail ensure that top−tail is the number of items in the queue (except in
the middle of resetting them both to zero, where the difference may be negative).

  20 The names of variables are different from Arora et al. [1998], and the algorithm here calls the local end’s index

top and the opposite end’s index tail, so as to correspond better with the view that the local end of the deque is a
stack and the other end is the tail (removal point) of a queue.

Algorithm 13.36: Unbounded lock-free array buffer with increasing scan start

 1   shared buffer[ ]← [EMPTY,...]                               /* unrealisable unbounded buffer */
 2   shared head ← 0                                                              /* next slot to fill */
 3   shared lower ← 0                                                    /* position to look at first */
 4

 5   add(val):
 6      pos ← FetchAndAdd(&head, 1)
 7      buffer[pos] ← val
 8

 9   remove():
10      limit ← head
11      currLower ← lower
12      pos ← currLower − 1
13      loop
14         pos ← pos + 1
15         if pos = limit
16              return null                                                        /* found nothing */
17         val ← LoadLinked(&buffer[pos])
18         if val = EMPTY
19              continue
20         if val = USED
21              if pos = currLower
22                   /* try to advance lower */
23                   currLower ← LoadLinked(&lower)
24                   if pos = currLower
25                        StoreConditionally(&lower, pos+1)
26              continue
27         /* try to grab */
28         if StoreConditionally(&buffer[pos], USED)
29              return val

13.9       Transactional memory
A transaction consists of a collection of reads and writes that should appear to execute
atomically. That is, the effect should be as if no other reads or writes interleave with those
of a transaction. load-linked/store-conditionally achieves this semantics for transactions
involving a single word, but the point is to allow transactions over multiple independent
words. A suitable mechanism will generally include means to indicate:

     • the start of a transaction;

     • each read that is part of the current transaction;

     • each write that is part of the current transaction; and

     • the end of a transaction.

The end is usually called the (attempted) commit of the transaction. If it succeeds, then
the transaction’s effects appear; if it fails, then the writes are discarded and the software
may respond by trying again, trying some other action, and so on. Thus, transactions

Algorithm 13.37: Bounded lock-free buffer implemented with an array

 1   shared buffer[MAX] ← [EMPTY,...]
 2   MODULUS = 2 * MAX
 3   shared head ← 0                                     /* refers to next slot to fill */
 4   shared lower ← 0               /* slots from lower to head-1 may have data */
 5

 6   add(val):
 7      loop
 8         currHead ← head
 9         /* could peek before using atomic operator */
10         oldVal ← LoadLinked(&buffer[currHead % MAX])
11         if oldVal = USED
12              currLower ← lower
13              if (currHead % MAX) = (currLower % MAX)
14                        && (currHead ̸= currLower)
15                   advanceLower()                                     /* lower is a buffer behind */
16                   continue
17              /* try to clean entry; ensure head has not changed */
18              if currHead = head
19                   StoreConditionally(&buffer[currHead % MAX], EMPTY)
20              continue
21         if oldVal ̸= EMPTY
22              if currHead ̸= head
23                   continue                                        /* things changed: try again */
24              return false                                     /* indicate failure: buffer is full */
25         currHead ← LoadLinked(&head)                                         /* try to claim slot */
26         /* recheck inside LL/SC */
27         if buffer[currHead % MAX] = EMPTY
28              if StoreConditionally(&head, (currHead + 1) % MODULUS)
29                   buffer[currHead] ← val
30                   return true                                                /* indicate success */
31

32   remove():
33      advanceLower()
34      limit ← head
35      scan ← lower − 1
36      loop
37         scan ← (scan + 1) % MODULUS
38         if scan = limit
39              return null                                                  /* found nothing */
40         /* could peek at value first before using atomic operator */
41         val ← LoadLinked(&buffer[scan % MAX])
42         if val = EMPTY || val = USED
43              continue
44         /* try to grab */
45         if StoreConditionally(&buffer[scan % MAX], USED)
46              /* Note: always safe to grab entry that is not USED and not EMPTY */
47              return val

Algorithm 13.37 (continued): Bounded lock-free buffer implemented with an array

 1   advanceLower():
 2      if buffer[lower % MAX] ̸= USED
 3         return                    /* quick return without using atomic operation */
 4      loop
 5         currLower ← LoadLinked(&lower)
 6         if buffer[currLower % MAX] = USED
 7            if StoreConditionally(&lower, (lower + 1) % MODULUS)
 8               continue
 9         return

may be executed speculatively. It is necessary to mark their end so that speculation can be
resolved and the transaction accepted, with its writes installed, and so on, or rejected and
the software notified so that it can retry or take some other action.
    Similar to the ACID properties of database transactions, transactional memory trans-
actions ensure the following properties.
     • Atomicity: All effects (writes) of a transaction appear or none do.
     • Consistency: A transaction appears to execute at a single instant.
     • Isolation: No other thread can perceive an intermediate state of a transaction, only a
       state before or a state after the transaction.
The durability property of database transactions, which ensures to very high probability
that the results of a successful transaction will not be lost, is omitted from the requirements
on transactional memory.21
    The actual reads and writes of a transaction will be spread out over time. Thus, as trans-
actions run, they may interfere with each other if they access the same locations. Specif-
ically, transactions A and B conflict if one of them writes an item that the other reads or
writes. Conflicting transactions must be ordered. In some cases, given the reads and writes
a transaction has already performed, this is not possible. For example, if A and B have both
read x, and then they both try to write to x, there is no way to complete both transactions
so as to satisfy transactional semantics. In that case, one or both of A and B must be aborted
(discarded), and the situation made to appear as if the aborted transaction had not run.
Generally the software will try it again, which will likely force a suitable ordering.
    Transactional memory provides a high-level programming abstraction that allows pro-
grammers to enclose code within transactional blocks. All shared memory accesses within
a block (and their effects) are either committed all together or discarded as a group. Trans-
actional memory can be implemented in hardware, software or a hybrid combination. Any
implementation strategy must provide for: atomicity of writes, detection of conflicts and
visibility control (for isolation). Visibility control may be part of conflict detection.
    Atomicity of writes can be achieved either by buffering or by undoing. The buffering
approach accumulates writes in some kind of scratch memory separate from the mem-
ory locations written, and updates those memory locations only if the transaction com-
mits. Hardware buffering may be achieved by augmenting caches or using some other
side buffer; software buffering might work at the level of words, fields or whole objects.
With buffering, a transaction commit installs the buffered writes, while an abort discards
  21 We note, however, that Intel x86 hardware transactional memory transactions may be durable if executed

over non-volatile memory on certain platforms.

Algorithm 13.38: Lock-free work stealing deque [Arora et al., 1998]

 1   shared deque[MAX]
 2   shared top ← 0                                         /* index one beyond the last used entry */
 3   shared tail ← 0                                                 /* index of the first used entry */
 4

 5   push(val):                                 /* local worker function to push (enqueue) a value */
 6      currTop ← top
 7      if currTop ≥ MAX
 8         return false                                                         /* indicate overflow */
 9      deque[currTop] ← val
10      top ← currTop + 1
11      return true                                                               /* indicate success */
12

13   pop():                           /* local worker function to pop a value from the local end */
14      currTop ← top − 1
15      if currTop < 0
16          return null                                                                   /* empty */
17      top ← currTop
18      val ← deque[currTop]
19      currTail ← LoadLinked(&tail)
20      if currTop > currTail
21          return val                             /* cannot be contending with other removers */
22      /* might be contending, and deque will be empty */
23      top ← 0
24      if StoreConditionally(&tail, 0)
25          return val                               /* I won on changing tail, so I get the value */
26      tail ← 0
27      return null
28

29   remove():                                         /* steal a value from another thread’s deque */
30      loop
31         currTail ← LoadLinked(&tail)
32         currTop ← top
33         if currTop ≤ currTail
34               return null                                                       /* deque is empty */
35         val ← deque[currTail]
36         if StoreConditionally(&tail, currTail+1)
37               return val                         /* won on setting tail, so can return the value */
38         /* contended with another remover, or pop that emptied the deque */
39         /* if stealing is optional, could indicate failure instead of looping */

the buffer. This typically requires more work for commits, usually the more common case,
and less work for aborts. Undoing works in a converse way: it updates modified data
as a transaction runs, but saves in a side data structure called the undo log the previous
value of each item it writes. If the transaction commits, it simply discards the undo log,
but if the transaction aborts, it uses the undo log to restore the previous values. Undo logs
can be implemented in hardware, software, or a combination, just as buffering can. Typi-
cal hardware transactional memory buffers writes in the cache marking the affected lines
as tentative until the transaction commits and invalidating those lines if the transaction
aborts.
    Conflict detection may be implemented eagerly or lazily. Eager conflict checking checks
each new access against the currently running transactions to see if it conflicts. If necessary
it will cause one of the conflicting transactions to abort. Lazy conflict checking does the
checks when a transaction attempts to commit. Some mechanisms also allow a transaction
to request as it runs validation that there are no conflicts so far in the transaction. Soft-
ware schemes may set flags in object headers or maintain a side table recording accesses.
These are checked by transactional accesses to accomplish conflict detection. Hardware
will typically associate flags with cache lines or words to the same end.
    For purposes of presentation, let us discuss a simple hardware transactional memory
interface consisting of these primitives, as introduced by Herlihy and Moss [1993]:22
TStart() indicates the beginning of a transaction.
TCommit() indicates that the transaction wants to commit. It returns a boolean that is true
    if and only if the commit succeeded.
TAbort() indicates that the transaction wants to abort, which is sometimes useful to re-
    quest programmatically.
TLoad(addr) marks a transactional load from the indicated address. This adds that ad-
    dress to the transaction’s read set and returns the current value in that memory loca-
    tion.
TStore(addr, value) marks a transactional store of the indicated value to the indicated
     address. This adds the address to the transaction’s write set and performs the write
     transactionally, that is, in a way such that the effect of the write disappears if the
     transaction aborts, and so on.
    These primitives can simplify the implementation of a variety of concurrent data struc-
tures. For example, Algorithm 13.30 simplifies to Algorithm 13.39. The add function is
simpler because it can write two locations atomically, and remove is simpler because it
can read two and even three values atomically. More importantly, it is easier to see that
the transactional implementation is correct; verifying the other version requires more sub-
tle arguments about orders of reads and writes.

Using transactional memory to help implement collection
There are two main relationships that transactional memory can have with garbage col-
lection. Transactional memory can help implement the collector [McGachey et al., 2008;
Ritson et al., 2014], or transactions may be part of the managed language semantics that
the collector must play with nicely. This section considers transactional memory in sup-
port of garbage collection; the next section looks at garbage collection for a language that
supports transactions.
 22 Intel’s x86 Restricted Transactional Memory (RTM) works substantially like this.

Algorithm 13.39: Transactional memory version of a single-linked-list queue

 1   shared head ← new Node(value: dontCare, next: null)
 2   shared tail ← head
 3

 4   add(val):
 5      node ← new Node(value: val, next: null)
 6      loop
 7         currTail ← TLoad(&tail)
 8         TStore(&currTail.next, node)
 9         TStore(&tail, node)
10         if TCommit()
11             return
12

13   remove():
14      loop
15         currHead ← TLoad(&head)
16         next ← TLoad(&currHead.next)
17         if next = null
18             if TCommit()        /* the commit ensures we got a consistent view */
19                return EMPTY                 /* or otherwise indicate emptiness */
20             continue
21

22            /* appears non−empty; try to remove first node */
23            val ← TLoad(&next.value)
24            TStore(&head, next)
25            if TCommit()
26                 return val
27            /* on failure, start over */

   It should be clear that transactional memory, because of the way it can simplify the
programming of concurrent data structures, can make it easier to implement parallel and
concurrent allocation and collection. In particular it can simplify concurrent allocators,
mutator and collector read and write barriers, and concurrent collector data structures.
Given that there are no current hardware standards and an increasing variety of software
packages available, it is not possible to be specific, but using transactional memory to
support automatic memory management involves these caveats.

     • Software transactional memory tends to involve significant overheads, even after op-
       timisation. Given the desire for low overheads in most parts of automatic storage
       management, the scope for applying software transactional memory may be small.
       Still, coding of low traffic data structures might be simplified while continuing to
       avoid the difficulties with locks. However, software transactional memory can be
       used efficiently to support concurrent replication copying [Ritson et al., 2014; Ugawa
       et al., 2018]. Their insight is that fromspace and tospace replicas of an object need
       to be only eventually rather than immediately consistent, and therefore that a general-
       purpose transactional memory mechanism is not necessary.

     • Hardware transactional memory will likely have idiosyncrasies. For example, it may
       handle conflict detection, access and updating all in terms of physical units such as

     cache lines. It will also likely have an upper limit on the number of data items in-
     volved in a transaction, because of hardware capacity limitations such as the number
     of lines per cache set in a set-associative cache, for some approaches to implement-
     ing hardware transactional memory. Because the mapping from what a programmer
     writes to the cache lines actually used may not be obvious, implementers must still
     be careful with low-level details.

   • Transactional memory can, at most, guarantee lock-freedom, though it does that
     fairly easily. Even if the underlying commit mechanism of transactional memory
     is wait-free, transactions can conflict, leading to aborts and retries. Programming
     wait-free data structures will remain complex and subtle.

   • Transactional memory can require careful performance tuning. One concern is inher-
     ent conflicts between transactions because they access the same data. An example is
     a concurrent stack: transactional memory will not solve the bottleneck caused by the
     need for every push and pop to update the stack pointer. Furthermore, exactly where
     in a transaction various reads and writes occur — nearer to the beginning or nearer to
     the end — can significantly affect conflicts and the overhead of retrying transactions.

All that said, a hardware transactional memory facility such as that offered on some In-
tel x86 processors can be useful. That hardware supports reading and writing at least a
small number of completely independent cache lines in a transaction, which is enough
to simplify the implementation of most of the concurrent data structures presented here.
Whether the performance would be comparable, or even better, with hardware transac-
tional memory remains an open question — hardware transactions tend to empty the pro-
cessor pipeline. The simpler model of the world that transactional memory presents may
result in fewer bugs and reduce development effort.

Supporting transactional memory in the presence of garbage collection
Consider now the quite different problem of implementing a language that offers both
automatic memory management and transactions built using some form of transactional
memory [Harris and Fraser, 2003; Welc et al., 2004, 2005]. The key issue is the ways in which
these two complex mechanisms — transactions and automatic memory management —
may interfere, particularly in a highly concurrent implementation.
    One kind of interference is that actions of the storage manager may cause transaction
conflicts that result in higher overhead because of more retries, as well as making progress
problematic for either a mutator, the collector or both. For example, if the mutator is at-
tempting a long transaction, and collector actions conflict, the mutator transaction may
be continually aborted by actions of the collector, or the collector may effectively block
for a long time. The issue is particularly severe if the implementation exploits hardware
transactional memory. For example, attempts by a concurrent collector to mark, forward
or copy an object may cause mutator transactions to abort just because they touched the
same memory word — even though the operations are carefully coded not to disturb each
other’s semantics. This would be harder to avoid with hardware transactional memory,
since it is oblivious to the semantics of the data being managed, whereas a software trans-
actional memory built for a particular language might give special treatment to object
headers, as opposed to data fields.
    Transactions can become involved in the semantics of memory reclamation. For exam-
ple, if a transactional memory system uses a log of old values to support aborting trans-
actions in an update-in-place implementation, then it is possible for the log to contain the
only reference to an object. While the transaction remains in doubt, the referent object must
13.10. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                  289

be considered still to be reachable. Thus, transaction logs need to be included in the root
set for collection. Furthermore, in the case of copying collection, pointers in the logs must
not only be provided to the collector for tracing, they must also be updated to reflect the
new locations of objects that have moved.
    An interesting issue is how to handle allocation in a transactional language. In partic-
ular, it would seem logical that if a transaction allocates some objects and then aborts, it
should somehow unallocate those objects. However, if the allocation data structures are
shared, maintaining ability to roll back values exactly as they were would mean that trans-
actions accessing free-lists or bump pointers effectively lock them until the transaction
completes. This is probably undesirable. Therefore, allocation should be more a logical
action than a physical one, when we consider how to undo it. A free-list system might
go back through an aborting transaction’s log and free the objects it allocated. This may
put them in a different position on a free-list, and if a block had been split, it might not be
recombined, and so forth. It is also possible that the semantics of the language may admit
some non-transactional activity within a transaction. In that case an object allocated by the
transaction might be revealed, so it can be unsafe to free the object. The implementation
must further take care that if an object might be revealed in this way, the initialisation of
its crucial contents, such as setting up the object header, is not undone. Concepts such
as open nesting [Ni et al., 2007] may help here. A generic strategy is to consider all auto-
matic memory management actions of a transactional mutator to be open-nested actions.
However, a simpler approach overall is to use local allocation buffers.
    Finally, some transactional memory systems do significant allocation as part of how
they function, and that has impact on allocators and collectors. In particular, many soft-
ware transactional memory systems work by allocating a new version of an object for a
writing transaction, which is only installed if the transaction commits. There may not be
anything new here semantically for a collector to deal with, but the load may be a bit
different. There is also a bit of a sibling relationship between transactional memory and
collection in the sense that they may both need efficient concurrent data structures with
adequate progress guarantees. For example, transaction commit is in part a consensus
algorithm that ideally is wait-free.

13.10      Issues to consider
A first consideration cannot be overstated: getting concurrent algorithms correct is hard!
Therefore, unless concurrency is absolutely necessary, it should be avoided. That said,
concurrency has become more necessary than it was, and so we offer these additional
considerations.
    What is the range of platforms on which the system will run? What are the memory
consistency properties and the fence and synchronisation primitives they offer? It is neces-
sary to code to the weakest ordering to be supported, but it may be possible to elide some
fences or other primitives on some platforms, as we discussed relative to Algorithm 13.34
in Section 13.8. What orderings will need fences?
    What atomic update primitives are available? Although load-linked/store-conditionally
is convenient and more powerful, many popular systems only offer compare-and-swap or
equivalent. Without load-linked/store-conditionally, ABA problems can crop up, which
can be addressed as we showed in Algorithm 13.27. Perhaps in the future transactional
memory will be of use.
    What progress guarantees are needed? Weaker guarantees are much easier to imple-
ment and to reason about. For low-traffic data structures, straightforward locking may
be appropriate — it is much easier to code and to code correctly than lock-free or stronger
13.10. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                             290

guarantees. Further, even deployed systems that are wait-free for most cases may use sim-
pler techniques for corner cases or for some short steps where the implementation effort
to make them wait-free is not worth the benefit.
   Does the system exhibit true concurrency (more than one thread running at once in
hardware) or is it only multiprogrammed? Multiprogrammed concurrent algorithms are
easier to deal with.
   In the following chapters, we build on the ideas introduced here to construct parallel,
incremental, concurrent and real-time collectors.
