Chapter 15

Concurrent garbage collection

The basic principles of concurrent collection were initially devised as a means to reduce
pause times for garbage collection on uniprocessors. Early papers used terms such as ‘con-
current’, ‘parallel’, ‘on-the-fly’ and ‘real-time’ interchangeably or inconsistently. In Chap-
ter 14 we defined the modern usage of ‘parallel’. Here, we define the remaining terms. So
far, we have assumed that the mutator is suspended while garbage collection proceeds,
and that each collection cycle terminates before the mutator can continue. Figure 14.1 il-
lustrated different stop-the-world collection styles by one or more horizontal bars, with
time proceeding from left to right, and showed mutator execution in white while each
collection cycle is represented as a distinct non-white shade. Thus, grey boxes represent
actions of one garbage collection cycle, and black boxes those of the next. In Chapter 14
we saw that one way to reduce pause times on a multiprocessor is to run a full collection
cycle with multiple collector threads acting in parallel while all the mutators are stopped,
as illustrated in Figure 14.1c.
    Another way to reduce pause times on a uniprocessor is to interleave mutator execution
with collector execution, as illustrated in Figure 15.1a. Interleaving mutator and collector
execution in this way is called incremental collection, since the collection cycle is broken
down into multiple finer-grained increments. However, incremental collection is not as
straightforward as it might first seem, since the collection cycle is no longer atomic with
respect to mutation of the object graph, so the reachability of objects can change from one
increment to the next. Thus, incremental collectors must have some way of keeping track
of changes to the graph of reachable objects, perhaps re-scanning objects or fields in the
face of those changes. There are many different ways to cope with this problem.
    Although interleaving provides the illusion of concurrency between mutator and col-
lector, incremental collection assumes that the mutator and collector do not execute in
parallel — that is, that the mutator is stopped for each increment of the collector cycle. It
is possible to maintain this property on a multiprocessor by making sure that all parallel
mutators are stopped for each increment, as illustrated in Figure 15.1b. The increments can
also be parallelised, as in Figure 15.1c.
    It is a conceptually simple step to go from interleaving of the mutator with the collec-
tor on a uniprocessor to concurrent execution of (multiple) mutators in parallel with the
collector on a multiprocessor. The main added difficulty is ensuring that the collector and
mutators synchronise properly to maintain a consistent view of the heap, and not just for
reachability. For example, inconsistency can occur when a mutator attempts to manipulate
partially scanned or copied objects, or to access metadata, concurrently with the collector.
    The degree and granularity of this synchronisation necessarily impacts application
throughput (that is, end-to-end execution time including both mutator and collector work),

CHAPTER 15. CONCURRENT GARBAGE COLLECTION                                        330

                                                                   me

        (a) Incremental uniprocessor collection

        (b) Incremental multiprocessor collection

        (c) Parallel incremental collection

        (d) Mostly-concurrent collection

        (e) Mostly-concurrent incremental collection

        (f) On-the-fly collection

        (g) On-the-fly incremental collection

Figure 15.1: Incremental and concurrent garbage collection. Each bar rep-
    resents an execution on a single processor. The coloured regions represent
    different garbage collection cycles.

and synchronisation is more easily maintained in some phases of collection than others.
Thus, mostly-concurrent collection avoids some synchronisation overhead by assuming that
all the mutators are stopped at the same time for brief periods during each collector cy-
cle, often at the beginning of the cycle, which may include obtaining stack roots from the
stopped mutators, and at the end of the marking phase to ensure that all live objects have
been marked. This is true whether the collection cycle is monolithic (Figure 15.1d) or in-
cremental (Figure 15.1e). The (hopefully brief) global stop-the-world phase ensures that
all the mutators are simultaneously aware that some phase of a collection cycle has begun
(or completed).
     Relaxing the need for a global stop-the-world phase yields purely concurrent on-the-fly
collection, which executes in parallel with the mutators (Figure 15.1f), possibly incremen-
tally (Figure 15.1g). The vertical lines indicate that each mutator may need to synchronise
with the garbage collector prior to each collection cycle, even though there is no global
stop-the-world phase.1

15.1       Correctness of concurrent collection
A correct concurrent collector must satisfy two properties:

    • safety requires the collector to retain at least all reachable objects;

    • liveness requires the collector eventually to complete its collection cycle.

Concurrent collectors are only correct insofar as they are able to control mutator and collec-
tor interleavings. As we shall soon see, concurrent mutator and collector operations will
be specified as operating atomically, allowing us to interpret a sequence of interleaved
operations as being generated by a single mutator (and single collector), without loss of
generality. Any concurrent schedule for executing these atomic operations that preserves
their appearance of atomicity will be permitted, leaving the actual implementation of the
concurrency control for these operations to the discretion of the implementer. Perhaps the
easiest way to preserve atomicity of these operations is to alternate collector and mutator
work by running the collector incrementally, stopping all the mutator threads while each
collector increment runs. Other approaches permit finer-grained synchronisation. We re-
viewed techniques for doing so in Chapter 13.

The tricolour abstraction, revisited
Correctness of concurrent collectors is often reasoned about most easily by considering
invariants based on the tricolour abstraction that the collector and mutator must preserve.
All concurrent collectors preserve some realisation of these invariants, but they must retain
at least all the reachable objects (safety) even as the mutator modifies objects. Recall that:

White objects have not yet been reached by the collector; this includes all objects at the
    beginning of the collection cycle. Those left white at the end of the cycle will be
    treated as unreachable garbage.

Grey objects have been reached by the collector, but one or more of their fields still need
    to be scanned (they may still point to white objects).
   1 Historically, concurrent collection in general was referred to as ‘on-the-fly’ [Dijkstra et al., 1976, 1978; Ben-

Ari, 1984]. However, on-the-fly has since come to mean more specifically never stopping all the mutator threads
simultaneously.

Black objects have been reached by the collector and all their fields have been scanned;
     thus, immediately after they were scanned none of the outgoing pointers were to
     white objects. Black objects will not be rescanned unless their colour changes.

The garbage collector can be thought of as advancing a grey wavefront, the boundary be-
tween black (was reachable at some time and scanned) and white (not yet visited) objects.
When the collector cycle can complete without mutators concurrently modifying the heap,
there is no problem. The key problem with concurrent mutation is that the collector’s and
the mutator’s views of the world may become inconsistent, and that the grey wavefront
no longer represents a proper boundary between black and white.
   Let us reconsider the earlier definition of the mutator Write operation, which we can
recast as follows by introducing a redundant load from the field right before the store:
    atomic Write(src, i, new):
       old ← src[i]
       src[i] ← new
The Write operation inserts the pointer src→new into the field src[i] of object src. As
a side effect it deletes the pointer src→old from src[i]. We characterise the operation as
atomic to emphasise that the old and new pointers are exchanged instantaneously with-
out any other interleaving of mutator/collector operations. Of course, on most hardware
the store is naturally atomic, so no explicit synchronisation is required.
    When the mutator runs concurrently with the collector and modifies objects ahead of
the wavefront — grey objects (whose fields still need to be scanned) or white objects (as
yet unreached) — correctness ensues since the collector will still visit those objects at some
point (if they are still reachable). There is also no problem if the mutator modifies objects
behind the wavefront — black objects (whose fields have already been scanned) — so long
as it only inserts or deletes a pointer to a black or grey object (which the collector has
already decided is reachable). However, other pointer updates may lead to the mutator’s
and the collector’s view of the set of live objects becoming incoherent [Wilson, 1994], and
thus live objects being freed incorrectly. Let us consider an example.

The lost object problem
We show the two scenarios under which a white pointer can be inserted behind the wave-
front in Figure 15.2. The first scenario in Figure 15.2a illustrates how the mutator can hide
a white object initially directly reachable from a grey object by inserting its pointer behind
the wavefront and then deleting its link from the grey object. The initial state of the heap
shows a black object X and grey object Y, having been marked reachable from the roots.
White object Z is directly reachable from Y. In Step D1 the mutator inserts pointer b from
X to Z by copying pointer a from grey object Y. In Step D2 the mutator deletes unscanned
pointer a from the only unscanned object (Y) that refers to Z. In Step D3 the collector scans
object Y to make it black, and then terminates its marking phase. In the sweep phase, white
object Z will be erroneously reclaimed, even though it is reachable via pointer b.
    The second scenario in Figure 15.2b shows how the mutator can hide a white object
transitively reachable via a chain of pointers from a grey object by inserting its pointer
behind the wavefront, and then deleting some other link in the chain. In this scenario no
pointer to the lost object itself is deleted, unlike the direct case which does delete a pointer
to the lost object. The initial state of the heap shows a black object P and grey object Q,
having been marked reachable from the roots. White object R is directly reachable from Q,
while white object S is transitively reachable from Q via R. In Step T1 the mutator inserts

               Roots                                                   Roots

           X                   Y                                   P                   Q

                               a                                                             c
                       Z
                                                                   S                   R
                                                                                 d

       D1: Write(X, b, Read(Y, a))                              T1: Write(P, e, Read(R, d))
               Roots                                                   Roots

           X                   Y                                   P                   Q
                                   Y
                  b            a                                       e                     c
                       Z
                                                                   S                   R
                                                                                 d

          D2: Write(Y, a, null)                                    T2: Write(Q, c, null)
               Roots                                                   Roots

           X                   Y                                   P                   Q

                  b                                                    e
                       Z
                                                                   S                   R
                                                                                 d

                D3: scan(Y )                                               T3: scan(Q)
               Roots                                                   Roots

           X                   Y                                   P                   Q

                  b                                                    e
                       Z
                                                                   S                   R
                                                                                 d
(a) Direct: hiding a reachable white object by         (b) Transitive: hiding a transitively reachable
dropping a direct link from grey                       white object by breaking an indirect chain
                                                       from grey

Figure 15.2: The lost object problem: a reachable white object is hidden from
      the collector by making it unreachable from any grey object.
          With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media: Vechev et al. [2005],
                                     figures 3–4, pages 584–5

pointer e from P to S by copying pointer d from white object R. In Step T2 the mutator
deletes pointer c to R, destroying the path from the only unscanned object Q that leads to
S. In Step T3 the collector scans the object Q to make it black, and terminates its marking
phase. In the sweep phase, white object S will be erroneously reclaimed, even though it is
reachable via pointer e.
    Wilson [1994] observes that objects can only become lost if two conditions hold at some
point during tracing:

Condition 1: the mutator stores a pointer to a white object into a black object, and

Condition 2: all paths from any grey objects to that white object are destroyed.

Inserting a white pointer (that is, a pointer to a white object) into a black object will cause
problems if the collector never encounters another pointer to the white object. It would
mean that the white object is reachable (from the black object, Condition 1), but the col-
lector will never notice since it does not revisit black objects. The collector could only
discover the white object by following a path of unvisited (that is, white) objects starting
from an object that the collector has noticed but not finished with (that is, a grey object).
But Condition 2 states that there is no such path.

The strong and weak tricolour invariants
To prevent live objects from being reclaimed incorrectly, we must ensure that both condi-
tions cannot hold simultaneously. To guarantee that the collector will not miss any reach-
able objects, it must be sure to find every white object that is pointed to by black objects. So
long as any white object pointed to by black objects is also protected from deletion, it will
not be missed. It is sufficient for such an object to be directly reachable from some grey
object, or transitively reachable from some grey object through a chain of white objects. In
this case Condition 2 never holds. We say that such an object is grey protected. Thus, we
must preserve:

   • The weak tricolour invariant: All white objects pointed to by a black object are grey
     protected (that is, reachable from some grey object, either directly or through a chain
     of white objects).

    Non-copying collectors have the advantage that all white pointers automatically turn
into grey/black pointers when their target object is shaded grey or black. Thus, white
pointers in black objects are not a problem because their grey protected white targets are
eventually shaded by the collector — all white pointers in black objects eventually become
black before the collection cycle can terminate.
    In contrast, concurrent copying collectors are more restricted because they explicitly
have two copies of every live object at the end of the collection cycle (the fromspace white
copy, and the tospace black copy), at which point the white copies are discarded along
with the garbage. By definition, black objects are never revisited by the collector. Thus,
a correct concurrent copying collector must never allow a white fromspace pointer (to a
white fromspace object) to be stored in a black tospace object. Otherwise, the collector
will complete its cycle while leaving dangling white pointers from black tospace into the
discarded white fromspace. That is, they must preserve:

   • The strong tricolour invariant: There are no pointers from black objects to white
     objects.

    Clearly, the strong invariant implies the weak invariant, but not the other way round.
Because problems can only occur when the mutator inserts a white pointer into a black
object, it is sufficient simply to prohibit that. Preserving the strong tricolour invariant is a
strategy equally suited to both copying and non-copying collectors.
    In both the scenarios in the example, the mutator first wrote a pointer to a white object
into a black object (D1/T1), breaking the strong invariant. It then destroyed all paths to
that white object from grey objects (D2/T2), breaking the weak invariant. The result was
that a (reachable) black object ended up pointing to a (presumed garbage) white object,
violating correctness. Solutions to the lost object problem operate at either the step that
writes the pointer to the white object (D1/T1) or the step that deletes a remaining path to
that object (D2/T2).

Precision
Different collector algorithms, which achieve safety and liveness (of collector) in differ-
ent ways, will have varying degrees of precision (as determined by the set of objects they
retain at the end of the collection cycle), efficiency (throughput) and atomicity (degree of
concurrency). Varying precision means that they may retain some varying superset of the
reachable objects, and hence affects the promptness of reclamation of dead objects. A stop-
the-world collector obtains maximal precision (all unreachable objects are collected) at the
expense of any concurrency with the mutator. Finer-grained atomicity permits increased
concurrency with the mutator at the expense of possibly retaining more unreachable ob-
jects and the overhead to ensure atomicity of key operations. It is difficult to identify the
minimal yet sufficient set of critical sections to place in tracing. Vechev et al. [2007] shows
how this search can be semi-automated. Unreachable objects that are nevertheless retained
at the end of the collection cycle are called floating garbage. It is usually desirable, though
not strictly necessary for correctness, that a concurrent collector also ensure completeness in
collecting floating garbage in some later collection cycle.

Mutator colour
In classifying algorithms, it is also useful to talk about the colour of the mutator roots as if
the mutator itself were an object. A grey mutator either has not yet been scanned by the
collector so its roots are still to be traced, or its roots have been scanned but need to be
rescanned. Thus, grey mutator roots may refer to objects that are white, grey or black. A
black mutator has been scanned by the collector so its roots have been traced, and will not
be scanned again. Under the strong invariant this means that a black mutator’s roots can
refer only to objects that are grey or black but not white. Under the weak invariant, a black
mutator can hold white references so long as their targets are protected from deletion.
    The colour of the mutator has implications for termination of a collection cycle. By
definition, concurrent collection algorithms that permit a grey mutator need to rescan its
roots. This will lead to more tracing work if a reference to a non-black object is found.
When this trace is complete, the roots must be scanned again, in case the mutator has
added to the roots yet another non-black reference, and so on. It is generally necessary for
grey mutator algorithms to halt all mutator threads for a final scan of their roots.
    As mentioned earlier, our simplifying assumption for now is that there is only a sin-
gle mutator. However, on-the-fly collectors distinguish among multiple mutator threads
because they do not suspend them all at once to sample their roots. These collectors
must operate with mutator threads of different colours, both grey (unscanned) and black
(scanned). Moreover, some collectors may separate a single mutator thread’s roots into

scanned (black) and unscanned (grey) portions. For example, the top frame of a thread’s
stack may be scanned to make it black, while the remaining stack frames are left unscanned
(grey). Returning or unwinding into the grey portion of the stack forces the new top stack
frame to be scanned.

Allocation colour
Mutator colour also influences the colour objects receive when they are allocated, since
allocation results in the mutator holding the pointer to the newly allocated object, which
must satisfy whichever invariant applies given the colour of the mutator. But the allocation
colour also affects how quickly a new object can be freed once it becomes unreachable. If
an object is allocated black or grey, then it will not be freed during the current collection
cycle (since black and grey objects are considered to be live), even if the mutator drops
its reference without storing it into the heap. A grey mutator can allocate objects white
and so avoid unnecessarily retaining new objects. A black mutator cannot allocate white
(whether the strong or weak invariant applies), unless (under the weak invariant) there is
a guarantee that the white reference will be stored to a live object ahead of the wavefront
so the collector will retain it. Otherwise, there is nothing to prevent the collector from
reclaiming the object even though the black mutator retains a pointer to it. Note also that,
initially, a new object contains no outgoing references, so allocating black is always safe.

Pointer tagging
While colour — white, grey or black — applies to objects, it is also possible to associate in-
formation with pointers. For example, a bit within each pointer might indicate whether that
pointer is marked through or not. This bit stealing introduces tags on pointers.2 Such tags
allow finer-grained recording of progress in scanning (marking through) the pointers of an
object. It leads to invariants that are further refined. Using the strong tricolour invariant,
the target of a marked-through pointer must not be white. A black object may only contain
marked-through pointers; a white object may only contain unmarked-through pointers;
and a grey object may contain either. Pointer tags can help in maintaining a black muta-
tor invariant, since a marked-through pointer is good for a black mutator to hold but an
unmarked-through one may not be. Some systems use double mapping (Section 11.10) to
support using one or more higher-order bits for the pointer tags while sometimes avoiding
explicit tests of those bits.

Incremental update solutions
Wilson [1994] calls solutions that address D1/T1 mutations incremental update techniques
because they inform the collector of incremental changes made by the mutator to the set
of objects known to be live, and hence of additional objects that need to be (re)scanned.
Incremental update solutions conservatively treat an object as live (non-white) if a pointer
to it is ever inserted behind the wavefront (into a black object), speculating that the mutator
may yet delete all other paths to the object ahead of the wavefront. Thus, incremental
update techniques preserve the strong invariant. They use a write barrier to protect against
the insertion of a pointer to awhite object into a black object. In the example above, the
write barrier would re-colour the source or destination of pointer b so that the pointer is
no longer black to white.
   2 Tagged pointers have also been called coloured pointers. We prefer the term tagged pointer in order to avoid

confusion with a pointer to a coloured object.

    When a black mutator loads a reference from the heap it is effectively inserting a pointer
in a black object (itself). Incremental update techniques can use a mutator read barrier to
protect from insertion of white pointers in a black mutator.

Snapshot-at-the-beginning solutions
Wilson calls solutions that address D2/T2 mutations snapshot-at-the-beginning techniques
since they preserve the set of objects that were live at the start of the collection. They inform
the collector when the mutator deletes a white pointer from a grey or white object (ahead
of the wavefront). Snapshot-at-the-beginning solutions conservatively treat an object as
live (non-white) if a pointer to it ever existed ahead of the wavefront, speculating that the
mutator may have also inserted that pointer behind the wavefront. This maintains the
weak invariant, because there is no way to delete every path from some grey object to
any object that was live at the beginning of the collection cycle. Snapshot-at-the-beginning
techniques use a write barrier to protect against deletion of grey or white pointers from
grey or white objects.
    Snapshotting the mutator means scanning its roots, making it black. We must snapshot
the mutator at the beginning of the collection cycle to ensure it holds no white pointers.
Otherwise, if the mutator held a white pointer that was the only pointer to its referent, it
could write that pointer into a black object and then drop the pointer, breaking the weak
invariant. A write barrier on black could catch such insertions, but degenerates to main-
taining the strong invariant. Thus, snapshot collectors only operate with a black mutator.

15.2       Barrier techniques for concurrent collection
Following Pirinen [1998], barrier techniques that maintain one of the two tricolour invari-
ants rely on a number of actions to cope with insertion or deletion of pointers. They can:

    • add to the wavefront by shading an object grey, if it was white; Shading an already
      grey or black object has no effect.

    • advance the wavefront by scanning an object to make it black; or

    • retreat the wavefront by reverting an object from black back to grey.

The only other actions — reverting an object to white or shading an object black without
scanning — would break the invariants. Algorithms 15.1 to 15.2 enumerate the range of
classical barrier techniques for concurrent collection. Following Hellyer et al. [2010], we
have marked barriers as atomic, but this can be relaxed with care. For each processor
type (memory model) the implementer will need to determine where to use individual
atomic operations or to place fences to prevent incorrect orderings of memory accesses.

Grey mutator techniques
We first consider approaches that operate with a grey mutator. All these techniques pre-
serve the strong invariant by using an insertion barrier3 when writing references into the
heap to protect from storing white pointers into black objects. Because the mutator is grey,
they do not need a read barrier. They are incremental update techniques.
  3 We believe that insertion barrier is a clearer term for the mechanism than incremental update barrier. Likewise,

we prefer the term deletion barrier to snapshot barrier.

Algorithm 15.1: Grey mutator barriers                    Algorithm 15.2: Black mutator barriers

        (a) Steele [1975, 1976] barrier                            (a) Baker [1978] barrier

 1    atomic Write(src, i, ref):                     1    atomic Read(src, i):
 2       src[i] ← ref                                2       ref ← src[i]
 3       if isBlack(src)                             3       if isGrey(src)
 4          if isWhite(ref)                          4          ref ← shade(ref)
 5              revert(src)                          5       return ref

        (b) Boehm et al. [1991] barrier                         (b) Appel et al. [1988] barrier

 1    atomic Write(src, i, ref):                     1    atomic Read(src, i):
 2       src[i] ← ref                                2       if isGrey(src)
 3       if isBlack(src)                             3          scan(src)
 4          revert(src)                              4       return src[i]

     (c) Dijkstra et al. [1976, 1978] barrier            (c) Abraham and Patel [1987] / Yuasa barrier

 1    atomic Write(src, i, ref):                     1    atomic Write(src, i, ref):
 2       src[i] ← ref                                2       if isGrey(src) || isWhite(src)
 3       if isBlack(src)                             3          shade(src[i])
 4          shade(ref)                               4       src[i] ← ref

                          Hellyer et al. [2010], doi: 10.1145/1806651.1806666
                 © 2010 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

Algorithm 15.3: Pirinen [1998] black mutator hybrid barrier

                                1   atomic Read(src, i):
                                2      ref ← src[i]
                                3      if isWhite(src)
                                4         shade(ref)
                                5      return ref
                                6

                                7   atomic Write(src, i, ref):
                                8      if isGrey(src)
                                9         shade(src[i])
                               10      src[i] ← ref

   • Steele [1975, 1976] devised the barrier illustrated in Algorithm 15.1a. It yields the
     most precision of all the techniques because it simply notes the source object being
     modified. It does not change any decision about reachability of any object, but re-
     treats the wavefront by changing the modified source object from black back to grey.
     It defers deciding reachability of the target white object until the source object can be
     rescanned (the inserted pointer might be deleted before rescanning). This precision
     comes at the cost of progress, since the wavefront is retreated.
   • Boehm et al. [1991] implemented a variant of the Steele barrier which ignores the
     colour of the inserted pointer, as shown in Algorithm 15.1b. They originally im-
     plemented this barrier using virtual memory dirty bits to record pages modified by
     the mutator without having to mediate the heap writes in software, which meant a
     less precise barrier that did not originally have the conditional test that the reverted
     source object is actually black. Boehm et al. use a stop-the-world phase to terminate
     collection at which time the dirty pages are rescanned.
   • Dijkstra et al. [1976, 1978] designed a barrier (Algorithm 15.1c) that yields less pre-
     cision than Steele’s since it commits to shading the target of the inserted pointer as
     reachable (non-white), even if the inserted pointer is subsequently deleted. This loss
     of precision aids progress by advancing the wavefront. The original formulation of
     this barrier shaded the target without regard for the colour of the source, with a fur-
     ther loss of precision. Omitting this extra check allows atomicity to be relaxed, so
     long as the store and the shade operations are separately atomic. The store must still
     be performed ahead of the shade operation so as to avoid a subtle race when the col-
     lector transitions from one collector cycle to the next in the middle. If the operations
     are inverted, then a collector cycle transition right after shading the stored ref grey
     can revert it to white and scan the src to black before the store, which then creates a
     black to white pointer violating the strong invariant [Stenning, 1976].

Black mutator techniques
The first two black mutator approaches apply incremental updates to maintain the strong
invariant using a read barrier to prevent the mutator from acquiring white pointers (that
is, to protect from inserting a white pointer in a black mutator). The third, a snapshot tech-
nique, uses a deletion barrier on pointer writes into the heap to preserve the weak invariant
(that is, to protect from deleting the last pointer keeping an object live that was reachable at
the time of the snapshot). Under the weak invariant, a black mutator can still hold white
references; it is black because its roots do not need to be rescanned, even if it has since
loaded pointers to white objects, because those white objects are protected from deletion
by the write barrier.
   • Baker [1978] used the read (mutator insertion) barrier shown in Algorithm 15.2a.
     This approach has less precision than that of Dijkstra et al., since it retains otherwise
     white objects whose references are loaded by the mutator at some time during the
     collection cycle, as opposed to those actually inserted behind the wavefront. Note
     that Baker’s read barrier was designed originally for a copying collector, where the
     act of shading copies the object from fromspace to tospace, so the shade routine
     returns the tospace pointer.
   • Appel et al. [1988] implemented a coarse-grained (less precise) variant of Baker’s read
     barrier (Algorithm 15.2b), using virtual memory page protection primitives of the
     operating system to trap accesses by the mutator to grey pages of the heap without

     having to mediate those reads in software. Having scanned (and unprotected) the
     page, the trapped access is allowed to proceed. This barrier can also be used with
     a copying collector since scanning will forward any fromspace pointers held in the
     source object, including that in the field being loaded.
   • Abraham and Patel [1987] and Yuasa [1990] independently devised the deletion bar-
     rier of Algorithm 15.2c. At D2 it directly shades Z grey. At T2 it shades R grey so
     that S can eventually be shaded. This barrier offers the least precision of all the tech-
     niques, since it retains any unreachable object to which the last pointer was deleted
     during the collection cycle. With an insertion barrier at least we know that the mu-
     tator has had some interest in objects retained by the barrier (whether to acquire or
     store its reference), whereas the deletion barrier retains objects regardless of whether
     the mutator manipulated them. This is evident in that shading R retains it as floating
     garbage — it is not otherwise reachable — solely to preserve S. In its original form,
     this snapshot barrier was unconditional: it simply shaded the target of the overwrit-
     ten pointer, regardless of the colour of the source. Abraham and Patel exploited this
     to drive their snapshot barrier using virtual memory copy-on-write mechanisms.

Completeness of barrier techniques
Pirinen [1998] argues that these barrier techniques cover the complete range of all possible
approaches, if augmented with the read and write barrier combination illustrated in Al-
gorithm 15.3. This combines an insertion read barrier on a black mutator with a deletion
barrier on the heap. The combination preserves a weak invariant: all black-to-white point-
ers have a copy in some grey object (this is slightly stronger than the basic weak invariant
that requires only a chain of white references from grey to white). The black mutator can
safely acquire a white pointer from some grey source object since the target object will
eventually be shaded grey when the grey source is scanned, or the write barrier will shade
the target grey if the source field is modified. The read barrier makes sure that the mutator
never acquires a white pointer from a white object. Thus, every reachable white object has
a grey object directly keeping it alive throughout the collection cycle.
    Variations on the techniques listed above can be obtained in various ways by short-
circuiting, coarsening or refining some steps, including the following.
   • Shading an object grey can be short-circuited by immediately scanning the object to
     make it black.
   • A deletion barrier that shades the target of the deleted pointer grey can instead (and
     more coarsely) scan the source object that contained the pointer to black before the
     store.
   • A read barrier that shades the target of the loaded pointer grey can instead (and
     more coarsely) scan the source object to black so that it contains no pointers to white
     objects, ensuring that the loaded pointer cannot be white. Thus, the read barrier of
     Appel et al. coarsens that of Baker. Conversely, the Baker read barrier can be refined
     to consider only properties of the loaded target reference (ignoring the colour of the
     source). For example, if the target is white, then the barrier can shade it to grey to
     prevent the black mutator from acquiring a pointer to a white object. We discuss
     variants of this refinement in more detail on the facing page.
   • An insertion barrier that shades the target of the inserted pointer grey can instead
     revert the source to grey. This is how the barriers of Steele and Boehm et al. gain
     precision over that of Dijkstra et al.

Algorithm 15.4: Baker [1978]-style load barrier. This barrier becomes self-healing with the
addition of line 5.

 1   atomic Read(src, i):
 2      ref ← src[i]
 3      if isWhite(ref)
 4         ref ← shade(ref)
 5         src[i] ← ref                                                                /* optional self−healing */
 6      return ref

    Clearly, all strong invariant (incremental update) techniques must at least protect a grey
mutator from inserting white pointers into black, or protect a black mutator from acquiring
or using white pointers. The strong techniques all do one of these two things and need not
do any more.
    We have already argued that weak invariant (snapshot) techniques must operate with
a black mutator. Under the weak invariant, a grey object does not merely capture a single
path to reachable white objects. It may also be a placeholder for a pointer from a black
object to some white object on that path. Thus, the snapshot barrier must preserve any
white object directly pointed to from a grey one. The least it can do is to shade the white
object when its pointer is deleted from a grey one.
    To deal with white objects transitively reachable via a white path from a grey object
(which may also be pointed to from a black one) we can either prevent the mutator from
obtaining pointers to white objects on such paths so it can never modify the path [Pirinen,
1998], or make sure that deleting a pointer from a white object (which may be on such a
path) makes the target of the pointer at least grey [Abraham and Patel, 1987; Yuasa, 1990].

Load barriers
We use the term load barrier4 for a read barrier that only focuses on properties of the target
being loaded, ignoring properties of the source object. A load barrier aims to maintain
an invariant on the pointers held by a mutator as it loads them, as opposed to when the
pointers are used.
    For example, Baker’s read barrier ensures that a black mutator never holds a pointer to
a white object. Rather than testing if the source object is grey (and making sure to shade
the loaded target in case it is white), a load barrier version of the Baker read barrier can
instead test if the target of the loaded reference is white before shading it, as shown in
Algorithm 15.4.
    Load barriers can also be self-healing. For example, Baker’s read barrier used with a
copying collector might not only copy a white target object from fromspace to tospace,
but it might also update the source slot with the tospace pointer by adding line 5 to Algo-
rithm 15.4. Self-healing avoids repeatedly triggering the load barrier’s work on the same
loaded reference.
    In the presence of pointer tags, we obtain additional variations. Rather than consid-
ering the colour of the source object whose field is being read, or the colour of the target
referent of a field, pointer tags allow focus on a property of the pointer being loaded, which
may be connected with, but not the same as, the colour of its referent. Furthermore, since
the focus is on the pointer, not the source object, the barrier may take action before the
   4 The Pauseless/C4 collectors [Click et al., 2005; Tene et al., 2011] use the term loaded value barrier; Shenandoah

calls these loaded reference barriers [Kennke, 2019].

reference is used. This is of particular advantage on speculative hardware, since proper-
ties of the loaded pointer are not dependent on properties of its target referent object. For
example, the tag might reveal that its pointer refers to a fromspace white object instead of
a tospace (grey or black) copy. The barrier can check for that and forward the reference ac-
cordingly, preserving a tospace invariant for the black mutator. The Pauseless/C4 collector
uses such a barrier (see Section 17.5 [Click et al., 2005; Tene et al., 2011]).
   In summary, all of the barrier techniques enumerated here cover the minimal require-
ments to maintain their invariants, but variations on these techniques can be obtained by
short-circuiting, refining or coarsening.

Concurrent write barrier mechanisms

In order to preserve either the strong or the weak invariant, write barriers must detect all
writes to object fields of interesting pointers and record either their source, their target or
the target originally stored in the field. References to these grey objects must be recorded in
some data structure. However, concurrently with mutators adding references to the struc-
ture, the collector will remove and trace them. It is essential that insertions and removals
be efficient and correct in the face of mutator-mutator and mutator-collector races.
    One way to record grey objects is to add them to a log. We considered a variety of
concurrent data structures and efficient ways to manage them in Chapter 13. In this sec-
tion, we consider a popular and alternative mechanism: card tables. The basic operation
of card tables for stop-the-world collectors was described in Chapter 11. Here we extend
that discussion to examine how mutator-collector concurrency complicates their operation
and how this can be resolved.
   Recall that remembered sets can be implemented by associating a byte in a card table
with each small (say, 512 bytes) contiguous area of the heap. Card tables can be used by
both generational and concurrent collectors. A write barrier records the location of a grey
object by dirtying the byte in the card table that corresponds to the card containing the
object. Concurrently, the collector scans the card table for dirty cards. The collector must
then search any dirty cards, trace grey objects and clean the cards. Clearly, this presents a
race between mutators and collector that raises questions of correctness.
    What constitutes a grey entity depends on the style of collector and its write barrier.
In a generational collector, object fields are grey if the object is in an older generation and
the field holds a reference to an object in a younger generation. In a concurrent collector
that uses a Steele-style retreating barrier, an object is grey if it has already been marked
(that is, was once black) but now holds a reference to an unmarked child. With a Dijkstra-
style advancing barrier or a Yuasa-style deletion barrier, all objects in a dirty card must
be considered grey. While this barrier may seem very imprecise since it will preserve
garbage neighbours of live objects, note that Abuaiadh et al. [2004] found that compacting
small blocks rather than individual objects led to an increase in memory footprint of only
a few percent.
    The card table is the concurrent collector’s work list. The collector must scan it looking
for dirty cards and cleaning them until all cards are clean. Since mutators may dirty cards
after the collector has cleaned them, the collector must repeatedly scan the card table. An
alternative might be to delay processing the card table until a final stop-the-world phase,
but this is likely to cause the concurrent part of the tracing phase to terminate too soon
[Barabash et al., 2003, 2005].

One-level card tables
The simplest organisation is a one-level card table, as described above. Here, a card may
be in one of three states: dirty, refining or clean. Mutator write barriers will set the
state to be dirty using a simple store instruction rather than an atomic primitive such as
compare-and-swap [Detlefs et al., 2002a]. The collector thread sets the status to refining
before searching the card for interesting pointers and determining a new status for the
card. The simplest would be dirty but Detlefs et al. can also ‘summarise’ cards (see
Chapter 11). The collector now attempts to write the new status back to the card. First,
it checks that the card’s status is still refining and that no mutator has dirtied the card
while the collector was searching it. If the status is still refining, the collector must try
to change the value atomically to the new status, for example with a compare-and-swap.
If this fails, then a mutator must have dirtied the card concurrently, meaning that it may
contain an unprocessed grey object. Detlefs et al. simply leave this card dirty and proceed
to the next dirty card, but one might also try to clean the card again.

Two-level card tables
Because the overwhelming majority of cards are likely to be clean, two-level card tables
reduce the cost of searching the card table for dirty cards. Each entry in a second, coarse-
grain card table records the state of 2n fine grained cards. Cleaning a two-level card table
proceeds similarly to cleaning a one-level table. When a dirty coarse-grain card is found,
its status is set to refining and the corresponding fine-grained cards are searched. Once
all the fine-grain cards are clean, the collector attempts atomically to set the state of the
coarse-grain card to clean. However, there is a subtle concurrency issue here. Because
write barrier actions are not atomic with respect to the card-cleaning thread, the write
barrier must dirty the fine-grained card before dirtying the corresponding coarse-grained
card, while the collector reads them in the opposite order. We note that obtaining the
proper order may have extra cost on machines that require a memory fence to force it.

Reducing work
One solution that reduces the amount of redundant work done by the collector is to try to
avoid scanning any object more than once [Barabash et al., 2003, 2005]. Here, the authors
defer cleaning cards for as long as there is other tracing work for the collector to do. Their
mostly-concurrent collector uses a Steele-style retreating insertion barrier. Such collectors
must scan marked objects on dirty cards and trace all their unmarked children. The first
technique for reducing the amount of redundant scanning is not to trace through an object
on a dirty card: it suffices to mark the object as it will be traced through when the card is
cleaned. Although objects that are traced through before their card is dirtied will still be
scanned twice, this eliminates rescanning objects that are marked after their card is dirtied.
Barabash et al. observe that this can improve the collector’s performance and reduce the
number of cache misses it incurs. Note that although changes in the order of memory
accesses on a weakly consistent platform may cause this optimisation to be missed, the
technique is still safe.
    Their second approach is to reduce the number of dirty cards. Recall that it is necessary
for a Steele-style barrier to dirty a card only if the modified object has already been traced
by the collector. If it has not, then the collector will notice it eventually so there is no need
to dirty the card. In other words, there is no need to shade a white object grey. Card
marking is used by collectors because it is a fast, unconditional operation. The question,
therefore, is how this check can be made efficient.

   One solution is to mark the cards dirty unconditionally but maintain a second table
indicating whether a card contains an object that has been traced. Periodically, the dirty
card table can be undirtied as follows, without need for atomic operations assuming the
tables hold bytes rather than bits:
    for each dirty card C
       if not isTraced(C)                                                                        $
          setClean(C)
          if isTraced(C)
             setDirty(C)
Their second solution rests on the observation that for many programs most pointer writes
are made to young objects and that these typically reside in local allocation buffers. Instead
of keeping a second card table, a bit is used for each object to indicate whether it is part of
an active local allocation buffer. If this bit is set, the collector defers tracing the object to a
later time, instead adding the object to a deferred list. When the buffer overflows — the
allocation slow path — the mutator sets all the cards in the buffer to be clean and clears all
the defer bits for all objects in the buffer. One reason that this is effective is that Barabash
et al. found that the collector rarely reaches objects in an active local allocation buffer.
    Some care is needed with this solution on weakly consistent platforms. The simplest
approach is to have the collector execute a fence after marking a card traced and before
tracing an object, and have the undirtying procedure execute a fence between checking
whether each card is dirty and checking whether it is traced (as above). Note that in both
cases only the collector threads execute the fence. An alternative method is to have the
undirtying procedure start by scanning the card table, and cleaning and recording (in a list
or an additional card table) all cards that are dirty but have not yet been traced. Next, the
undirtying procedure handshakes with the collector, requesting the concurrent collector
to run a synchronisation barrier. When both have run the handshake, the undirtying pro-
cedure rescans all the cards whose dirty bit was cleared and marks them dirty again if the
card has been traced.

Eliminating read barriers
For systems with much concurrency, a technique of Sivaramakrishnan et al. [2012] allows
eliminating read barriers. They do this by preventing the creation of pointers that cross
generations or regions, that is, pointers that would force the referent object to be copied
and necessitate the installation of a forwarding address. Instead, the write barrier sim-
ply blocks the thread until after the next local collection has occurred. In systems without
much mutator concurrency, this would probably not work well, but they obtained favor-
able results (20% to 30% performance improvement) across multiple hardware platforms
with large numbers of processors executing large numbers of mutator threads.

15.3     Ragged phase changes
Tracing garbage collectors comprise several phases, for example with the collector idle,
marking roots, tracing the object graph, and so on. It is essential that phase changes are
coordinated between mutator and collector threads. This is straightforward for stop-the-
world or mostly-concurrent collectors as all mutator threads are halted when the collector
changes from one phase to another (Figure 15.3a). This ensures the following.
   • Once the collector has entered a new phase B, no mutator observes a collector state
     S A corresponding to the previous phase A; and

                             GC phase A                        GC phase B

                                  (a) Mostly-concurrent collection

                       GC phase A             GC phase I           GC phase B

                                  (b) On-the-fly collection, type I

                     GC phase A       GC phase I₁    GC phase I₂       GC phase B

                                  (c) On-the-fly collection, type II

Figure 15.3: Ragged phase changes

   • At any time, all mutators observe a coherent collector state, that is, all observe S A or
     all observe SB .
In contrast, on-the-fly collectors typically stop each mutator independently, for example to
scan its stack. A mutator will not recognise that a phase has been changed until it reaches
a GC safe-point. This causes two problems.
  1. The collector cannot start collection work until it has determined that all mutators
     have recognised that the phase has been changed.
  2. There is a time window in which different mutators observe different collection
     states.
     Ugawa et al. [2018] identify a general design pattern that subsumes previous approaches.
They assert that it is sufficient to capture all types of ragged phase change. Problem 1
requires an intermediate phase (Figure 15.3b) between the main phases, where the collec-
tor simply handshakes with each mutator to ensure that the mutator has recognised the
change of main phases and changed its local state. Each mutator should respond to this
handshake request at its next GC safe-point. Once the collector has completed a handshake
with every mutator, it is guaranteed that all mutators have recognised that the collector is
going to move to the new phase. They call this type of ragged phase change Type I.
     Problem 2 recognises the possibility of a mutator-mutator conflict. Any mutator that
has not recognised the new phase will be running with assumptions based on an invariant
for the previous phase. This may conflict with the invariant assumed by mutators that
have recognised the change. Two intermediate phases, I1 and I2 (Figure 15.3c), solve this
problem as follows. Before the ragged phase change, mutators respect the invariants of the
current Phase A. The purpose of Phase I1 is for mutators to change their local collection
state to an intermediate state, S I . Typically, a mutator in this intermediate state will run
with a more complex barrier that respects the invariants of both main Phases A and B, that
is, each mutator is prepared for another mutator acting according to the invariants of Phase
B, but none is doing so yet. In Phase I2 , mutators know that no other mutator is still in
Phase A but some may be in Phase B. At the end of Phase I2 , all mutators will be respecting
the invariants of Phase B. Ugawa et al. call this type of ragged phase change Type II. As
an example, consider how an on-the-fly collector might change from no collection (Phase

A) to marking (Phase B). In Phase I1 , we allow a mutator to write to black objects safely
but to allocate only white objects. At the transition from Phase I1 to I2 , the collector knows
that all mutators are ready for black objects. In Phase I2 , mutators can allocate new objects
black. At the end of this phase, the collector knows that all mutators are allocating black
and so can transition to state SB .

15.4     Issues to consider
Garbage collectors that are incremental (mutator interleaved with collector) or concurrent
(mutator and collector in parallel) have one primary purpose: minimising the collector
pauses observed by the mutator. Whether the pause is due to an increment of collec-
tion work needing to be performed by the mutator, or is caused by the mutator having
to synchronise with (and possibly wait for) the collector to finish some work, incremen-
tal/concurrent techniques usually trade increased elapsed time (mutator throughput) for
reduced disruption by the collector. In an ideal world, concurrent collectors may be able
to reduce elapsed time by running collector work completely in parallel with the muta-
tor. Unfortunately, there is no free lunch. As we have already seen, concurrent collectors
require some level of communication and synchronisation between the mutator and the
collector, in the form of mutator barriers. Moreover, contention between the mutator and
collector for processor time or for memory (including disturbance of the caches by the
collector) can also slow the mutator down.
    Conversely, incremental or concurrent collection can improve throughput for some ap-
plications. The collectors impose overhead on individual mutator actions (loads or stores)
in order to reduce the pauses observed by the application’s users. However, an applica-
tion’s user may be another program, and this client may be very sensitive to delays. Ossia
et al. [2004] offer three-tier transaction processing systems as an example. They point out
that delays for stop-the-world collections may cause transactions to time out and to be
retried. By doing a little extra work (executing write barriers), much more extra work
(reprocessing transactions that timed out) can be avoided.
    The concurrent collection techniques that we consider in subsequent chapters each
have their own particular impact on these costs. Concurrent reference counting collectors
may impose a particularly high overhead on pointer loads and stores. Concurrent mark-
sweep collectors, which do not move objects, have relatively low overhead for pointer
accesses (varying with the barrier), but they may suffer from fragmentation. Concurrent
collectors that relocate objects require additional synchronisation to protect the mutator
from, or inform the mutator about, objects that the collector moves. Copying collectors
also impose additional space overhead that adds to memory pressure. In all concurrent
collectors, whether a read barrier or write barrier is used will affect throughput differently,
based on the relative frequency of reads and writes, and the amount of work the barrier
performs.
    Concurrent mark-sweep collectors typically use a write barrier to notify the marker
of an object to mark from. Many concurrent copying and compacting collectors use a
read barrier to protect the mutator from accessing stale objects that have been copied else-
where. However, concurrent replicating collectors typically only use write barriers except
for pointer comparisons. There is a trade-off between the frequency of barrier execution
and the amount of work it must do. A barrier that triggers copying and scanning will
be more expensive than one that simply copies, which will be more expensive than one
that simply redirects the source pointer. Similarly, performing more work early may re-
sult in fewer later barriers needing to do much work. All of these factors depend on the
granularity of work performed, across a scale from references through objects to pages.

    The amount of floating garbage is another factor in the costs of concurrent collection.
Not having to collect floating garbage will allow faster termination of the current collection
cycle, at the expense of additional memory pressure.
    Whether the mutator (threads) must be stopped at the beginning of the collection cycle
(to make sure the collector has seen all the roots), at the end (to check for termination) or
between intermediate phases, also has an impact on throughput. Termination criteria also
affect the amount of floating garbage.
    A further consideration is that most concurrent collectors offer only loose assurances on
pauses and space overhead. Providing the hard bounds on space and time needed for real-
time applications means making well-defined progress guarantees for mutator operations
that interact with the heap, and space guarantees that derive solely from knowledge of the
memory allocation footprint of the application.
    Incremental or concurrent collection can be particularly desirable when the volume of
live data is expected to be very large. In this case, even stop-the-world parallel collection
using every processor available would lead to unacceptable pause times. However, one
drawback of incremental and concurrent collectors is that they cannot recycle any mem-
ory until the marking phase of a collection cycle is complete; we must provide sufficient
headroom in the heap or give the collector a sufficiently generous share of processor re-
sources (at the expense of the mutator) to ensure that the mutator does not run out of
memory before the collection cycle completes. We consider garbage collector scheduling
when we address the problem of real-time collection in Chapter 19; there, the problem is
particularly acute.
    An alternative approach is to use hybrid generational/concurrent collection. The young
generation is managed in the usual generational way, stopping the world for each minor
collection. The old generation is managed by a concurrent collector. A variation on this ap-
proach is used by the LXR collector [Zhao et al., 2022a] which combines coalesced reference
counting to reclaim many, especially short-lived, objects in both generations promptly with
background concurrent mark-sweep collection only of garbage cycles; we discuss LXR
in Section 18.1. These generational strategies have several advantages. Nursery collec-
tions are usually short enough not to be disruptive. Since most objects tend to die young
— the weak generational hypothesis — we can expect memory to be recycled promptly
for further allocation, thus reducing the space overhead required to avoid running out of
memory. There is no need to apply the concurrent write barrier to objects in the young
generation as it is collected stop-the-world: the generational write barrier in the slow path
suffices. Concurrent collectors typically allocate new objects black, guaranteeing that they
will survive a collection even though most objects will not live that long. However, by
allocating new objects generationally, this problem disappears. Finally, old objects have
much lower mutation rates than young ones [Blackburn and McKinley, 2003]. This is the
ideal scenario for an incremental or concurrent collector since their write barrier is less
frequently invoked.
    !
http://taylorandfrancis.com
