Chapter 16

Concurrent mark-sweep

In the previous chapter we looked at the need for incremental or concurrent garbage collec-
tion, and identified the problems faced by all such collectors. In this chapter, we consider
one family of these collectors: concurrent mark-sweep collectors. As we noted before, the
most important issue facing concurrent collection is correctness. The mutator and collector
must communicate with each other in order to ensure that they share a coherent view of
the heap. This is necessary on the mutator’s part to prevent live objects from being hidden
from the collector. It is necessary for collectors that move objects to ensure that the mutator
uses the correct addresses of moved objects.
    The mark-sweep family includes the simplest of the concurrent collectors. Because they
do not change pointer fields, the mutator can freely read pointers from the heap without
needing to be protected from the collector. Thus, there is no inherent need for a read barrier
for non-moving collectors. Read barriers are otherwise generally considered too expensive
for use in maintaining the strong invariant for a non-moving collector, since heap reads
by the mutator are typically much more frequent than writes. For example, Zorn [1990]
found that the static frequencies of pointer loads and stores in SPUR Lisp were 13% to 15%
and 4%, respectively. He measured the running-time overhead of inlined write barriers as
ranging from 2% to 6%, and up to 20% for read barriers. The exception to this general rule
is when compiler optimisation techniques can be brought to bear on eliminating redundant
barriers [Hosking et al., 1999; Zee and Rinard, 2002], and to folding some of the barrier
work into existing overheads for null pointer checks [Bacon et al., 2003a]. For this reason,
mark-sweep collectors usually adopt the Dijkstra et al. [1976, 1978] incremental update or
Steele [1976] insertion write barriers, or their coarser Boehm et al. [1991] variant, or the
snapshot-at-the-beginning Yuasa [1990] deletion write barrier.

16.1     Initialisation
Instead of allowing the mutator to run until memory is exhausted, concurrent collectors
run while the mutator is still allocating. However, when to trigger the beginning of a new
marking phase is a critical decision. If a collection is triggered too late, it can happen that
there will be insufficient memory to satisfy some allocation request, at which point the
mutator will stall until the collection cycle can complete. Once the collection cycle begins,
the collector’s steady-state work-rate must be sufficient to complete the cycle before the
mutator exhausts memory, while minimising its impact on mutator throughput. How and
when to trigger a garbage collection cycle, ensuring that sufficient memory is available

Algorithm 16.1: Mostly-concurrent mark-sweep allocation

 1   New():
 2      handshake1()
 3      ref ← allocate()                              /* must initialise black if mutator is black */
 4      if ref = null
 5          gcStart()
 6          while gcRunning
 7             /* wait for collection to finish */
 8          ref ← allocate()
 9          if ref = null
10             error "Out of memory"
11      return ref
12

13   handshake1():
14      if not gcRunning && behind()                                          /* GC checkpoint */
15         gcStart()
16      if markingTerminating()                                      /* only for grey mutators */
17         ackHandshake()
18         while markingTerminating()
19            /* wait for marking/sweeping to finish (with lazy or eager sweep) */

for allocation to keep the mutator satisfied even as concurrent collection proceeds, and
reaching termination of the collection cycle so that garbage can be reclaimed and recycled,
all depend on scheduling collection work alongside the mutator.
    Algorithm 16.1 illustrates the mutator allocation sequence for a concurrent mark-sweep
garbage collector that triggers the collector to start work based on a policy decision as to
whether collection is ‘behind’ and needs to begin in order to avoid running out of memory
before the collection cycle completes. Collection is synchronised with concurrent mutator
threads executing mutator barriers or allocations, as indicated by the atomic modifier.
There may also be multiple collector threads if the code is adjusted to use a suitable termi-
nation algorithm to end marking and likewise sweeping may be parallelised. The decision
as to when to start the collector is captured by the utility routine behind, which makes
sure that the mutator does not get so far ahead of the collector that the allocate routine
will not block waiting for the collector to finish.
    Algorithm 16.2 shows what happens when collection work is triggered. The gcStart
routine forces initialisation of the collector by scanning the roots to prime the work list. As-
suming that scanning the roots also means stopping and scanning all the mutator threads,
then at this point no mutator thread holds a white reference. Thus, this example operates
in mostly-concurrent mode, with a stop-the-world phase to initiate collection. The now-
grey root objects represent the initial scanning wavefront from which tracing proceeds.
Having scanned the roots, mutator threads can now continue either as black (since they
hold no white references) or grey, depending on the mutator barriers being used.
    Stopping the world may result in unacceptable pauses. With grey mutator barriers in
place, it is possible simply to enable the barriers and defer scanning all the roots until later,
concurrently with the mutator. Section 16.6 describes techniques that relax the need to stop
the mutator threads in order to sample their roots. Still, at least one root must be scanned
to prime the work list and initiate tracing.

Algorithm 16.2: Mostly-concurrent marking

 1   shared worklist ← empty
 2

 3   atomic gcStart():
 4      if not gcRunning
 5         scan(Roots)                         /* invariant: mutator holds no white references */
 6         gcRunning ← true
 7      return
 8

 9   gcThread():
10      while true                                         /* one iteration per collection cycle */
11         while not gcRunning
12            /* wait for cycle start */
13         while not isEmpty(worklist)
14            ref ← remove(worklist)
15            scan(ref)
16         rescan()                                                  /* only for grey mutators */
17         sweep()                                                       /* eager or lazy sweep */
18         gcRunning ← false
19

20   rescan():                                               /* only needed for grey mutators */
21      setMarkingTerminating(true)
22      handshake2()
23      scan(Roots)
24      while not isEmpty(worklist)
25         ref ← remove(worklist)
26         scan(ref)
27      setMarkingTerminating(false)
28

29   handshake2():                                             /* wait for all mutators to stop */
30      waitForAllMutatorsToAckHandshake()

16.2     Termination
Termination of the collector cycle for a black mutator is a relatively straightforward proce-
dure. When there are no grey objects in the work list remaining to be scanned, the collector
terminates. At this point, even with the weak tricolour invariant the mutator can contain
only black references, since there are no white objects reachable from grey objects still held
by the mutator (since there are no grey objects). Because the mutator is black, there is no
need to rescan its roots.
    Termination for a grey mutator is a little more complicated, since the mutator may
acquire white pointers after its roots were scanned to initiate the collection. Thus, the grey
mutator roots must be rescanned before the collector cycle can terminate. Provided that
rescanning the mutator roots does not expose any fresh grey objects, the collection cycle
is done. Algorithm 16.2 simply follows a single marking pass by stopping all the mutator
threads in order to rescan their stacks and mark to completion before entering the sweep
phase. An alternative would be to repeat the process of stopping mutators, scanning their
stacks, and marking while the mutators are restarted a number of times, before a final stop-

the-world rescan and mark to completion. This approach is likely to lead to a shorter pause
to complete marking. Note that there is also a choice in handshake1 (Algorithm 16.1) of
whether to halt mutators just until marking is complete (and then lazily sweep the heap)
or to halt them until after the (eager) sweep is also complete.
    Pizlo [2017] describes a technique for ensuring that rescanning eventually terminates.
In this scheme, time is broken down into quanta of, say, two milliseconds. The collector (if
running) always gets at least 30% of a quantum. The remaining 70% is split according to
what fraction of the reserve space is left, the reserve being the amount of space into which
the mutator may allocate while the collector is running. If fraction H of the reserve is left,
the mutator gets that fraction of the 70% of the quantum. Note that in the extreme (when
the reserve is exhausted) the collector will run to completion without interruption. This
resource allocation approach helps prevent the collector from getting too far behind and,
assuming that mutators continue to allocate, guarantees eventual completion.

16.3     Allocation
Notice that the allocator must initialise the mark state (colour) of the new object according
to the colour of the mutator. If the mutator is black, then new objects must be allocated
black (marked) under the strong invariant, unless (under the weak invariant) the new ob-
ject is also made reachable from some grey object. This last guarantee is generally difficult
to make, so black mutators usually allocate black even under the weak invariant [Abraham
and Patel, 1987; Yuasa, 1990]. However, a grey mutator admits a number of alternatives
that several implementations exploit.
    Kung and Song [1977] simply allocate black during the marking phase and white oth-
erwise. Their choice is guided by the observation that new objects are usually immediately
linked to existing reachable objects, at which point their write barrier (unconditional Dijk-
stra-style incremental update) would simply shade the object anyway. Moreover, because
the new object contains no references, it is safe to allocate straight to black and avoid un-
necessary work scanning it for non-existent children.
    Steele [1976] chooses to vary the colour of allocation during marking, depending on the
pointer values that are used to initialise the new object. Assuming that the initial values
of a new object’s reference fields are known at the time of allocation permits a bulk test
of the colour of the targets of those references. If none of them are white, then the new
object can safely be allocated black. Furthermore, if none of them are white, then it is
a possible sign that the marker is close to terminating and that the new object will not
be discarded. Conversely, if any of the initialising pointers is white, then the new object
is allocated white. The Steele collector marks mutator stacks last, and scans them from
bottom (least volatile) to top (most volatile), so most cells will be allocated white to reduce
floating garbage.
    During sweeping, Steele allocates white or black according to where the sweeper is in
its pass through the heap. Allocation is white if the free cell being allocated is from space
that has already been swept, and black otherwise (to prevent the sweeper from misinter-
preting the newly allocated object as free).
    One problem with allocating new objects white instead of black is that the new object
may over time accumulate a long chain of white objects which, if it remains reachable, must
eventually be traversed before the collection cycle can terminate (consider what happens
when a grey mutator allocates a large new data structure white). Allocating black avoids
dragging out termination in this way, but at the cost of wasted space since it defers freeing
any newly allocated but now unreachable data until the next cycle [Boehm et al., 1991;
Printezis and Detlefs, 2000]. Vechev et al. [2006] propose a compromise solution in which

they colour newly allocated objects with a fourth colour: yellow objects are treated as if
they are white for purposes of retention (they may yet die before the cycle completes), but
black with respect to the tricolour invariant. That is, a yellow object will be shaded straight
to black (reachable) without being scanned. Thus, terminating tracing with a grey mutator
that holds yellow references means not needing to trace beyond the yellow object.

16.4     Concurrent marking and sweeping
So far we have considered running marking concurrently only with the mutator, with
marking and sweeping proceeding in series. Lazy sweeping means that allocation requests
by the mutator may also trigger concurrent sweeping from the previous marking phase,
even as a new collection cycle is running the next marking phase. This can potentially lead
to a confusion about the colours of objects. The trick is to distinguish true garbage white
objects from the previous marking phase (needing to be swept) from (as-yet unmarked)
white objects in the next marking phase (which may yet be marked). Lamport [1976]
pipelines the execution of marking and sweeping phases by introducing a new colour,
purple, to distinguish the former from the latter. At the completion of the marking phase,
all (garbage) white objects are recoloured purple. Sweeping will collect purple objects,
adding them to the free-list (recoloured black or white, depending on allocation colour).
Lamport envisions several concurrent marking and sweeping threads, with a collection
cycle proceeding as follows.

  1. Wait until all markers and sweepers have finished.

  2. Change all white nodes to purple and all black nodes to white (preferably white to
     avoid floating garbage) or grey (in the case the node has been shaded concurrently
     by the mutator write barrier).

  3. Shade all roots.

  4. Start the markers and sweepers.

Marking ignores all purple objects: the mutator can never acquire a reference to a pur-
ple object, so grey objects never point to purple and purple objects are never shaded. Of
course, the difficulty with this approach is that the conversion of white to purple might
require touching colour state associated with all of the garbage objects, which must be
completed before sweeping can begin. Similarly, when starting the marking phase, all
black objects (from the previous cycle) must be recoloured white.
    Lamport describes an elegant solution to this problem in which the colours are reinter-
preted at Step 2 by rotating through a range of colour values. Each object is tagged with
a two-bit basic hue (white, black, purple) plus a one-bit shaded flag. If the hue is white,
then setting the shaded flag shades the object grey (that is, a shaded white hue is grey). If
the hue is black, then setting the shaded flag has no effect (that is, black hue means black
whether the shaded flag is set or not). If the hue is purple, then the shaded flag will never
be set since garbage objects will not be traced. The sense of the hue bits is determined by a
global variable base encoding the value of white (=base), black (=base+1) and purple
(=base+2). At Step 2 there are no grey or purple nodes because marking and sweeping
have finished, so flipping from black to white and white to purple is achieved simply by
incrementing base modulo 3. Table 16.1 shows the three possible values of base encoded
in binary (00, 01, 10) and the two possible values of the shaded flag (0, 1), which together
make up the possible colours, along with examples for the three possible values of base.
The entries in the ’value’ columns are determined using arithmetic modulo 3. Note that

   tag                  GC 1: base=00          GC 2: base=01          GC 3: base=10
   hue     shaded      value     colour       value     colour       value     colour
    00        0      base         white      base+2      purple     base+1      black
    00        1      base          grey      base+2    impossible   base+1      black
    01        0      base+1        black     base        white      base+2     purple
    01        1      base+1        black     base         grey      base+2   impossible
    10        0      base+2       purple     base+1       black     base       white
    10        1      base+2     impossible   base+1       black     base        grey

Table 16.1: Lamport [1976] mark colours: ‘hue and shaded’ encoding of
         colours for concurrent marking and sweeping. The colour encoding is:
         white as hue=base/shaded=0, grey as hue=base/shaded=1, black as
         hue=base+1 and purple as hue=base+2. Note that a garbage (purple)
         object can never be shaded. When all markers and sweepers have finished,
         there are no grey or purple nodes, so flipping from black to white/grey and
         white to purple is achieved simply by incrementing base modulo 3.

the combination hue=base+2/shaded=1 is impossible because purple (garbage) objects
are never shaded grey. Subsequent increments cycle the hue interpretation accordingly.
    To make sure that Step 2 does not leave a node grey from one cycle to the next unless
it was recently shaded by a mutator, whenever a marker thread makes a grey node black
it must also clear the shaded flag. Otherwise, the grey node will be retained as floating
garbage. Also, to speed up the identification of garbage, markers and sweepers can take
the opportunity to clear the shaded flag whenever they encounter a black object.
    Queinnec et al. [1989] propose an alternative solution to this problem, using separate
colour information for odd and even collection cycles. Thus, marking in one cycle can
proceed independently of sweeping from the previous cycle because they operate on in-
dependent colour state.

16.5       Garbage-First: collecting young and old regions
Most of the concurrency issues faced in the marking phase of a mostly-concurrent collector
are addressed by the use of write barriers, which we considered at length in the previous
chapter. As an example, we now discuss the OpenJDK Garbage-First (G1) collector which
employs collector threads, running concurrently with mutator threads, to mark live ob-
jects, although it stops the world to copy survivors from condemned regions.
    In Section 10.4 we focused on G1’s organisation of the heap and on ‘young only’ collec-
tion of young generation regions. To recap, G1 organises the heap into equal-sized regions.
To enable these to be collected independently, G1 requires for each collected region a re-
membered set that records where other regions might contain a reference to this region;
G1 implements remembered sets as sets of cards. Management of these remembered sets
is crucial to G1’s performance and space utilisation.
    As configured in OpenJDK, G1 is a generational collector. Most collections are ‘young
only’, stopping the world to evacuate young generation regions and reclaim in-place any
dead humongous objects. In this section, we consider how a ‘mixed collection’ of young
and old regions operates, describing its phases in some detail. Here, G1 marks the whole
heap concurrently but still evacuates any regions selected with mutators paused. Thus, it
is a ‘mostly mark-sweep collector.’ G1 has evolved considerably from the implementation
described by Detlefs [2004a]; here we discuss the techniques used in OpenJDK 20. One of
the most significant changes lies in the handling of remembered sets, which can grow very

large unless stale and duplicate entries are removed, which was time-consuming and did
not eliminate all remembered set fragmentation. G1 therefore no longer builds remem-
bered sets on the fly for all old regions but on demand only for those being evacuated;
remembered sets for young regions are always maintained.
    G1 starts in ‘young only’ mode, evacuating in stop-the-world pauses only live objects
in young generation regions (see Section 10.4). Eventually, it will become necessary to re-
claim space in old generation regions as well. This necessitates a ‘mixed collection’ that
starts by initiating concurrent marking adaptively, based on the size of the old genera-
tion, promotion rate, prediction of the length of time to mark and other metrics. ‘Mixed
collections’ comprise a number of stop-the-world and concurrent phases.

Start: This stop-the-world phase is piggy-backed on a ‘young only’ collection that seeds
      the roots for concurrent marking. To avoid explicitly marking recently allocated ob-
      jects, G1 sets a Top At Mark Start (TAMS) variable for each region; any objects allocated
      at addresses above the TAMS for a region will be considered implicitly live/marked.
      This simplifies allocation, as there is no need to mark the bitmap1 for new objects.
      This phase also records those memory ranges to which the young collection copied
      objects (in the survivor space or old generation). These ranges will be searched sub-
      sequently for roots into the condemned set; simply recording these ranges avoids
      expensive iteration and marking during this pause.

Concurrent Clear Claimed Marks: Initialise collection of classes and class loaders.

Concurrent Scan Root Regions: The ‘young only’ collection did not follow references to
    old generation objects. In this phase, multiple threads scan the previously recorded
    ranges of addresses occupied by survivors of the ‘young only’ collection for refer-
    ences to the old generation, and mark the referenced objects. This phase runs concur-
    rently with the mutators and must complete before the next stop-the-world ‘young
    only’ collection can start.

Concurrent Mark From Roots: Now that all roots have been marked, live objects below
    each region’s TAMS are traced and marked concurrently by parallel threads, using a
    snapshot-at-the-beginning algorithm, with mutators using a deletion barrier (as in
    Algorithm 15.2c). G1 marking threads use the approach described by Printezis and
    Detlefs [2000]. Each thread first claims a region to mark by atomically advancing a
    global ‘finger’ to the right. To scan a region, the thread advances a local finger through
    the region’s bitmap. When it encounters a mark, the thread tries to mark atomically
    the corresponding object’s unmarked children. If an unmarked child is to the left of
    the global finger, the thread pushes it onto its local mark stack. Otherwise, it takes
    no further action as the object will be encountered later by some marking thread.
      The threads use work stealing to balance loads, where necessary pushing or stealing
      work between their local mark stacks and a global mark stack or other threads’ local
      mark stacks. Several stop-the-world ‘young only’ collections may take place while
      concurrent marking is in progress. Marking threads synchronise with pending GC
      safe-points by regularly polling, based on a dynamic number of objects and words
      scanned metric.

Concurrent Pre-clean: Optionally, process weak reference objects discovered by concur-
    rent marking. Any such object that holds null or a reference to a live object needs no
    further processing and is dropped from the list of discovered references.
  1 Recall that in JDK 20 G1 uses only a single bitmap for marking (it originally used two [Detlefs, 2004a]).

Remark: In this stop-the-world phase, G1 completes marking. Should this cause the
    global mark stack to overflow, G1 will start another Concurrent Mark round. Other-
    wise, it processes weak references according to the Java specification (see the discus-
    sion of weak references in Section 12.2) and unloads unused classes. It then reclaims
    any completely empty regions and identifies candidate regions for evacuation ac-
    cording to the volume of live data in each region, ignoring any whose occupancy
    exceeds a threshold (default, 85%) and therefore whose reclamation would yield lit-
    tle free space. In the next phase, G1 will need to scan live objects for inter-region
    references. To assist this, the Remark phase sets a Top At Rebuild Start (TARS) vari-
    able for each old generation region. It will be sufficient to scan live objects in a region
    only up to its TARS, since any objects above this threshold whose reference fields are
    updated will be handled by the write barrier. The barrier will also handle all objects
    mutated after they have been scanned.
Concurrent Rebuild Remembered Sets: In this phase, mutators are restarted. G1 now
    starts to gather information needed for reclaiming space in the old generation, re-
    building the remembered sets for those old regions selected for evacuation. In ver-
    sions prior to JDK 20, G1 obtained liveness information from its ‘current’ and ‘previ-
    ous’ bitmaps (and ‘current’ and ‘previous’ TAMSes), which it used alternately. JDK 20
    drops the second bitmap and TAMSes in favour of reformatting the heap in order to
    facilitate later parsing and scanning it. Here, G1 replaces sequences of dead objects
    and gaps with filler objects (using liveness information from the mark bitmap) in
    order to improve heap parsability. It then scans live objects for inter-region refer-
    ences, adding any cross-region references to the appropriate remembered set. The
    pre-JDK 20 method had the disadvantages not only of the space needed for the sec-
    ond bitmap but also that iterating over the live objects (below the TAMS) required
    the use of the bitmap rather than simply walking over holes now occupied by single
    dead objects. All these actions — reformatting the heap, scanning and rebuilding
    remembered sets — are ‘embarrassingly’ parallel. Again, there is regular synchroni-
    sation at safe-points where ‘young only’ collections may occur.
Cleanup: In this stop-the-world phase, G1 calculates the efficiency of evacuating each re-
     gion in the condemned set, based on each region’s occupancy and connectedness. It
     drops any regions from the condemned set, along with their remembered sets, whose
     efficiency would be too low. At this point, G1 is ready to start the Space Reclamation
     phase but first runs a further stop-the-world Prepare Mixed ‘young only’ collection.
     This is needed because the Cleanup pause interrupted a mutator execution that had
     been sized to maintain minimum mutator utilisation requirements using predictions
     for a non-mixed collection pause; changing the type of garbage collection invalidates
     these predictions.
Concurrent Cleanup for Next Mark: Clears the bitmap, ready for the next marking cycle.
Space Reclamation: Over the next few stop-the-world pauses for ‘young only’ collections,
     parallel threads also scan the card table looking for live objects in old generation
     regions to evacuate. The only difference here between ‘young only’ and ‘mixed’
     collections is the contents of the condemned set. In each pause, G1 continues to
     evacuate regions in the condemned set until it estimates that it would exceed its
     pause time goal.

   In summary, G1 is intended to support applications running on multiprocessor ma-
chines using heap sizes of tens of gigabytes or larger, with over half the heap occupied
by live data. It is capable of defragmenting the heap while at the same time balancing

throughput and latency. Management of remembered sets has proved critical to its per-
formance. Earlier implementations could lead to remembered sets as large as 20%2 of the
heap in some circumstances. Building remembered sets on demand and only for those
old regions selected for evacuation and removing the second bitmap can reduce the space
needed to around 3% of the heap size in typical cases. Nevertheless, G1 may require care-
ful tuning to meet throughput and latency goals for some applications.

16.6      On-the-fly marking
So far, we have assumed that the mutator threads are all stopped at once so that their roots
can be scanned, whether to initiate or terminate marking. Thus, after the initial root scan,
the mutator holds no white references. At this point, the mutator threads can be left to
run as black (so long as a black mutator barrier is employed), or grey (with a grey mutator
barrier) with the proviso that to terminate marking the collector must eventually stop and
rescan grey mutators until no more work can be found. These stop-the-world actions re-
duce concurrency. An alternative is to sample the roots of each mutator thread separately,
and concurrently with other mutator threads. This approach introduces complexity be-
cause of the need to cope with some threads operating grey and some operating black, all
at the same time, and how it affects termination.
    On-the-fly collection never stops the mutator threads all at once. Rather, the collector
engages each of the mutators in a series of soft handshakes: these do not require a single
global hard synchronisation at the command of the collector. Instead, the collector merely
prompts each mutator thread asynchronously, one-by-one, to halt gracefully at some con-
venient point. The collector can then sample (and perhaps modify) each thread’s state
(stacks and registers) before releasing it on its way. While one mutator thread is stopped,
others can continue to run. Furthermore, if stack barriers are used, as described in Sec-
tion 11.5, the collector can restrict its examination of the stopped thread to just the top
active stack frame (all other frames can be captured synchronously with a stack barrier) so
the handshake can be very quick, minimising mutator interruption.

Write barriers for on-the-fly collection
Synchronisation operations for on-the-fly collectors need some care. A common approach
for mostly-concurrent collectors, which stop all threads together to scan their stacks, is
to use a deletion barrier with a black mutator. Furthermore, new objects are allocated
black. This approach simplifies the termination of marking: black stacks do not need to be
rescanned and allocation does not lead to more work for the collector. However, this ap-
proach is not sufficient for an on-the-fly collector, as Figure 16.1 illustrates. Because stacks
are scanned on the fly, some may be white. The heap is allowed to contain black objects
before all threads have been scanned and before tracing has started because we allocate
new objects black. The deletion barrier is not triggered on stack operations and there is
no insertion barrier, so neither X nor Y is shaded grey. Typically, on-the-fly algorithms
employ an incremental update insertion barrier to avoid propagating pointers unnoticed
before the deletion barrier can be enabled. In summary, correct mutator-collector synchro-
nisation for on-the-fly marking is a subtle issue that requires substantial care on the part
of the algorithm designer.

  2 Thomas Schatzl, Free and Open Source Software Developers’ European Meeting (FOSDEM), 2018, https:

//archive.fosdem.org/2018/schedule/event/g1/.

     Thread 1                          Thread 2   Thread 1                          Thread 2
       stack                             stack      stack                             stack
                      X                                            X

                      Y                                            Y

     (a) The deletion barrier is ‘on’. Thread 1   (b) X is updated to point to Y; thread 2’s
     has been scanned, but thread 2 has not. X    reference to Y is removed. Neither action
     has been newly allocated black.              triggers a deletion barrier.

Figure 16.1: On-the-fly collectors that allocate black need more than a dele-
       tion barrier to prevent the scenario of a white object reachable only from a
       black object.

Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier
Using soft handshakes to initiate marking was first used in a mark-sweep garbage collec-
tor tailored for the ML programming language. Dubbed Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier, after the
names of its authors [Doligez and Leroy, 1993; Doligez and Gonthier, 1994], this collector
uses private thread-local heaps to allow separate garbage collection of data allocated solely
on behalf of a single thread, and not shared with other threads. A global heap allows shar-
ing of objects among threads, with the proviso that the global shared objects never contain
pointers into private heaps. A dynamic escape detection mechanism copies private objects
into the shared heap whenever a reference to them is stored outside the private heap. Only
immutable objects (the vast majority in ML) can be allocated privately, so making a copy of
one in the shared heap does not require updating all the sources of its pointers (though it
does require copying its transitive closure of reachable immutable objects). But mutation is
rare in ML, so this happens infrequently. These rules permit a private heap to be collected
independently, stopping only the mutator that owns that heap.
    Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier uses concurrent mark-sweep collection in the shared heap, to
avoid having to update references from each of the threads. The steady-state concurrent
mark-sweep collector operates in the usual black mutator snapshot mode, employing a
Yuasa-style snapshot deletion barrier. Initiating steady-state collection proceeds using a
series of soft handshakes to transition mutator threads from grey to black, as follows. In
terms of Ugawa et al. [2018] (Section 15.3), this is a Type II transition.
    The collector and mutator threads each track their own view of the state of the col-
lection with a private status variable. To initiate the collection cycle, the collector sets its
status to Sync1 . The mutator threads are then made to acknowledge, and update their
own status, via soft handshakes. Once all have acknowledged the Sync1 handshake, the
collector is said to be in Phase Sync1 . Mutator threads ignore handshakes while storing to
a pointer field or allocating, to ensure that these operations first complete, making them
atomic with respect to phase changes. Having acknowledged this handshake, each muta-
tor thread now runs with the write barrier in Algorithm 16.3a, which shades both the old
and new values of modified pointer fields, combining both the black mutator Yuasa-style
snapshot deletion barrier and the grey mutator Dijkstra-style incremental update inser-
tion barrier. Shading by the mutator does not place the shaded object directly into the
collector’s work list for scanning (like Kung and Song [1977]), but simply colours a white
object explicitly grey and resets a global dirty variable to force the collector to scan for the

Algorithm 16.3: Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier write barriers. Both ignore the handshake.

              (a) The Sync barrier                            (b) The Async barrier

      1   WriteSync (src, i, new):                    1   WriteAsync (src, i, new):
      2      old ← src[i]                             2      old ← src[i]
      3      shade(old)                               3      if not isBlack(old)
      4      shade(new)                               4         shade(old)
      5      src[i] ← new                             5         if old ≤ scanned
                                                      6               dirty ← true
                                                      7      src[i] ← new

newly grey object (in the style of Dijkstra et al. [1978]). This avoids the need to synchronise
explicitly between the mutator and the collector (other than for soft handshakes, where
atomicity is accomplished simply by delaying acknowledging the handshake), but does
mean that worst-case termination requires rescanning the heap for grey objects. Because
mutation is rare in ML, this is not a significant impediment. At this point, the grey mutator
threads are still allocating white, as they were before the collection cycle was initiated.
    Once all of the mutators have acknowledged the Sync1 handshake the collector moves
to Phase Sync2 with another round of handshakes. Because the write barrier is atomic only
with respect to handshakes, it does not impose mutator-mutator synchronisation. This
leaves the possibility that a mutator from before the Sync1 handshake, which is not run-
ning the write barrier, could insert some other pointer X into the src[i] field right after
the load old←src[i]. Thus, shade(old) will not shade the pointer X that actually gets
overwritten by the store src[i]←new. The transition to Phase Sync2 avoids such problems
by ensuring that all mutator threads have completed any unmonitored atomic allocation
or write in Async before transitioning to Sync1 . At that point, all mutators will be run-
ning the write barrier (with insertion protection), so even if the mutators interleave their
write barrier operations, there will not be a problem. The collector can then safely move
into the steady-state snapshot marking phase, Async. Each mutator thread acknowledges
the Async handshake by scanning (shading from) its roots for the collector (making itself
black), starting to allocate black, and reverting to the standard snapshot barrier augmented
with resetting the global dirty flag (similarly to Dijkstra et al. [1978]) to force the collector
to rescan if the shaded object is behind the scanning wavefront, shown in Algorithm 16.3b.
Table 16.2 shows the phases as observed by collector and mutators.
    Once marking finishes, sweeping commences. Like Steele [1975], the collector’s sweep
pointer determines the mutator allocation colour to minimise floating garbage: white if
allocating from memory already swept (so already noted free in this cycle), black if not yet
swept (to avoid sweeping it to the free-list), and grey if at the point where the collector is
currently sweeping (to avoid the race with the sweeper at the boundary).

Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier for Java
Domani et al. [2000] consider Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier-style collection in the context of Java,
where they offer several improvements to cope with much higher mutation rates, and
language features such as weak references and finalisation. Because Java lacks general
support for immutable objects they do not consider independently collected thread-local
heaps, but simply a global shared heap, collected on the fly. They also support correct
execution on multiprocessors that have a more relaxed memory model than sequential
consistency, which was assumed for the original Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier implementation.

  Phase    Collector     Mutators        Meaning
  Async    Async         Async           No mutators are executing barriers
           Sync1         Async, Sync1    Some mutators may be running the Sync barrier
  Sync1    Sync2         Sync1 , Sync2   Some mutators may be black and running the
                                         Async barrier; others are running the Sync barrier
  Sync2    Sync2         Sync2           All mutators are running the Async barrier
           Async         Sync2 , Async   Some mutators are black; all are running the
                                         Async barrier
  Async    Async         Async           All mutators are black; the collector can complete
                                         marking, scanning and sweeping

Table 16.2: Phases in the Doligez and Gonthier collector

To avoid rescanning for fresh mutator-shaded grey objects (which are more common in a
mutation-oriented language like Java), Domani et al. dedicate an output-restricted double-
ended queue to each mutator thread, to which it can enqueue grey objects at one end, while
the collector is able to poll for work from the other end. This minimises synchronisation
between the mutator and collector in the write barriers.

Sliding views
Azatchi et al. [2003] offer further improvements to on-the-fly marking by exploiting the
sliding views approach to sampling mutator roots without stopping the world [Levanoni
and Petrank, 1999]. In place of the deque used by Domani et al., the sliding views approach
implements the snapshot deletion barrier by logging to a thread-local buffer the state of all
the fields of an object before it is modified (dirtied) for the first time while the collector is
marking. The buffers are drained via soft handshakes, with marking terminated once all
the buffers are empty. Like Doligez-Leroy-Gonthier, after the initial handshake, and before
the deletion barrier can be enabled for each mutator, the mutators also execute a Dijkstra-
style incremental update insertion barrier to avoid propagating pointers unnoticed before
the mutator snapshot can be gathered. These snooped stores also become mutator roots.
The snooped stores are disabled once all threads are known to be logging the snapshot.
We discuss further details of this approach in Section 18.7.

16.7      Abstract concurrent collection
Concurrent collectors have many common design features and mechanisms, while differ-
ing in small but important details. To highlight these similarities and differences, we can
adopt a common abstract framework for concurrent garbage collection [Vechev et al., 2005,
2006; Vechev, 2007]. As discussed previously, the correctness of a concurrent collector
depends on cooperation between the collector and the mutator in the presence of concur-
rency. Thus, the abstract concurrent collector logs events of mutual interest to the collector
and mutator by appending to the shared list log. These events are tagged as follows:

   • T⟨src, fld, old, new⟩ records that the collector has Traced pointer field fld of
     source object src, and that the field initially contained reference old which the col-
     lector has replaced by reference new. That is, the collector has traced an edge in the
     object graph src→old and replaced it with an edge src→new.

   • N⟨ref⟩ records that the mutator has allocated a New object ref.

   • R⟨src, fld, old⟩ records that the mutator has performed a Read from the heap
     by loading the value old from field fld of source object src.
   • W⟨src, fld, old, new⟩ records that the mutator has performed a Write to the
     heap by storing the value new into field fld of source object src which previously
     contained value old. If fld is a pointer field, then the mutator has replaced an edge
     src→old with an edge src→new.
Each of src, fld, old, new are the addresses of the source object and source field, and
old and new target object addresses, respectively. Collector event T captures the fields that
have already been scanned by the mutator. For a non-moving collector tracing does not
modify the references in the heap, so old=new for T events. Mutator event N captures
allocations by the mutator. Mutator events R and W capture the fields that the mutator
has accessed or modified.
    An abstract concurrent mark-sweep collector is illustrated by Algorithm 16.4, which
takes the abstract tracing collector of Algorithm 6.1 and augments it to handle the fact
that the collector executes concurrently with the mutator. The algorithm proceeds in the
usual way, scanning reachable objects by tracing from the roots, before sweeping to reclaim
unreachable objects. Units of scanning work performed by scanTracingInc occur atom-
ically; except to note that sweeping must also be properly synchronised, we omit details
of sweepTracing.
    Initialisation of the collector atomically samples the mutator roots using the routine
rootsTracing and clears the log. This is performed atomically (stop-the-world) to avoid
the complication of concurrent mutation of the roots by the mutator threads. On-the-fly
collectors can sample the roots without stopping the world.
    The collector then proceeds concurrently with the mutator, repeatedly both scanning
objects and adding origins to be considered by the collector due to concurrent writes per-
formed by the mutator.
    At some point, the loop terminates as a result of some non-deterministic choice (de-
noted by ⃝), ?   when the collector moves to a termination phase in which the remaining
origins and objects to be scanned are processed atomically (that is, preventing the mutator
from writing). This is performed atomically to prevent concurrent writes during termina-
tion, which may be needed to guarantee that the collector will complete its cycle. For some
practical algorithms, this atomic termination phase can be eliminated.
    The scanTracingInc procedure implements the usual collector traversal of the heap,
but incrementally, interleaved with the mutator. It differs from the original procedure
scanTracing of Algorithm 6.1 only in that it atomically records to the log each traced
field and the reference it contains.
    The addOrigins procedure reveals that the abstract concurrent collector is parametr-
ised by an as-yet-undefined function expose which takes a log prefix and returns a set of
objects that should be considered as additional origins for live references. Different imple-
mentations for this function yield different abstract concurrent collector algorithms cor-
responding to concrete algorithms in the literature, as discussed further below when we
describe how to instantiate specific collectors. It is the log that permits dealing with con-
current mutations that cause reachable objects to be hidden from the scan routine, which
otherwise would remain unmarked.

The collector wavefront
Cooperation between the collector and the mutator guarantees correctness in the presence
of concurrency. The log records the tracing progress of the collector through the heap —
the wavefront — in the form of T events. Key to cooperation is how interleaved mutator

Algorithm 16.4: Mostly-concurrent incremental tracing garbage collection

 1   shared log ← ()
 2

 3   collectTracingInc():
 4      atomic
 5         rootsTracing(W )
 6         log ← ()
 7      repeat
 8         scanTracingInc(W )
 9         addOrigins(W )
10      until ⃝?
11      atomic
12         addOrigins(W )
13         scanTracingInc(W )
14      sweepTracing()
15

16   scanTracingInc(W ):
17      while not isEmpty(W )
18         src ← remove(W )
19         if ρ(src) = 0                               /* reference count is zero */
20            for each fld in Pointers(src)
21                atomic
22                   ref ← *fld
23                   log ← log · T⟨src, fld, ref, ref⟩
24                if ref ̸= null
25                   W ← W + [ref]
26         ρ(src) ← ρ(src)+1                      /* increment reference count */
27

28   addOrigins(W ):
29      atomic
30         origins ← expose(log)
31      for each src in origins
32         W ← W + [src]
33

34   New():
35      ref ← allocate()
36      atomic
37          ρ(ref) ← 0
38          log ← log · N⟨ref⟩
39      return ref
40

41   atomic Write(src, i, new):
42      if src ̸= roots
43         old ← src[i]
44         log ← log · W⟨src, &src[i], old, new⟩
45         src[i] ← new

events (N, R, and W) are treated, depending on whether they occur to the portion of the
heap already scanned by the collector (behind the wavefront) or not yet scanned (ahead of
the wavefront). The wavefront itself comprises the set of pending fields still to be scanned
(specifically not the values of the pointers in those fields). Practical collectors may approx-
imate the wavefront more or less precisely, from field granularity up through granularity
at the level of objects to pages or other physical or logical units.

Adding origins
The addOrigins procedure uses the log to select a set of additional objects to be consid-
ered live, even if the collector has not yet encountered those objects in its trace, since it is
possible that some number of reachable pointers were hidden by the mutator behind the
wavefront. The precise choice of the set of origins is returned by the expose function.

Mutator barriers
The procedures New and Write represent the usual barriers performed by the mutator
(here they are suitably atomic), which in the abstract algorithm coordinate with the collec-
tor by appending their actions to the log. Logging New objects allows subsequent mutator
events to distinguish loading/storing fields of new objects, and loading/storing references
to new objects. A freshly allocated object always has a unique reference until that refer-
ence has been stored to more than one field in the heap. Moreover, it does not contain any
outgoing references (so long as its fields have not been modified, since they are initialised
to null). This event allows concrete collectors to vary in how they decide liveness of ob-
jects that are allocated during the collection cycle (some collectors treat all such objects as
live regardless of their reachability, leaving those that are unreachable to be reclaimed at
the next collection cycle). Others will retain only those new objects whose references are
stored to live objects.
    As usual, the mutator Write operation assigns src[i]←new (with new̸=null) so the
pointer to destination object new is inserted in field src[i] of source object src. Simi-
larly, the old pointer old previously in field src[i] of source object src is deleted. When
the source field is behind the collector wavefront, then the pointers new/old are insert-
ed/deleted behind the wavefront. Otherwise, the pointers are inserted/deleted ahead of
the wavefront. Logging Write events captures both the inserted and deleted pointers.
    Recall also that the wavefront can be expressed using the tricolour abstraction, where
those objects/fields ahead of the wavefront are white, those at the wavefront are grey, and
those behind the wavefront are black.

Precision
The abstract concurrent collector of Algorithm 16.4 preserves a fixed level of atomicity (as
specified by the atomic blocks) while instantiating the function expose in different ways
to vary precision. Varying this parameter of the abstract concurrent collector is sufficient
to capture a representative subset of concrete concurrent collectors that occur in the lit-
erature, but there are other real collectors that cannot be instantiated directly from Algo-
rithm 16.4 since they vary also in what they treat atomically. For example, Algorithm 16.4
assumes that roots can be obtained atomically from the mutator threads, which implies
that they must be sampled simultaneously perhaps by stopping them all briefly (that is,
Algorithm 16.4 is mostly-concurrent, not fully on-the-fly).

Instantiating collectors
Instantiating specific concurrent collectors within this framework requires defining a cor-
responding expose function. For example, consider a Steele-style concurrent collector that
rescans all objects modified up to and including the wavefront. The wavefront at an object
and field granularity is captured by (last) Trace operations in the log for each object/field.
The objects modified are captured by the src component of all the Write records in the
log, and the modified fields by the fld component. The Steele-style expose function atom-
ically rescans modified fields that have already been traced. The traditional implementa-
tion tracks the wavefront at the object granularity (src component of Trace records) us-
ing per-object mark bits, but the abstract framework highlights that the wavefront might
also operate at the field (fld) granularity given a mechanism for marking distinct fields.
Thus, one need only rescan modified fields that have already been traced as opposed to
whole modified objects that have already been traced. Moreover, Steele [1976] assumes
that mutator thread stacks are highly volatile, so expose must rescan them right to the end.
Termination requires that every Trace record have no matching (at the field or object level)
Write record occurring after it in the log.
    A classical Dijkstra-style collector that unconditionally shades the target of any refer-
ence stored to the heap will expose the new component of all the Write records up to and
including matching Trace records at the wavefront. Note that these new references are
extracted directly from the log without rescanning. Termination is similar to Steele.
    Conversely, a Yuasa-style snapshot collector exposes the old component of all Write
records that have no matching Trace record after them in log. Tracing that stays ahead
of the mutator will successfully append Trace records to the log before the mutator can
modify the fields they record, offering speedier termination than for incremental update.

16.8     Issues to consider
Many of the issues facing concurrent mark-sweep garbage collection are common to all
concurrent collectors. Concurrent collectors are without doubt more complex to design,
implement and debug than stop-the-world collectors. Do the demands made of the collec-
tor warrant this additional complexity? Or would a simpler solution such as a generational
collector suffice?
    Generational collectors can offer expected pause times for most applications of a few
milliseconds or even less. However, their worst case — a full heap collection — may pause
an application for very much longer, depending on the size of the heap, the volume of
live objects and so on. Such delays may not be acceptable. Concurrent collectors, on the
other hand, offer shorter and more predictable pause times. As we shall see in Chapter 19,
properly specified real-time collectors can guarantee submillisecond pause times, but this
typically comes at the cost of significant overhead on both the mutator and the collector.
To bound pause times, the collector must not only be concurrent but also on-the-fly: it
must stop mutators only one at a time in order to process their roots (unless the mutators
can be processed concurrently).
    Other questions for concurrent mark-sweep collection are the same as those for its
stop-the-world counterpart. Non-moving memory managers are vulnerable to fragmenta-
tion. As well as defragmenting the heap, copying and compacting collectors permit bump
pointer allocation which may be faster than free-list allocation and may also provide better
locality for the mutator(s). On the other hand, mark-sweep collectors make better utilisa-
tion of space than copying collectors since they do not require a copy reserve. However,
non-moving concurrent collectors have a further advantage over other concurrent collec-

tors: a simpler heap coherency model. All concurrent collectors require mutators to inform
the collector of changes to the topology of the heap in order to prevent a mutator from hid-
ing objects from a collector. In addition, collectors that move objects must ensure both that
only one collector thread moves an evacuated object and that it appears to mutators that
all references to a moved object are updated atomically.
     Concurrent mark-sweep collection also presents a number of tactical choices to the im-
plementer. As with other concurrent collectors, objects may be allocated black, grey or
white. Black mutators require that all objects be allocated black. Grey mutators allow fur-
ther possibilities. New objects may be allocated black, grey or white, or the decision may
be varied depending on the phase of the collector, the initial values of the new object’s
fields or the progress of the sweeper.
     In the remaining chapters, we examine concurrent copying and compacting collectors
and conclude with collectors that can provide pause time guarantees sufficient for hard
real-time systems, that is, those that must meet every deadline.
http://taylorandfrancis.com
