Chapter 17

Concurrent copying and compaction

In this chapter we discuss approaches to defragmenting the heap concurrently with the
mutator, relocating live objects either by concurrent copying or by concurrent compaction.
Here we consider how the mark-compact approaches of Chapter 3 and the copying ap-
proaches of Chapter 4 extend to operate concurrently with the mutator.
     We focus initially on collection techniques based on copying (evacuating or scaveng-
ing) reachable objects out of a fromspace into a tospace, after which the fromspace can
be reclaimed. These collectors face the problem that mutators may encounter references
to either fromspace or tospace objects, although note that replicating collectors relax this
complication by having mutators continue to operate on fromspace originals whilst the
collector constructs a replica of the live heap in tospace. We then consider concurrent col-
lection techniques based on compaction. Typically, such collectors divide the heap into a
number of regions and then identify only some of these for evacuation.
     Recall that when scanning object fields the collector must convert all fromspace point-
ers to tospace pointers, replacing each fromspace pointer with the forwarding address of its
fromspace target, copying the fromspace target the first time it is encountered. Concurrent
copying collectors must not only protect the collector against mutation but also protect the
mutator against concurrent copying. Moreover, concurrent updates by the mutator must
be propagated to the copies being constructed in tospace by the collector.
     For copying collectors, a black mutator must by definition only hold tospace pointers.
If it held fromspace pointers, then the collector would never revisit and forward them, vi-
olating correctness. This is called the black mutator tospace invariant: the mutator operates
at all times ahead of the wavefront in tospace. Similarly, a grey mutator must by definition
only hold fromspace pointers at the beginning of the collector cycle. In the absence of a
read barrier to forward a fromspace pointer to the tospace copy, the grey mutator cannot
directly acquire tospace pointers from fromspace objects (since the copying collector does
not forward pointers stored in fromspace objects). This is called the grey mutator fromspace
invariant. Of course, for termination of a copying algorithm, all mutator threads must end
the collection cycle holding only tospace pointers, so any copying collector that allows
grey mutator threads to continue operating in fromspace must eventually switch them all
over to tospace by forwarding their roots. Moreover, updates by the mutator in fromspace
must also be reflected in tospace or else they will be lost.

17.1     Mostly-concurrent copying
Maintaining a tospace invariant for all mutator threads is perhaps the simplest approach
to concurrent copying because it guarantees that the mutator threads never see objects that

the collector is yet to copy, or is in the middle of copying. Establishing the tospace invari-
ant in a mostly-concurrent world requires stopping all the mutator threads (atomically) to
sample and forward their roots (copying their targets) at the beginning of the collection
cycle. At this point, the now-black mutators contain only (grey) tospace pointers, but the
(unscanned) grey targets will still contain fromspace pointers.

Baker’s algorithm
Baker’s [1978] black mutator read barrier was first formulated for incremental collection to
protect against a mutator acquiring one of these fromspace pointers, and was subsequently
extended by Halstead [1985] for concurrent copying. The read barrier presents the illusion
to the mutator threads that the collection cycle has completed, by preventing them from
crossing the collector wavefront boundary between tospace and fromspace.
     Baker-style concurrent collection is illustrated in Algorithm 17.1, as a revision of the
non-concurrent copying of Algorithm 4.2. Notice that the read barrier only needs to trig-
ger when loading from a grey tospace object (ahead of the collector wavefront). Only then
is the forward operation needed to ensure that the loaded reference is to a tospace object,
copying any uncopied fromspace object as necessary. As specified here, synchronisation
between mutator and collector is relatively coarse-grained (at the level of objects): the col-
lector atomic block scans the next grey object, while the mutator atomic read barrier
forwards any reference loaded from a grey object. The atomic blocks ensure that a muta-
tor thread can never load a reference from an object that is in the middle of being scanned
(to turn it from grey to black).
     As presented in Algorithm 17.1, atomicity of the Read operation ensures that the muta-
tor sees the correct state of the src object (grey or not) and the target object (forwarded or
not), as well as allowing the mutator to copy the target object if it is in fromspace, without
interfering with ongoing copying by the collector in process. Thus, the mutator’s atomic
Read operation may incur overhead proportional to the size of the object being copied.
It is possible to obtain finer-grained atomicity by synchronising each of these operations
more carefully with the collector.
     One approach is to allow finer-grained synchronisation using a work list holding field
addresses rather than object references. A difficulty then is how to distinguish grey fields
from black fields. The problem is ensuring that the wavefront is easily determined by the
mutator. At the granularity of objects, it is simple enough to set a grey bit in the header of
each grey object, but for fields there is not usually a cheap place to store this information
although side metadata can be used for this purpose [Zhao et al., 2022a,b]. However, with
Cheney scanning the scan pointer can be advanced (atomically) as each field is scanned,
so black fields lie behind the scan pointer and grey fields in front. In this case, the read
barrier might look something like:

    atomic Read(src, i):
       ref ← src[i]
       if ref ̸= null && scan ≤ &src[i]                                   /* src[i] is grey */
          ref ← forward(ref)
       return ref

Of course, this description leaves out all the machinery needed to advance the wave-
front atomically through each of the fields. We will see techniques for achieving this
finer-grained processing in Chapter 19, where minimising interruptions by the collector
becomes important for real-time systems.

Algorithm 17.1: Mostly-concurrent copying

 1   shared worklist ← empty
 2

 3   collect():
 4      atomic
 5         flip()
 6         for each fld in Roots
 7             process(fld)
 8      loop
 9         atomic
10             if isEmpty(worklist)
11                break                                                  /* exit loop */
12             ref ← remove(worklist)
13             scan(ref)
14

15   flip():
16      fromspace, tospace ← tospace, fromspace
17      free, top ← tospace, tospace + extent
18

19   scan(toRef):
20      for each fld in Pointers(toRef)
21         process(fld)
22

23   process(fld):
24      fromRef ← *fld
25      if fromRef ̸= null
26         *fld ← forward(fromRef)                  /* update with tospace reference */
27

28   forward(fromRef):
29      toRef ← forwardingAddress(fromRef)
30      if toRef = null                                  /* not copied (not marked) */
31         toRef ← copy(fromRef)
32      return toRef
33

34   copy(fromRef):
35      toRef ← free
36      free ← free + size(fromRef)
37      if free > top
38         error "Out of memory"
39      move(fromRef, toRef)
40      forwardingAddress(fromRef) ← toRef                                  /* mark */
41      add(worklist, toRef)
42      return toRef
43

44   atomic Read(src, i):
45      ref ← src[i]
46      if isGrey(src)
47         ref ← forward(ref)
48      return ref

Mostly-concurrent, mostly-copying collection
Mostly-concurrent collection also naturally applies to mostly-copying collection. Recall that
a mostly-copying collector must treat ambiguous roots conservatively, pinning all objects
that they reference. The collector is free to move the remaining objects not directly refer-
enced by ambiguous roots. It is straightforward to use the brief stop-the-world phase of
a mostly-concurrent collector to mark (and pin) all the objects referenced by the ambigu-
ous roots in the mutator thread stacks and registers. At this point all the mutator threads
are black, and a Baker-style read barrier will ensure that the mutator threads never subse-
quently acquire references to uncopied objects.
    DeTreville [1990] used this approach for concurrently collecting Modula-2+ and subse-
quently for Modula-3 [Cardelli et al., 1992], both systems-oriented programming languages
whose compilers were not sophisticated enough to generate accurate stack maps. Also, be-
cause their compilers did not emit an explicit barrier for heap accesses, DeTreville applied
an Appel et al. read barrier to synchronise the mutator with the collector using virtual
memory page protection. Detlefs [1990] used the same technique for C++, modifying the
AT&T C++ compiler to derive automatically the accurate pointer maps for heap objects
needed to allow copying of objects not referenced directly from ambiguous roots.
    Subsequently, Hosking [2006] replaced use of coarse-grained virtual memory page pro-
tection as the read barrier mechanism with compiler-generated object-grained read barrier
support. The motivation for this was the difficulty of managing page protections atomi-
cally in the presence of mutator threads that are preemptively scheduled by the operating
system. Because the read barrier is only needed during the copying phase of collection,
after all the mutator threads have been stopped to scan their ambiguous roots and make
them black, it is possible to avoid expensive atomic instructions in the fast path of the
barrier that checks if the source object is grey. Atomic operations are thus only needed to
ensure atomicity of the forwarding operation.

17.2     Brooks’s indirection barrier
An alternative approach to requiring a tospace invariant is to allow the mutator to make
progress without concern for the wavefront. Brooks [1984] observes that if every object
(whether in fromspace or tospace) has a non-null forwarding pointer (either to its from-
space original or to its copy in tospace), then the test on the src object in the read barrier
can be eliminated. A fromspace object that has not yet been copied will have an indirec-
tion field that points to itself. When copying an object, the fromspace indirection field is
atomically updated to refer to the tospace copy. The tospace copy has an indirection field
that points to itself. All heap accesses, both reads and writes, of pointers, non-pointers
and mutable values in header words, now always require an unconditional dereference
operation in order to follow any indirection pointer to the tospace copy if one exists. Thus,
the Read barrier for the mutator is rewritten by Brooks as in Algorithm 17.2.
    Now the only problem, other than the need for an additional dependent load, is that the
read barrier can still read a field ahead of the wavefront that might refer to an uncopied
fromspace object. Fortunately, the ubiquitous indirection field relaxes the need for the
tospace invariant imposed by Baker so the mutator is allowed to operate grey and hold
fromspace references. To ensure termination Brooks imposes a Dijkstra-style write barrier
to prevent the insertion of fromspace pointers behind the wavefront, as in Algorithm 17.2.
    Because mutator threads now operate grey, once copying is finished they need a final
scan of their stacks to replace any remaining unforwarded references. The alternative, as

Algorithm 17.2: Brooks’s indirection barriers

 1   atomic Read(src, i):
 2      src ← forwardingAddress(src)
 3      return src[i]
 4

 5   atomic Write(src, i, ref):
 6      src ← forwardingAddress(src)
 7      if isBlack(src)                                /* src is behind wavefront in tospace */
 8         ref ← forward(ref)
 9      src[i] ← ref

performed in the original incremental Brooks collector, is simply to scan the thread stacks
and registers of each mutator thread after each collector increment, in order to redirect any
references they may hold to copied objects before they can resume.

17.3     Self-erasing read barriers
Baker-style collectors require a read barrier to preserve their black mutator invariant. Read
barriers are often considered to be more expensive than write barriers since reads are more
prevalent than writes. Furthermore, read barriers are conditional: given a Read(src,i),
they must test whether src[i] is in tospace and evacuate it if not. Cheadle et al. [2004]
eliminated this test and all overheads in accessing a black tospace object for a Baker-style
incremental copying collector in the Glasgow Haskell Compiler (GHC). The first word
of every object (closure) in GHC points to its entry code: the code to execute (enter) when
the closure is evaluated. They provided two versions of this code. In addition to the
standard version, a second version scavenged the closure before entering the standard
code. Let us see how this scheme operated. When the collector was off, the entry-code
word pointed to the standard, non-scavenging code. However, when an object was copied
to tospace, this word was hijacked and set to point to the self-scavenging code. If the
object, now in tospace, was entered, the self-scavenging code was executed first to copy the
object’s children to tospace. Then the original value of the entry-code word was reinstated.
Finally, the standard version of the code was entered. The beauty of this scheme was
that if the closure was evaluated in the future, then its standard code would have been
entered unconditionally: the read barrier had been erased. The cost of this scheme was
some duplication of code: Cheadle et al. found the overhead to be 25% over that of a
stop-the-world copying collector. However, GHC’s later introduction of pointer tagging
is incompatible with this technique as it eliminates many mutator calls to entry code in
order to reduce the number of branch prediction misses [Marlow et al., 2007]. Cheadle
et al. [2008] applied the same technique to flip method-table pointers in the Jikes RVM Java
virtual machine. To do so, they had to virtualise most accesses to an object (all method
calls and accesses to fields unless they are static or private). However, they were able
to recoup some of this cost by using the run-time compiler to inline aggressively. Note that
a self-healing load barrier is similar in intent, though different in implementation: it also
seeks to repair the condition that the barrier detects, and updates the slot to prevent the
barrier action in the future. However, it does so using explicit code, not an indirect call.

17.4       Replication copying
The Brooks indirection barrier imposes a time and space penalty. Following an indirection
pointer adds (bounded) overhead to every mutator heap access (both reads and writes,
pointers and non-pointers), and the indirection pointer adds an additional pointer word
to the header of every object. It has the advantage of avoiding the need for Baker’s tospace
invariant which forces the mutator to perform copying work when loading a fromspace
reference from the heap, while preserving the essential property that accesses (both reads
and writes) go to the tospace copy whenever one is present. This has the important result
that heap updates are never lost because they occur either to the fromspace original before
it is copied or to the tospace copy afterwards.1
     Replication copying collectors [Nettles et al., 1992; Nettles and O’Toole, 1993] relax this
requirement by allowing the mutator to continue operating against fromspace originals
even while the collector is copying them to tospace. That is, the mutator threads obey a
fromspace invariant, updating the fromspace objects directly, while a write barrier logs all
updates to fromspace objects to record the differences that must still be applied to their
tospace copies. In other words, replication copying collectors allow the state of the tospace
copy to lag behind that of its fromspace original, so long as by the time the collector is fin-
ished copying, but before it can discard fromspace, all mutator updates have been applied
from the log to the tospace copy and all mutator roots have been forwarded. Thus, the
termination condition for collection is that the mutation log is empty, the mutator’s roots
have all been scanned, and all of the objects in tospace have been scanned.
     Concurrent replication copying requires synchronisation between the mutator and col-
lector via the mutation log, and when updating the roots from the mutators. Thread-local
buffers and work stealing techniques can minimise the synchronisation overhead when
manipulating the mutation log [Azagury et al., 1999]. The collector must use the muta-
tion log to ensure that all replicas reach a consistent state before the collection terminates.
When the collector modifies a replica that has already been scanned, it must rescan the
replica to make sure that any object referenced as a result of the mutation is also replicated
in tospace. Termination of the collector requires that each mutator thread be stopped to
scan its roots. When there are no more objects to scan, the mutator log is empty, and no
mutator has any remaining references to uncopied objects, then the collection cycle is fin-
ished. At this point, all the mutator threads are stopped together briefly to switch them
over to tospace by redirecting their roots.
     The resulting algorithm imposes only short pauses to sample (and at the end redirect)
the mutator roots: each mutator thread is stopped separately to scan its roots, with a brief
stop-the-world phase at the end of the cycle to switch all the threads over to tospace.
     The downside to replication copying is that every mutation of the heap, not just point-
ers, needs to be logged by the mutator threads. This imposes a much higher write barrier
overhead than for traditional pointer-only write barriers, and the mutation log can become
a bottleneck. For languages that discourage mutation, such as the functional language ML
used by Nettles and O’Toole, this is less of an issue so performance does not suffer.

Multi-version copying
Nettles and O’Toole [1993] still require global stop-the-world synchronisation of the muta-
tor threads to transition them to tospace. Their algorithm is not lock-free because no muta-
tor can make progress while this transition occurs. Herlihy and Moss [1992] dispense with
   1 Atomic copying of an object and installation of the forwarding address from the old copy to the new one is

not always simple.

the need for a global transition. They adapt Halstead’s [1985] multiprocessor refinement
of Baker’s [1978] algorithm, which divides the heap into multiple per-processor regions.
Each processor has its own fromspace and tospace, and is responsible for evacuating into
its own tospace any fromspace object it discovers while scanning. Halstead uses locking
to handle races between processors that compete to copy the same object, and for updates
to avoid writing to an object while it is being evacuated. He also retains global synchroni-
sation to have all the processors perform the flip into their tospace before discarding their
fromspace. To eliminate this global synchronisation, Herlihy and Moss decouple from-
space reclamation from the flip. They divide each processor region into a single tospace
plus multiple (zero or more) fromspaces. As copying proceeds, multiple fromspace ver-
sions of an object can accumulate in different spaces. Only one of these versions is current,
while the rest are obsolete.
    Each processor2 alternates between its mutator task and a scanning task that checks
local variables and its tospace for pointers to fromspace versions. When such a pointer is
found, the scanner locates the object’s current version. If that version is in a fromspace,
then it copies it to a new current version in its tospace (the old version is now obsolete).
    In this way, the processors cooperate to move objects from fromspaces to tospaces, and
to redirect reachable pointers to the tospaces. Each processor is responsible for scanning its
own tospace for fromspace pointers, and for copying any fromspace object it finds (includ-
ing objects in fromspaces of other processors) that does not have a current tospace copy in
some processor. A processor can flip at any time during its mutator task (when its tospace
is full and so long as it has sufficient free space to allocate a new tospace), but not in the
middle of a scan. It cannot free its fromspaces until it can be sure no other processor holds
references to any of its fromspace objects.
    To manage versions, Herlihy and Moss maintain a forwarding pointer field next at
all times in each object, so that each obsolete fromspace version refers to its next version,
terminating at the current version which has a null forwarding pointer. When copying a
fromspace object into its own tospace, a scanning processor atomically installs the tospace
copy at the end of the version chain using compare-and-swap, making it current. Thus,
every mutator heap access must traverse to the end of the chain of versions before per-
forming the access. Moreover, to preserve lock-freedom while ensuring that heap updates
are not lost, every store into an object creates a new version of the object in the mutat-
ing processor’s tospace, using compare-and-swap to make it current. Thus, scanning and
copying require no global synchronisation, while preserving all mutator updates.
    A processor owning fromspaces (the owner) can discard them only if no other scanning
processor (scanners) holds any of its fromspace pointers. A scan is clean with respect to
a given owner if the scan completes without finding any pointers to versions in any of
the owner’s fromspaces, otherwise it is dirty. A round is an interval during which every
processor starts and completes a scan. A clean round is one in which every scan is clean
and no processor executes a flip. After a processor executes a flip, the resulting fromspace
can be reclaimed after completion of a subsequent clean round.
    An owner detects that another scanner has started and completed a scan using two
atomic handshake bits, each written by one processor and read by the other. Initially, both
bits agree. To start a flip, the owner creates a new tospace, marks the old tospace as a
fromspace, and inverts its handshake bit. At the start of a scan, the scanner reads the
owner’s handshake bit, performs the scan, and sets its handshake bit to the value read
from the owner’s. Thus, the handshake bits will agree once the scanner has started and
completed a scan in the interval since the owner’s bit was inverted.

   2 Herlihy and Moss use the term process for what might now be called a thread, but we continue to use processor

here to match Halstead [1985] and to emphasise that the heap regions should be thought of as per-processor.

    However, an owner must detect that all processes have started and completed a scan,
and every processor is symmetrically both an owner and a scanner, so the handshake bits
are arranged into two arrays. An owner array contains the owner handshake bits, indexed
by owner processor. A 2-dimensional scanner array contains the scanner handshake bits,
with an element for each owner-scanner pair. Because a scan can complete with respect to
multiple owners, the scanner must copy the entire owner array into a local array on each
scan. At the end of the scan, the scanner must set its corresponding scanner bits to these
previously saved values. An owner detects that the round is complete as soon as its owner
bit agrees with the bits from all scanners. An owner cannot begin a new round until the
current round is complete.
    To detect whether a completed round was clean, the processors share an array of dirty
bits, indexed by processor. When an owner executes a flip, it sets the dirty bit for all other
processors. Also, when a scanner finds a pointer into another processor’s fromspace it sets
that processor’s dirty bit. If an owner’s dirty bit is clear at the end of a round, then the
round was clean, and it can reclaim its fromspaces. If not, then it simply clears its dirty
bit and starts a new scan. By associating dirty bits with fromspaces rather than processor
regions, and having scanners set the dirty bit for the target fromspace when they find a
pointer, it is also possible to reclaim fromspaces individually rather than all at once.
    Herlihy and Moss prove safety and liveness (of collector) for their algorithm, but they
do not explore performance of an actual implementation. The liveness (of collector) argu-
ment relies on the observation that if each processor always eventually scans, then some
processor always eventually reclaims its fromspaces. At worst, because each processor will
eventually exhaust its free spaces, further flips will cease, and all processors will eventu-
ally focus on scanning until a clean round ensues. Of course, this resource exhaustion has
the effect of causing blocking in the system as a whole.

Extensions to avoid copy-on-write
The novelty of this multi-versioning algorithm is that it is entirely lock-free. Its downside
is the need to create a new version on every heap update, though this may be useful on a
non-uniform memory architecture multiprocessor to improve locality. Herlihy and Moss
consider several alternatives to avoiding versioning on every update:

Update in place with CompareAndSwap2. The first extension assumes the availability of
the CompareAndSwap2 operator which allows both performing the update and ensur-
ing that the forwarding pointer next remains null as a single atomic operation. Un-
fortunately, CompareAndSwap2 is not widely implemented on modern multiprocessors.
Transactional memory might be a viable alternative; in fact, this algorithm inspired the
work leading to Herlihy and Moss [1993].

Owner update in place. Another approach simply uses compare-and-swap, but it re-
quires additional fields in the header of object a: seq(a) is a modulo two sequence num-
ber, index(a) is the index of the slot being updated and value(a) is the new value for
that slot. Also, the forwarding pointer field next(a) is permitted to hold a sequence
number, in addition to a pointer or null (this is easy enough to achieve by tagging the
forwarding pointer field with a low bit to distinguish pointers to suitably aligned ob-
jects from a sequence number). There only need be two values for sequence numbers:
if seq(a)=next(a), then the current update is installed, and otherwise it is ignored.
    To perform a store using the full write barrier, a processor chains down the list of ver-
sions until it finds the current version (one with null or a sequence number stored in its

Algorithm 17.3: Herlihy and Moss [1992] Owner update in place

 1    WriteLocal (a, next, i, v):
 2       seq ← (next + 1) % 2
 3       seq(a) ← seq                                                                      $
 4       index(a) ← i
 5       value(a) ← v
 6       if CompareAndSet(&next(a), next, seq)
 7          scan(a[i])
 8          a[i] ← v
 9       else
10          Write(a, i, v)

next field). If the current version is local, then the processor performs the WriteLocal op-
eration illustrated in Algorithm 17.3. This takes the current version a, the observed next
field (either null or a sequence number), the index i of the slot to be modified, and the
new value of the slot v. It then uses compare-and-set to install the new sequence number
in the next field. If successful, then the processor performs a deletion barrier to scan any
pointer overwritten by the store (this preserves the invariant that scanning has inspected
every pointer written into tospace), before performing the store. Otherwise, the processor
locates the newer version and retries the update by invoking the full write barrier. Having
the owning process update in place is well suited to a non-uniform memory architecture
where it is more efficient to update local objects.
    If the object is remote, then the new owner makes a local tospace copy as before, ex-
cept that after making the copy, but before performing the store, it must check whether
next(a)=seq(a). If they are equal, then it must first complete the pending update, per-
forming the deletion barrier to scan the slot indicated by the index field and storing the
value from the value field into that slot. The same action must be performed when the
scanner evacuates an object into tospace. This ensures that any writes performed on the
original object while it is being copied are linearised before writes performed to the copy.

Locking update in place. Finally, there is the alternative of giving up on lock-freedom and
using compare-and-swap to lock the object while it is updated. As before, only the owner
of the current version may update in place. The owner locks an object by:

     1. using compare-and-swap to lock the object by installing a distinguished locked value
        in its next field;

     2. scanning the pointer (if any) being overwritten by the store;

     3. performing the update;

     4. scanning the pointer (if any) being stored; and

     5. unlocking the object by setting next back to null.

Since the owner is the only processor that updates the object in place, there is no need to
synchronise with the scanner. The deletion barrier in Step 2 ensures that pointers possibly
seen by other processors will be scanned. The insertion barrier in Step 4 ensures that if the
object has already been scanned, then the new pointer will not be mistakenly omitted.

Sapphire
A problem with symmetric division of the heap into independently collected regions per
processor as done by Halstead [1985] and Herlihy and Moss [1992] is that it ties the heap
structure to the topology of the multiprocessor. Unfortunately, application heap structures
and thread-level parallelism may not map so easily to this configuration. Moreover, one
processor can become a bottleneck because it happens to own a particularly large or knotty
portion of the heap, causing other processors to wait for it to complete its scanning before
they can discard their fromspaces, so they may end up stalling if they have no free space
in which to allocate. It may be possible to steal free space from another processor, but
this requires the ability to reconfigure the per-processor heap regions dynamically. These
issues were discussed earlier in Chapter 14. Instead, concurrent collectors place collector
work asymmetrically on one or more dedicated collector threads, whose priority can easily
be adjusted to achieve a balance of throughput between mutator and collector threads.
    Sapphire [Hudson and Moss, 2001, 2003] is a concurrent copying algorithm designed
to work well in the presence of a large number of mutator threads on small- to medium-
scale shared memory multiprocessors. It extends previous concurrent replication copying
algorithms to allow one thread at a time to flip from operating in fromspace to operating
in tospace, as opposed to having to stop them to transition them all at once over to tospace.
This minimises the amount of time that any given application thread may need to block to
support the collector. To cope with mutators operating in both fromspace and tospace at
the same time, Sapphire requires that they update both the fromspace and tospace copies
of an object, when both exist.

Transactional Sapphire
Transactional Sapphire [Ugawa et al., 2018] extends Sapphire with parallel collector threads,
and introduces transactions, in either hardware or software, for object copying, and a
simpler mechanism to handle volatile fields in order to support lock-free programs that
employ fine-grain synchronisation using atomic operations. Like Sapphire, Transactional
Sapphire assumes that Java programs are well-synchronised, that is that accesses by dif-
ferent threads to a field should either be protected by a lock or the field should be declared
volatile. Otherwise, surprising results3 may occur.
    The Transactional Sapphire collector starts as an incremental update collector sup-
ported by insertion barriers, before transitioning to a snapshot collector supported by
deletion barriers (see the discussion in Section 16.6 on page 357). It allocates most ob-
jects in replicated from- and tospaces. Whereas Hudson and Moss had to adopt a complex
protocol to manage objects with volatile fields safely, Transactional Sapphire avoids the
costs and complexities of synchronising accesses to such objects with replicating them by
allocating these objects (and large objects) in a space managed by mark-sweep collection;
the volume of these objects is expected to be small. Transactional Sapphire has four major
groups of phases (Algorithm 17.4). Throughout the Mark and Copy phases, it maintains
the invariant that mutators read from and write to the originals in fromspace in the repli-
cated heap; the Flip phase transitions mutators in several steps to accessing tospace objects.
Most of these phase changes are Type I (see Section 15.3), but changing from ‘collector idle’
to the StackMark phase and from the Copy phase to the HeapFlip phase requires Type II
phase changes (the names of intermediate phases are prefixed with ‘Pre’).
Mark: The first group of phases marks all reachable objects. For objects in replicated
    spaces, the collector creates an empty shell in tospace and installs forwarding point-
    ers; for objects in mark-sweep spaces, the collector sets a mark in the object header.
  3 Of course, in Java ‘surprises’ can also result from unsynchronised accesses to double and long values.

Algorithm 17.4: Transactional Sapphire phases

 1   Mark:
 2      PreMark1                                           /* install Mark phase write barrier */
 3      PreMark2                                                     /* toggle allocation colour */
 4      StackMark                                                   /* process mutators’ stacks */
 5      RootMark                                                     /* blacken global variables */
 6      HeapMark                                               /* process collector mark queue */
 7      ReferenceProcess                      /* mark reference types and terminate marking */
 8

 9   Copy:
10      PreCopy                                            /* install Copy phase write barrier */
11      Copy                                  /* copy fromspace objects to their tospace shells */
12

13   Flip:
14      PreFlip1                          /* install the limited self−flip and equality barriers */
15      PreFlip2                                                /* install the full self−flip barrier */
16      HeapFlip                              /* flip non−replicated spaces to point to tospace */
17      RootFlip                                           /* flip global roots to point to tospace */
18      StackFlip                                      /* flip mutator stacks to point to tospace */
19

20   Reclaim                                            /* turn off barriers; reclaim fromspace */

Copy: The second group of phases copies fields of reachable objects in fromspace to their
    replica shells in tospace. During these phases, the mutators read from the originals
    in fromspace, but must mirror their writes to the tospace copies. The fromspace and
    tospace copies are kept loosely coherent by relying on the programming language
    memory model (in this case for Java [Manson et al., 2005; Gosling et al., 2015]). This
    means that the updates to each copy need not be atomic or simultaneous. Rather, a
    well-synchronised Java application need only perceive that the values in the copies
    cohere at application-level synchronisation points. Any changes made by a mutator
    thread to fromspace copies between two synchronisation points will be propagated
    to the tospace copies before passing the second synchronisation point. If all threads
    are at synchronisation points, then the fromspace and tospace copies will be con-
    sistent with one another. This is important during the third, Flip, group of phases,
    when mutators can observe both fromspace and tospace copies.

Flip: In this group, the collector forwards pointers in global variables and thread stacks
      and registers, flipping them one at a time into tospace. Unflipped mutator threads
      may hold references to both fromspace and tospace copies (even of the same object).
      Previous concurrent copying collectors either imposed a tospace invariant using a
      read barrier to redirect mutators out of fromspace [Baker, 1978], or imposed a from-
      space invariant while replicating and then flipped all at once [Nettles and O’Toole,
      1993]. Incremental flipping without a read barrier (except for pointer equality tests)
      means that mutators may access both fromspace and tospace at the same time, which
      requires slightly tighter synchronisation of updates to both copies.

Reclaim: As mutators and global roots no longer hold fromspace references, the collector
     can now release the old fromspace.

Algorithm 17.5: Transactional Sapphire write barriers

                                      (a) The Mark phase write barrier

       1   checkAndEnqueue(ref):                                                         /* shade ref */
       2      if inFromspace(ref)
       3         if not forwarded(ref)                                                         /* white */
       4            tobeCopiedQueue.enqueue(ref)
       5      else
       6         if not testAndMark(ref)                                                       /* white */
       7            add(worklist, ref)
       8

       9   WriteMark (src, i, ref):
      10       src[i] ← ref
      11       checkAndEnqueue(ref)

                            (b) The ReferenceProcess phase write barrier

       1   WriteReferenceProcess (src, i, ref):
       2      checkAndEnqueue(src[i])
       3      src[i] ← ref
       4      if isFirstStackScan()
       5         checkAndEnqueue(ref)          /* active only while switching barriers */

                                      (c) The Copy phase write barrier

       1   WriteCopy (src, i, ref):
       2      src[i] ← ref
       3      if inFromspace(src)
       4         repl ← src.forwardingPointer
       5         if inFromspace(ref)
       6              repl[i] ← ref.forwardingPointer
       7         else
       8              repl[i] ← ref

Marking. The Mark group of phases comprises six steps. Termination relies on use of
deletion barriers and allocating new objects black, that is, with replicas in both fromspace
and tospace.
    To allocate a new object, the fromspace replica is allocated first,4 after checking that
there is enough space for both objects; this ensures that although a mutator may be blocked
until the end of the collection cycle if there is insufficient memory, the subsequent allo-
cation of the tospace replica can never fail. Maintaining the invariant that there are no
black-white pointers requires care. Because there is no stop-the-world rendezvous, differ-
ent mutators may be in different phases. The transition from ‘collector idle’ to the start
of the main marking phase, StackMark, must therefore be Type II5 (see Section 15.3). The

   4 The original Sapphire allocated new objects black in a separate newspace.
    5 An alternative design decision might be to allocate grey in this phase, which would allow the phase change

to be Type I, thus removing a handshaking step. However, delaying turning on the deletion barrier would require
scanning objects newly allocated during the Mark phase.

role of the first intermediate phase, PreMark1, is to install the insertion barrier shown in
Algorithm 17.5a. Mutators do not perform any marking directly, but rather enqueue ob-
jects for the collector to process. If the referent ref of a pointer update src.i = ref is
in fromspace, and if it has not been forwarded (the collector has not created a shell for it),
the barrier shades the object by adding it to a tobeCopiedQueue. The barrier does not
create the shell immediately, since that allocation path might include a GC safe-point and
hence a potential phase change. An unmarked object in a non-replicating space is marked
and added to a separate work list so that its children can be traced. Each mutator has its
own queue, so enqueuing does not normally need synchronisation.
    In the StackMark phase, each collector thread competes to claim and halt a mutator,
scan its stack and then resume it. The number of mutators blocked at any time is at most
the number of collector threads, typically significantly fewer than the number of CPU
cores. As with the mutator barrier, as it scans a mutator’s stack, the collector simply adds
references found to its work queue rather than immediately creating tospace shells. In the
RootMark phase, the collector scans global roots — for Jikes RVM, vectors of references
for static variables and Java Native Interface references. All writes to these vectors are pro-
tected by an insertion barrier so mutators do not need to be halted for scanning. To support
load balancing between collector threads, the RootMark phase comprises two stages. The
first is a global stage in which the master collector measures each vector to balance loads
in the following stage where all collectors scan the vectors in parallel. It is essential that
this is global, since the size of a vector’s live area may change as mutators run. If the range
of a vector were to be computed asynchronously, some slots may be scanned by multiple
collectors and others not at all. Protecting the vectors with a write barrier allows the live
area to be enlarged or contracted safely (although contraction may mean that the collector
traverses dead objects).
    In the HeapMark phase, collectors traverse reachable objects, creating shells in tospace
and writing a forwarding pointer to each shell in a distinct word in the fromspace object’s
header. Care is taken to handle any races between collector and collector, or collector and
mutator. Roots for the traversals are the queues filled by the collectors in the StackMark
and RootMark Phases and by the mutator write barrier. Each tospace shell’s header (a
status word and a back pointer to its fromspace replica) is created immediately. The back
pointer is used in the Flip Phases to propagate mutator updates to both copies of an object.
    Until the ReferenceProcess phase, Transactional Sapphire uses the insertion barrier
shown in Algorithm 17.5a, both for safe initialisation and because insertion barriers pre-
serve less floating garbage than deletion barriers. In this phase, the algorithm switches on
both an insertion and a deletion barrier (Algorithm 17.5b), as per Doligez and Gonthier
[1994], to give both quicker termination and a guarantee of progress. For termination, in-
sertion barrier techniques require mutator stacks to be scanned repeatedly until no new
references are found. In contrast, collectors using a deletion barrier do not have to rescan
stacks. Transactional Sapphire faces two problems here. First, deletion barriers are a black
mutator technique (see Section 15.2), but the insertion barrier used so far does not prevent
a mutator from holding a reference to an otherwise unreachable white object. Thus, the
stacks must be rescanned to blacken them. After each mutator’s stack has been scanned
again, it suffices that the mutator only use the deletion barrier. Second, Java’s semantics
allow a mutator to call get at any time on a weak reference whose referent is only weakly-
reachable, causing the referent to become strongly-reachable if the reference has not yet
been cleared. Once the referent becomes strongly-reachable, the collector must not clear
the weak reference, and must retain any objects that just became strongly-reachable. If
multiple weak reference objects refer to the same target, they must behave consistently: at
any time, all calls to get on these weak reference objects must either all return null or all
return a reference to the target. For example, if a and c are weak references to an object b,
at all times the invariant a.get() = c.get() must hold.

Algorithm 17.6: The collector’s word-copying algorithm using compare-and-swap

 1   copyWord(p, q):
 2      loop
 3         currentValue ← *q;
 4         toValue ← *p                                                                      $
 5         if isPointer(toValue)
 6            toValue ← forwardObject(toValue)
 7         if toValue = currentValue
 8            return
 9         if not CompareAndSwap(q, currentValue, toValue)                                   $
10            return

    Without a stop-the-world phase, this race between the mutator calling get and the col-
lector attempting to finish marking strongly-reachable objects before proceeding to clear-
ing reference objects with unmarked referents necessitates the collector to iterate until no
new calls to get have been made. Transactional Sapphire uses a global state, with values
normal, tracing, repeat and clearing, to manage this. The collector starts by chang-
ing the state from normal to tracing. When it believes its tracing work is complete, it
attempts to change the state atomically to clearing. Meanwhile, any get will attempt
to set the state atomically to repeat, which will prevent the collector from proceeding
to clearing references but cause it to continue tracing from the newly greyed referents.
Note that a further benefit of using a deletion barrier is that the number of weak refer-
ences at the start of the ReferenceProcessing stage is known, and any new weak reference
objects will be allocated black, hence termination of marking is guaranteed without a stop-
the-world pause. In contrast, with an insertion barrier, the collector may have to chase
references escaping back and forth between a Reference object and the stack repeatedly.

Copying. By the end of the Mark group of phases, all live fromspace objects have been
marked with forwarding pointers to tospace shells. In the Copy phase, the collector copies
the contents of each fromspace object into its shell; mutators continue to access fromspace
objects and to allocate new objects black. The collector first installs the Copy phase write
barrier (Algorithm 17.5c) in the PreCopy phase. Whenever a mutator writes to a fromspace
object, this barrier writes the semantically equivalent value to the corresponding field of
its tospace copy.
     It is important that mutator updates are never lost, even when the collector copies the
same object at the same time, and are wait-free. Any concurrent copying collector must
deal with races between mutators updating and collectors copying an object. The target
platform for Transactional Sapphire is x86 systems, for which most memory operations
are guaranteed to be executed in order: only loads may be reordered with preceding store
instructions. It is assumed that all reference fields are word-aligned: copying word by
word rather than field by field improves performance, while still handling reference types
and double-word types in accordance with the Java specification. Transactional Sapphire
offers three solutions: it can copy an arbitrary number of words atomically and efficiently
using a compare-and-swap in a loop, it can use hardware transactional memory (such
as Intel’s Restricted Transactional Memory extensions) or it can use a minimal form of
software transactional memory.
     The compare-and-swap method shown in Algorithm 17.6 copies word by word. This
is efficient because multiple non-reference fields within the same word can be processed
in a single iteration of the loop, and it also deals correctly with reference fields, which are

Algorithm 17.7: Transactional Sapphire: copying with software transactional memory

 1    copyObjectTransactional(p, q):
 2       for i ← 0 to words(q)                                                 /* copying step */
 3          toValue ← p[i]
 4          if isPointerField(p, i)
 5              buf[i] ← toValue
 6              toValue ← forward(toValue)
 7          q[i] ← toValue
 8

 9        memoryBarrier
10

11        for i ← 0 to words(q)                                             /* verification step */
12           if isPointerField(p, i)
13              if p[i] ̸= buf[i]
14                 goto FAIL
15           else if p[i] ̸= q[i]
16              goto FAIL
17

18        return
19

20    FAIL:
21       copyObject(p, q)                      /* fall back to copying word at a time with CAS */

word-aligned and sized. If the contents of the old and new words differ, then the collector
atomically updates the tospace word using a compare-and-swap. Failure means that a
mutator has updated this word with a newer value so the collector does not need to copy
this word. Unfortunately, success does not mean that the collector has written the newest
value, as there is a risk of an ABA problem. If the mutator were to change the values held in
p and q between line 3 and line 4, then the test in line 7 would fail, so the collector would
prepare to compare-and-swap toValue into q. In the absence of any further mutator
action, this compare-and-swap would fail, which is safe as noted above. But if the mutator
were to update p and q again with their original value, then the compare-and-swap would
succeed, updating q with a stale toValue! To resolve this, the algorithm double checks in
the next iteration of the loop. The risk to progress is very small: the mutator would have
to continually update the words to prevent progress.
    The simplest hardware transactional memory approach is to copy a single object in
each transaction, word by word, dereferencing for forwarding where necessary, using nor-
mal load/store instructions within an XBEGIN. . . XEND block. If the transaction fails, then
the algorithm falls back to copying using compare-and-swap. Since objects are typically
smaller than a cache line, it is possible to copy several objects in a single transaction, but
note that the expected read set of a transaction for a single object may be larger as semantic
copying requires dereferencing each reference field of a source object. However, the size
of a transaction can be reduced by visiting objects as part of the heap scan and adding
them to a ‘to be copied’ list (until it reaches a limit) before initiating the transaction; this
planning removes scanning traffic from the transaction’s read set and hence also reduces
the risk of aborts.
    Previous concurrent copying collectors have also attempted to leverage transactional
memory, but at some cost. For example, McGachey et al. [2008] describe a lock-free, on-
the-fly, copying collector in a strongly atomic software transactional memory system that

uses versioning for reads, and strict two-phase locking and eager versioning for writes.
In order to guarantee consistency, mutators and collectors must wrap reads and writes
of both reference and scalar fields in transactions (although note that the transactional
mutator needs such barriers anyway).
    However, copying does not require such a general purpose transactional memory mech-
anism, as it is only necessary for fromspace and tospace replicas to be eventually rather
than immediately consistent, since tospace fields are not read until after the Copy group of
phases is complete. The Transactional Sapphire garbage collector can therefore use either
hardware transactions, or a custom software transactional method comprising a copying
and a verification step for each object; both transactional methods were found to offer
similar copying speeds and to significantly improve over the original Sapphire technique
which used compare-and-swap instructions [Ritson et al., 2014]. The copying step imple-
mented with software transactions semantically copies the object using normal load/store
instructions. In the verification step, the contents of the tospace replica are compared to the
fromspace object. If the two are semantically consistent, then the object has been success-
fully replicated. If any word is found to be inconsistent with its replica, then the object is
copied again using the fallback compare-and-swap method. A memory fence (MFENCE on
x86) separating the copying and verification steps is essential, but is the only fence needed.
Without it, a store to the tospace replica could be reordered after the loads performed in the
verification step, risking the loss of a mutator store. Anderson et al. [2015] use a broadly
similar software verification step in Chihuahua, a concurrent, semispace collector, which
uses Brooks forwarding pointers rather than replication to redirect mutator accesses to the
most up-to-date location of an object. However, Chihuahua requires the mutator to use not
only a read barrier — an extra, unconditional dereference to follow the forwarding pointer
— but also atomic instructions in the write barrier.

Flip. In this phase, the collector flips fromspace references in non-replicated spaces, global
roots and mutators’ stacks to point to tospace. Before this phase, mutators never access
tospace objects, but after this phase mutators never access fromspace objects. In order to
avoid conflicting mutator invariants, another Type II phase transition is needed. During
this transition, mutators must be ready to deal with references to any space.
    The PreFlip1 phase installs two barriers: Algorithm 17.8a shows a pointer-equality read
barrier that tests the equivalence of references to the fromspace and tospace replicas of the
same object (in preparation for subsequent phases that store tospace references), and Algo-
rithm 17.8b a double-update write barrier that propagates a write to a fromspace/tospace
object to its tospace/fromspace replica, respectively. Note that mutators in the PreFlip1
phase do not yet have access to tospace objects. In the PreFlip2 phase, the full self-flip
barrier (Algorithm 17.8c) is installed: from now on, this mutator never writes a reference
to a fromspace object. Note that it was not possible to install this barrier in PreFlip1 as
other mutators might still have been in a Copy phase, expecting to see only fromspace ref-
erences. In the HeapFlip and RootFlip phases, the collector flips the non-replicated spaces
and global roots, respectively. From the StackFlip phase onwards, the allocator must return
a tospace reference while also allocating a fromspace replica.
    In summary, Transactional Sapphire extends previous concurrent copying algorithms
and has much in common with replication schemes. It permits one thread at a time to flip
from fromspace to tospace rather than all at once, and minimises thread blocking (pauses)
while avoiding a read barrier for all but pointer-equality tests in the Flip phase. Mutators
simply update both the fromspace and tospace copies of an object (when both exist) to
keep them coherent. We have omitted the subtleties of dealing with locks, status words
and hash codes, and the swapping of the roles of fromspace and tospace; we refer readers
to Ugawa et al. [2018] for details.

Algorithm 17.8: Transactional Sapphire Flip phase barriers

                              (a) Pointer equivalence read barrier

     1    pointerEQ(p, q)                                                       /* p == q */
      2      if p = q
      3         return true
     4       if inFromspace(p)
     5          return p.forwardingPointer = q
     6       if inFromspace(q)
     7          return q.forwardingPointer = p
     8       return false

                   (b) PreFlip phase write barrier with limited self-flipping

     1    WritepreFlip (src, i, ref):
     2       if inFromspace(ref) && inTospace(src)
     3          ref ← ref.forwardingPointer
     4       src[i] ← ref
     5       if inFromspace(src) || inTospace(src)
     6          repl ← src.forwardingPointer
     7          if inFromspace(ref) ||
     8                    (inTospace(ref) && inFromspace(repl))
     9              repl[i] ← ref.forwardingPointer
     10         else
     11             repl[i] ← ref

                                 (c) Full self-flip write barrier

     1    WriteFlip (src, i, ref):
     2       if inFromspace(ref)
     3          ref = ref.forwardingPointer
     4       src[i] ← ref
     5       if inFromspace(src) || inTospace(src)
     6          repl ← src.forwardingPointer
     7          repl[i] ← ref

Platinum
The Platinum collector [Wu et al., 2020b] aims to deal with long application latency tails
(caused by garbage collection pauses) and to improve the utilisation of the CPU in a
mostly-concurrent, generational, replicating collector. They take two measures to address
CPU utilisation. First, they use fewer collector threads than cores, ensuring that resources
will be available for mutators to keep running during collection. Second, each collector
thread is bound to a particular core. When the collector is not running, mutators may use
any core, but when the collector is running they are restricted to the cores where collec-
tor threads are not running. This strategy helps guarantee high CPU utilisation for the
collector threads.
    Wu et al. also exploit two hardware features found on some modern Intel processors,
transactional memory and memory protection keys, to keep mutator write barrier over-
heads low. Memory protection keys allow the programmer to use a system call to asso-

ciate a particular protection key with a range of pages. The programmer can set any access
restrictions, such as to make the pages read-only, by setting a register that can be accessed
cheaply without a system call. These additional restrictions can be changed at will, though
they cannot allow more access rights than the underlying page table entry does. The crit-
ical point is that protection keys allow different threads to have different access rights to
the same virtual memory pages.
    Platinum sets up two protection keys. During collection, one is associated with pages to
which only the collector threads should have write access, and Platinum arranges that the
mutators set their protection keys to disallow writes to these pages. The other protection
key is associated with pages to which mutators do have write access.
    Platinum uses the heap layout from HotSpot’s Parallel collector: an old generation and
a young generation split into an eden and two survivor spaces. During collection, mutators
access only fromspace replicas of objects. Collector threads have write access to most of
the heap — the Collection region. In contrast, mutators have write access only to the blocks
that saw recent allocation — the Pinned region — and blocks reserved for allocation — the
Allocation region. These regions are not scavenged. When the collector copies an object,
it places forwarding- and back-pointers in the fromspace and tospace replicas. When a
mutator attempts to modify an object in a page in the Collection region, to which it does
not have write access, it takes a trap. If the object being mutated has been copied, the trap
handler adjusts the mutator’s protection key temporarily in order to update the field in
both copies of the object in a hardware transaction. In contrast, Transactional Sapphire
protects the collector’s copying in a transaction (hardware or software).
    As with other mostly-concurrent collectors, Platinum needs an initial and a final stop-
the-world phase. As usual, in the first pause, the collectors scan thread stacks. How-
ever, Platinum needs to do more work in the final stop-the-world phase. Because collector
threads do not scavenge the Pinned and Allocation regions in the concurrent phase, Plat-
inum must not only update references in thread stacks to objects in the Collection region
that have been moved but must also sweep these two regions to update any references.

17.5     Concurrent compaction
Chapter 3 discussed approaches to garbage collection that split into two phases, marking
and compacting. Recall that compaction is decoupled from the tracing phase that deter-
mines reachable objects. This allows greater freedom than a copying collector over the
order in which objects are relocated (by address, say, rather than in order of tracing for
reachability). It can further give freedom as to which regions are compacted and which are
left alone. In principle, these compacting collectors could defragment the entire heap one
region at a time — thus, at the memory overhead of a single region — unlike a copying
collector which must reserve sufficient space to accommodate all the objects that it copies,
in the worst case, the size of fromspace.

Compressor
Compressor [Kermany and Petrank, 2006], presented earlier in Section 3.4 and Section 14.8,
exploits the freedom allowed by separating marking from copying to perform compaction
concurrently with the mutator threads.
   Recall that Compressor first computes an auxiliary ‘first-object’ table that maps a to-
space page to the first fromspace object that will be moved into the page. Parallel com-
pactor threads then race to claim an unmapped tospace virtual page, map it to a physical
page, populate it with its live copies from fromspace pages, and redirect each pointer field

in the copies to refer to tospace. Once all the live objects in a fromspace page have been
copied, it is immediately unmapped.
    To enable concurrent compaction, Compressor exploits virtual memory page protec-
tion primitives similarly to Appel et al. [1988] (where protection served as the read barrier
for concurrent copying collection in order to prevent the mutator from accessing tospace
pages whose objects have not yet been copied or which contain unforwarded pointers).
Ossia et al. [2004] also used protection simply to allow concurrent forwarding of point-
ers in pages containing compacted objects, but Compressor drives both compaction and
forwarding using page protection. Compressor protects the tospace pages from read and
write access (without yet mapping them to physical pages). Computing the first-object
table and protecting tospace occurs concurrently with mutator threads operating in from-
space. Compressor then briefly stops all the mutator threads to switch their roots to refer
to tospace addresses before releasing the threads. Of course, the contents of those pages
have not yet been copied. At this point, if a mutator accesses a protected tospace page, it
will trap. Handling the trap requires doing the work of compaction to map and populate
the page with its copies (the mutator performs incremental compaction work as if it was a
compactor thread), and forward the references in those copies, before the mutator can re-
sume and access the page. Note that only the data for this page is copied, thus the handler
will not evacuate the beginning of an object that starts on the previous page or the end of
one that continues onto the next page. Concurrent compaction requires that a compactor
thread be able to access the page while other mutator threads are still protected from ac-
cess. To support this, Compressor double-maps each physical page when its contents are
to be copied, once in its ‘natural’ (still-protected) tospace virtual page, and again in an
unprotected virtual page private to the compactor thread (see also double mapping in Sec-
tion 11.10). Once the compaction work has been done for that page, the tospace virtual
page can be unprotected so mutators can proceed, and the private mapping is discarded.
    In essence, Compressor applies the standard tricolour invariant. Fromspace pages are
white, protected tospace pages are grey, and unprotected tospace pages are black. Initially,
the mutator threads operate grey in fromspace while the first-object table is computed
along with the tospace addresses. When the mutator threads are flipped over to tospace,
they are black. The protection-driven double mapping read barrier prevents the black
mutator threads from acquiring stale fromspace references from grey pages that are still in
the process of being populated with their fromspace copies.
    Compressor must also handle other aspects of the tricolour invariant. In particular, af-
ter marking and before the task of determining the first-object table begins, mutators must
allocate all new objects in tospace to prevent those allocations from interfering with the
relocation map (otherwise, allocating to a hole in fromspace would interfere). Moreover,
these newly allocated objects must eventually have their pointer fields scanned after the
mutators flip to tospace, to redirect any stale fromspace references in those fields over to
tospace, and similarly for global roots. Thus, both newly allocated tospace objects and the
global roots must be protected from access by mutators, with traps on their pages forcing
scanning to redirect their pointers.
    Because the performance of Compressor depends heavily on the cost of virtual mem-
ory page mapping and protection primitives, which can be onerous [Hosking and Moss,
1993b], it is important to batch these operations as much as possible. For example, Com-
pressor actually protects and double-maps the entire tospace at the beginning of collection
(to avoid the cost of double mapping each page as it is processed). Similarly, it moves eight
virtual pages per trap (to better amortise the trap overhead on mutator threads).
    One downside of Compressor is that when a mutator traps on access to a protected
tospace page, then it must not only copy all of that page’s objects, it must also forward all
the pointers in those objects to refer to their relocated (or soon to be relocated) targets. This

can impose significant pauses on the mutator. In a moment, we will discuss the Pauseless
collector, which reduces the amount of incremental work needed to be performed by a mu-
tator to copying at most one object (without needing to forward any of the stale fromspace
references it contains). Before doing so, let us briefly review the way in which Compressor
drives compaction using page protection, as illustrated in Figure 17.1. The figures show
the logical grouping of virtual pages into distinct categories (the linear address-ordered lay-
out of the heap is intentionally not represented).
Live: pages containing (mostly) live objects (initially dark grey in the figures)
Condemned: pages containing some live objects, but mostly dead ones, which are good
    candidates for compaction (light grey in the figures, with dark grey live objects)
Free: pages currently free but available for allocation (dashed borders)
New Live: pages in which copied live objects have been allocated but not yet copied
    (dashed borders, with dashed space allocated for copies)
Dead: unmapped pages that can be recycled (freed for allocation) once there are no point-
    ers to them (shown hatched in the figures)
     Figure 17.1a illustrates the initial state in which live objects have been identified along
with those to be relocated. For ease of later comparison with Pauseless and its genera-
tional successor C4, we take the liberty here to restrict compaction only to pages sparsely
occupied by live objects. In Compressor, live tospace pages containing stale references that
need forwarding, and tospace pages into which objects are yet to be relocated, must first
be protected to prevent the mutators from accessing them. Concurrently with the muta-
tors, the forwarding information for the live objects is prepared on the side in auxiliary
data structures. At this point, the heap pages are configured as in Figure 17.1b, and the
mutator roots are all flipped over to refer to only the protected tospace pages. Compaction
can now proceed concurrently with the mutators, which will trap if they try to access an
unprocessed tospace page. Trapping on a live tospace page causes all of the references
in that page to be forwarded to refer to tospace, as in Figure 17.1c. Trapping on a re-
served tospace page evacuates objects from condemned fromspace pages to fill the page,
and the references contained in these copied objects are forwarded to refer to tospace (Fig-
ure 17.1d). When all the live objects in a condemned fromspace page have been evacuated,
it is completely dead and its physical page can be unmapped and returned to the operating
system, though its virtual page cannot be recycled until all references to it have been for-
warded. Compaction ceases when all tospace pages have been processed and unprotected
(Figure 17.1e). We now contrast this approach with that of the Pauseless and C4 collectors.

Pauseless and C4
Azul Systems found that stop-the-world collection of the young generation led to long
pauses in enterprise-scale systems and applications (such as portals, replicated in-memory
data and messaging systems) that hold a large amount of data for each session. Their
Pauseless collector [Click et al., 2005; Azul, 2008] and its generational extension, the Contin-
uously Concurrent Compacting Collector (C4) [Tene et al., 2011], address this problem. Pause-
less protects fromspace pages that contain objects being moved, instead of protecting to-
space pages containing moved objects and/or stale pointers. Rather than needing to pro-
tect all of the tospace pages like Compressor, Pauseless and C4 protect the much smaller
set of fromspace pages whose objects are actually being moved (focusing on sparsely pop-
ulated pages that will yield most space), and these pages can be protected incrementally

    Roots

                Live   Live   Live      Condemned           Condemned

              (a) Initial Compressor configuration. All pages are in fromspace.

    Roots

                Live   Live   Live      Condemned           Condemned

    (b) Compute forwarding information, protect all tospace pages (illustrated by the dou-
    ble horizontal bars). These include those reserved to hold evacuated objects and those
    Live pages not condemned for evacuation. Then flip mutator roots to tospace. Muta-
    tors accessing a protected tospace page will now trap.

    Roots

                Live   Live   Live      Condemned           Condemned

    (c) Trapping on a Live page forwards pointers contained in that page to refer to their
    tospace targets. Unprotect the Live page once all its stale fromspace references have
    been replaced with tospace references.

    Roots

                Live   Live   Live      Condemned           Condemned

    (d) Trapping on a reserved tospace page evacuates objects from fromspace pages to fill
    the page. The fields of these objects are updated to point to tospace. Unprotect the
    tospace page and unmap fully evacuated fromspace pages (releasing their physical
    pages, shown as hatched).

    Roots

                Live   Live   Live

    (e) Compaction is complete when all Live pages have been scanned to forward ref-
    erences they contain, and all live objects in condemned pages have been copied into
    tospace and the references they contain have been forwarded.

Figure 17.1: Compressor

        63                      44   41                     20                      0
         OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO SS N ppppppppppppppppppppp aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa

Figure 17.2: C4’s tagged pointer layout. The a bits are the address. The two
       SS bits identify the space (generation) in which the object resides and N is the
       NMT bit. The virtual address to which the pointer refers is indicated by the
       p (page number) bits and the a bits (address within the page).

when they become a source for evacuation. Pauseless uses a self-healing loaded value
barrier (LVB) to intercept and repair (heal) stale fromspace references before the mutator
traps trying to use them, copying their target object as necessary. This avoids blocking
the mutator to evacuate all of the live objects on the protected fromspace page. The ini-
tial implementation of Pauseless used proprietary hardware to implement the read barrier
directly as a special load-reference instruction, but on stock hardware Pauseless and C4
compile the necessary logic inline with every load-reference operation by the mutator.
    Pauseless steals one address bit from the 64-bit address space to use as a pointer tag.
This Not-Marked-Through (NMT) bit is used by the LVB during the concurrent marking
phase of the collector to decide whether the reference has previously been scanned by the
collector. The collector maintains a desired value for the NMT bit and the LVB ensures that
every loaded reference has been safely scanned by the collector and points to the current
location of its safely accessible (unprotected) target object (that is, the evacuated object in
tospace if it has been copied).
    The C4 generational collector extends this scheme to support simultaneous and inde-
pendently active concurrent collections of different generations. While Pauseless main-
tains a single, global, currently expected value of the NMT state, C4 instead maintains a
different expected value for each generation. C4 steals an additional pointer tag bit per
generation to encode the generation in which the referent resides. This allows the LVB
to quickly check the NMT value for the proper generation, which can differ because col-
lections of young and old generations proceed independently. Moreover, a reference’s
generation never changes without relocating its target object. Figure 17.2 shows the layout
of C4’s tagged pointers in a 64-bit object reference. The tagged pointers must be stripped
of their tag before they can be dereferenced. The compiler can modify all dereferences to
strip the tag before use, and reuse the stripped reference where the reuse does not cross a
GC safe-point. Alternatively, an implementation can multi-map memory or alias address
ranges so that the tag is effectively ignored.
    During an active mark phase, if the LVB encounters a loaded reference with a NMT
state that does not match the expected state for its target generation, the LVB will remedy
that by logging the reference on the collector’s work list to be scanned. Self-healing repairs
the slot from which the reference was loaded. Null references are ignored.
    Likewise, if the LVB also encounters a loaded reference that points to a protected from-
space page whose live objects are being evacuated, the LVB will obtain the new location of
the reference’s target (copying the object if it has not yet been evacuated), and repair the
slot from which the mutator loaded the fromspace reference.
    The initial implementation of Pauseless and C4 used proprietary hardware which im-
plemented the LVB as a special single-cycle instruction that implicitly interprets the pointer
tag bits, but on stock hardware this can be emulated at some cost as instructions inlined
to interpret the pointer tag explicitly at every load-reference operation by the mutator. Al-
gorithm 17.9 shows the interpretation of the tags and and pseudocode for a representative
LVB implementation in C4. Note that the specifics differ with the context in which the LVB
is generated: interpreter, compiler optimisation level or in the run-time system itself.

Algorithm 17.9: Pauseless/C4 loaded value barrier (LVB)

 1   Expected[4] = {0, 0, 0, 0}
 2

 3   // Space ID Values:
 4   // 00 NULL and non-heap pointers
 5   // 01 Old generation references
 6   // 10 New generation references
 7   // 11 Unused
 8

 9   Read(src, i):
10      src_ptr ← src & 0x1FFFFFFFFFF                              /* strip tags from reference */
11      addr ← &src_ptr[i]                                             /* address of source slot */
12      value ← *addr                                 /* load target reference from source slot */
13

14       // target referent may need to be marked or may be in protected fromspace page
15       trigger_mark ← value.NMT ̸= Expected[value.space]
16       trigger_copy ← protected(value.page)
17       if trigger_mark || trigger_copy /* may need to mark and/or copy referent */
18            value ← shade(addr, value, trigger_mark, trigger_copy)
19       return value
20

21   shade(addr, value, trigger_mark, trigger_copy):
22      oldValue ← value
23      if trigger_mark                                   /* fix the trigger conditions */
24         value.NMT ← not value.NMT
25         add(worklist, value)                      /* enqueue to marker’s work list */
26      if trigger_copy
27         value ← forward(value)                    /* copy referent if not yet copied */
28      loop                              /* will only repeat if CAS fails spuriously */
29         if oldValue = CompareAndSwap(addr, oldValue, value)
30            return value                         /* CAS succeeded, so we are done */
31         if oldValue ̸= *addr
32            return value          /* Another thread updated slot but value is ok */

    Here, the LVB executes first the load, followed by the LVB logic. If the loaded reference
does not have the expected NMT value for the generation to which it refers then the ref-
erence needs to be queued for the collector to mark as necessary, also correcting its NMT
value. If it refers to a protected page (which is currently being evacuated by the collector),
then the reference needs to be corrected to point to its relocated referent. Both of these
situations trigger execution of slow path code to correct the situation. When the trigger-
ing reference points to an object that has not yet been relocated, then the LVB will first
cooperatively relocate the object before forwarding the reference to point to its new loca-
tion. Unlike a Brooks-style indirection barrier there is no null check, no memory access,
no load-use penalty, no need for a forwarding word in the object header and no cache
footprint imposed on the fast path, making it efficient and predictable.

The Pauseless and C4 garbage collection phases. Both collectors divide their work into
three main phases, each of which is fully parallel and concurrent.

Mark is responsible for periodically refreshing the mark bits. In the process of doing that,
    it will set the NMT bit for all references to the desired value (in C4’s case, the desired
    value for the generation being collected) and gather liveness statistics for each page.
    The marker starts from the roots (static global variables and mutator stacks) and
    begins marking reachable objects. The NMT bit assists in making the Mark phase
    fully concurrent, as described further below.

Relocate uses the most recently available mark bits to find sparse pages with little live
     data, to compact those pages (relocating their objects), and to free their physical back-
     ing memory. The Relocate phase starts by protecting sparsely occupied fromspace
     pages against mutator access and then copies live objects out of those pages. For-
     warding information maintained on the side tracks the locations of relocated objects.
     If a mutator loads a reference to a protected page, the LVB will trigger and replace
     the stale protected-page reference with the correctly forwarded reference. After the
     page contents have been relocated, the Relocate phase frees the physical memory,
     which can be immediately recycled by the operating system. Virtual memory cannot
     be freed until no more stale references to that page remain in the heap. A Relocate
     phase runs continuously, freeing memory to keep pace with mutator allocation. It
     runs standalone or concurrently with the next mark phase.

Remap updates every remaining pointer in the heap whose target has been relocated.
    Collector threads traverse the object graph executing the LVB against every reference
    in the heap, forwarding stale references as if triggered by a mutator. At the end of this
    phase, no live heap reference can refer to a page protected by the previous Relocate
    phase, so virtual memory for those pages is freed. Since both the Remap and Mark
    phases traverse all live objects, Pauseless and C4 are able to fold them together. The
    Remap phase for the previous collection cycle runs concurrently with the Mark phase
    for the current cycle.

    Pauseless and C4 have several qualitative advantages. Firstly, there is no ‘rush’ to fin-
ish any given phase. No phase imposes a substantial burden on the mutators that needs
to be relieved by ending the phase quickly. There is no ‘race’ to finish some phase before
collection can begin again — the Relocate phase runs continuously and can immediately
free memory at any point. Since all phases are parallel, the collector can keep up with any
number of mutator threads simply by adding more collector threads. Unlike some other
concurrent marking collectors, marking is guaranteed to complete in a single traversal re-
gardless of the mutation rate (there is no need to re-mark — revert to grey — previously
marked objects, nor to stop the mutators in a final mark step to ensure termination). Col-
lector threads will compete with mutator threads for CPU time, though any spare CPU can
be employed by the collector.
    Secondly, the phases incorporate a self-healing effect, where mutators use the LVB im-
mediately to correct any mis-tagged reference by replacing it with the corrected reference
in the slot from which it was loaded (marking and relocating its target as necessary). On
Azul’s proprietary Vega hardware, this was reported to result in a drop in mutator utilisa-
tion for a short period (a ‘trap storm’) following a phase shift, with an minimum mutator
utilisation penalty of approximately 20 milliseconds spread over a few hundred millisec-
onds. But Pauseless has no stop-the-world pauses where all threads must be simultane-
ously stopped. We now discuss the phases in more detail.

Mark. The Mark phase manipulates mark bits managed on the side. It begins by clearing
the current cycle’s mark bits. Each object has two mark bits, one for the current cycle and
one for the previous cycle.

    The Mark phase then marks all global references, scans each mutator thread’s root set,
and flips the per-thread expected NMT value. For C4, the root set also includes the remem-
bered set of references from old to young objects. The remembered set is maintained by a
precise card marking barrier that leverages the same reference metadata as the LVB to filter
out unnecessary card marks without need for address range comparisons. Running muta-
tors cooperate by marking their own root set at a ragged handshake. Blocked (or stalled)
mutators are marked in parallel by mark phase collector threads. Each mutator thread can
immediately proceed once its root set has been marked (and expected NMT flipped), but
the Mark phase cannot proceed until all threads have executed the handshake.
    After the root sets have been marked, marking proceeds in parallel and concurrently
with the mutators in the style of Flood et al. [2001]. The markers ignore the NMT bit in
references loaded from their work lists. The NMT bit is only used for loads from heap
objects. This continues until all live objects have been marked. New objects are allocated
in live pages. Because mutators can only hold (and thus store) marked-through references,
the initial state of the mark bit for new objects does not matter for marking.
    The NMT bit is crucial to completion of the Mark phase in a single pass over the live
objects, regardless of stores by the mutator, because the load barrier prevents mutators
from acquiring unmarked references. A mutator that loads a reference with the wrong
value in the NMT bit will trigger the LVB to communicate the reference to the marker
threads. Because it can never acquire an unmarked reference, a mutator can never store
and propagate an unmarked reference. The self-healing nature of the LVB also stores the
corrected (marked) reference back to memory, so that particular reference can never trigger
again in the current cycle. This self-healing effect means that a phase-change will not make
the mutators wait until the marker threads can flip the NMT bits in the objects on which
the mutator is working. Instead, each mutator flips each reference it encounters as it runs.
Steady state NMT triggers are rare.
    The mutator must take care that updating the triggering reference does not clobber a
store to the same location by another thread since the NMT-trigger occurred. Thus, the
LVB uses a compare-and-swap operation so that the memory is only updated if it has not
changed since the triggering thread read from that location. Because a ragged handshake
is used to initiate the Mark phase, different mutators may briefly have a different view of
the desired NMT value. It is possible for mutators on different sides of the handshake to
compete, possibly more than once, over a single reference’s NMT value triggering in the
LVB and updating in memory. This can only last until the unflipped thread passes its next
GC safe-point where it will mark through its stack, and cross the handshake. Note that it is
not possible for a single thread to hold the same reference twice in its root set with different
NMT settings, so pointer equality can always be implemented as a direct comparison of
(loaded) pointer values.
    The scalability of marking can be improved by reducing cache contention. Pauseless
held mark bits on the side in a bitmap, which avoids compare-and-swap on object headers,
but Iyengar et al. [2012a] improve on this for C4 by striping6 cache lines of the bitmap across
processors, based on the addresses of those lines. A marking thread works only on its own
stripe. When it finds a pointer whose mark bit lies in a different stripe, it enqueues that
pointer for another thread to work on, without examining the mark bit. While it is possible
to have one worker per stripe, they found that four workers per stripe reduced contention
well enough and usefully reduced the number of queues needed. The queues accumulate
a fixed number of entries, and when one fills, the thread publishes the group of entries to
a global pool, where other threads can claim the group and work on it. When a worker’s
own queue becomes empty, it publishes any partial queues it has for other threads. Iyengar
  6 Flood et al. [2001] did the same thing; they used the term stride as opposed to stripe.

et al. showed that this striping approach improved scalability, scaling linearly up to the
number of cores on a socket. They further observed that when a mutator enqueues a
reference for marking, the referent of the reference is usually in the mutator’s own cache so
it can be advantageous to process the reference using a marking thread that is topologically
near the queueing mutator. They found using a topology aware preference when marking
threads claim queued pointers to mark gave approximately 10% improvement when the
number of marking threads exceeds the number of cores per socket.
    C4 permits multiple young generation collections to occur while it is simultaneously
collecting the old generation. Mostly, these collections are independent, but some cross-
generational coordination is necessary. Old generation marking starts with a set of young-
to-old roots gathered by a special young generation collection triggered at the start of every
old generation collection cycle; further young generation collections running during this
old generation collection cycle will ignore any new-to-old pointers they find. The collec-
tors need to synchronise whenever the young generation collector needs to access objects
that the old generation collector is relocating or otherwise modifying. Examples include
metadata objects that the collector needs to access to discover an object’s layout, and re-
membered set cards that the young generation collector reads to discover the source of
old-to-young pointers. In order to access such objects safely, the young generation collec-
tor waits briefly until the old generation collector has completed relocating objects on a
page, at which point the old generation collector waits for the young generation collector.
After the young generation collector has scanned the card(s), it signals the old generation
collector to resume relocation.
    Termination of the Mark phase only needs to worry about the race between a mutator
having loaded an unmarked reference but not having yet completed the LVB. The LVB
never spans a GC safe-point, so it is sufficient that all the mutators cross a GC safe-point
without triggering an LVB. Thus, the Mark phase requests an empty handshake. Any
references discovered before the handshake will be marked as normal. When all mutators
have executed the handshake without reporting a new reference for marking, then the
Mark phase is complete. Otherwise, the marker threads will consume the new references
for marking and the handshake can be repeated. Because no new references can be created
with the wrong NMT bit, this process must eventually terminate.

Relocate. The Relocate phase starts by finding sparsely occupied pages. Figure 17.3a
shows a logical grouping of virtual pages into distinct categories (again, the linear address-
ordered layout of the heap is intentionally not illustrated). There are references from both
the mutator roots and live pages into sparse pages whose live objects are to be compacted
by evacuation. The Relocate phase first builds side arrays to hold forwarding pointers for
the objects to be relocated. These cannot be held in the fromspace originals because the
physical storage for the fromspace pages will be reclaimed immediately after copying and
long before all the fromspace references have been forwarded. The side array of forward-
ing data is not large because only sparse pages are relocated, so it can be implemented
easily as a hash table. The Relocate phase then protects the mostly dead condemned pages
from access by the mutators as in Figure 17.3b. Objects in these pages are now considered
stale and can no longer be modified. Also, if a mutator loads a reference that points into a
protected page, then it will trigger the LVB to repair the reference.
    At the time the fromspace pages are protected, running mutators may have stale ref-
erences in their root set. These are already past their load barrier and will not get caught
directly. Instead, the mutators are asked to forward any existing stale references from
their root set with a ragged handshake, relocating the fromspace targets as necessary (Fig-
ure 17.3c). Once all the mutators have executed this handshake, copying of the remaining

    Roots

                Live    Live   Live        Condemned           Condemned

                (a) Initial Pauseless configuration. All pages are in fromspace.

    Roots

                Live    Live   Live        Condemned           Condemned

    (b) Compute forwarding information, protect all condemned fromspace pages (illus-
    trated by the double horizontal bars), but leave tospace pages unprotected. These in-
    clude those reserved to hold evacuated objects and those live pages not condemned
    for evacuation.

    Roots

                Live    Live   Live        Condemned           Condemned

    (c) Flip mutator roots to tospace, copying their targets, but leaving the references they
    contain pointing to fromspace. Mutators accessing an object on a protected fromspace
    page will trap and wait until the object is copied.

    Roots

                Live    Live   Live        Condemned           Condemned

    (d) Mutators loading a reference to a protected page will now trigger the LVB, copying
    their targets.

    Roots

                Live    Live   Live

    (e) Compaction is finished when all live objects in condemned pages have been copied
    to tospace, and all tospace pages have been scanned to forward references they contain.

Figure 17.3: Pauseless

live objects into tospace can proceed concurrently with the mutators. The load barrier
prevents the mutators from seeing a stale object before it has finished moving.
    As in the Mark phase, the load barrier in the Relocate phase prevents the mutator
from loading a stale reference. The self-healing LVB forwards the reference and updates
the memory location using compare-and-swap. If the fromspace object has not yet been
copied, then the mutator will copy the object on behalf of the collector rather than waiting.
The mutator copies the object from the collector’s double mapped view of the page. This is
illustrated in Figure 17.3d. Large objects that span multiple pages are not relocated, nor are
objects in mostly live pages. An object that consumes about half of a page can be copied in
about a millisecond.7
    To amortise the cost of modifying page protections and forwarding the mutator roots,
Pauseless batches up groups of sparse pages for compaction, typically protecting (and
relocating and freeing) a few gigabytes at a time. The rate at which relocation must proceed
is dictated only by the need to keep up with the allocation rate of the mutators.

Remap. Virtual memory is not freed immediately. The final step of forwarding the remain-
ing stale references in the live pages and reclaiming virtual memory falls to the Remap
phase. At the end of the Remap phase, there are no more stale references to the fromspace
pages so their virtual memory can now be recycled (Figure 17.3e), the side array of for-
warding pointers can be reclaimed, and the collection cycle is complete. Recall that real
memory for evacuated pages was reclaimed long before, during the Relocate phase. Fur-
ther recall that the Remap phase for the current collection cycle runs concurrently with the
Mark phase for the next cycle.

Operating system extensions. Pauseless and C4 make aggressive and sustained use of
virtual memory mapping and physical memory manipulation. This functionality can be
implemented using standard operating system primitives, but the performance and rates
at which that functionality can be deployed using the standard primitives is prohibitive.
Pauseless-specific extensions to the operating system’s memory manager result in signifi-
cant performance improvements [Azul, 2010]. Enterprise Java applications commonly see
allocation rates of from 200 to 500 megabytes/second per core, which must be matched by
a sustained garbage collection rate to avoid pauses. In Pauseless/C4, each page will even-
tually be remapped once (and later unmapped once) in order to reclaim dead object space.
No physical memory copying is required, so the remap rate is not significantly sensitive
to memory bandwidth. Instead, the cost of the remapping operations dominate. Typical
operating systems support remapping with three limitations.
  1. Each page remap includes an implicit translation lookaside buffer invalidation op-
     eration. Since translation lookaside buffer invalidations require multiple cross-CPU
     interrupts (over all cores) the cost of remapping grows with the number of active
     threads in the program. This happens even when the active threads do not partici-
     pate in the remapping, or have no interaction with the remapped memory.
  2. Only small (typically 4-kilobyte) page mappings can be remapped.
  3. Remap operations are single-threaded within a process (grabbing a common write
     lock).
To address these shortcomings, Pauseless/C4 benefits from operating system extensions
that support bulk remapping with a single system-wide translation lookaside buffer inval-
idation for a batch of remaps, remapping of large (typically 2-megabyte) page mappings,
  7 Recall that Pauseless’s pages are quite large.

and multiple concurrent remaps within the same process. These operating system im-
provements result in approximately three orders of magnitude speedup compared to a
stock operating system, scaling almost linearly as the number of active threads doubles.
    Summing up, Pauseless/C4 is designed as a fully parallel, generational and concur-
rent collector for large multiprocessor systems. It requires no stop-the-world pauses and
reclaiming of dead objects happens throughout a collector cycle rather than, say, only at
the end. There are no phases where the collector must race to finish before the mutators
run out of free memory. Mutators can perceive a period of reduced utilisation during trap
storms at some phase shifts, but the self-healing property of the LVB serves to recover
utilisation quickly.

Collie
Can mutator utilisation be further improved during collection? Collie is another full-heap
parallel compacting collector that uses transactional memory to ensure consistency [Iyen-
gar et al., 2012b] and wait-freedom. It was developed on Azul Systems’ Vega system which
provided hardware assisted transactional memory as well as the self-healing LVB instruc-
tion used by Pauseless/C4 described above [Click et al., 2005; Tene et al., 2011]. Collie
extends Pauseless but attempts to compact most objects inside transactions. If a trans-
action fails to relocate an object, the object is pinned to its location, without compaction,
but at a mirrored virtual address on a tospace page mapped to the same physical page
(the fromspace and mirrored tospace addresses differ by only the value of a high-order bit
not interpreted as an address). An evacuating transaction will fail if there is a potentially
inconsistent concurrent write or an inconsistent concurrent read of a memory location that
is written to.
     Collie relies on the notion of stable referrer sets. A referrer set is the set of locations
that point to an object. An object’s referrer set is said to be stable after marking completes
if (i) it does not contain any thread stack or register references before the collector starts
to relocate the object, and (ii) once relocation begins, no new references are added to the
object’s referrer set. In other words, an object is guaranteed to be inaccessible to mutators
as long as its referrer set is stable, and thus can be safely relocated to a fresh location.
Objects whose referrer sets are either not stable before an attempt to evacuate them or
which do not remain stable during the evacuation are pinned at their mirrored tospace
virtual addresses.
     The stability of an object’s referrer set is identified through a combination of the Collie
mutator’s load and write barriers, and transactions used by the collector in its compacting
phase. The write barrier intercepts heap reference stores and pins their target by setting a
bit in its header. Note that Collie identifies referrer sets conservatively: a write may cause
some object’s precise referrer set to shrink. Once the compaction phase starts, Collie’s LVB
ensures that any load of a fromspace reference will cause the barrier to attempt to replace it
atomically with a mirrored-tospace reference and then reload the reference from the heap
location (Algorithm 17.10). If the barrier succeeds in replacing the old reference value, it
has effectively pinned the object. If the replacement fails, then the value at address must
have been changed, either by a racing mutator or by the collector’s having evacuated the
target object; either way, the newly loaded reference will be a valid tospace reference.
     Wait-free concurrent marking is similar to that of Pauseless/C4 but also constructs the
per-object, heap-stable (containing all heap references to the object) referrer sets. Evalua-
tion suggests that capping referrer set sizes at four words is sufficient to capture most ob-
jects. Popular objects with more references than can fit in a referrer set (or objects that fail to
have a referrer set allocated for them) are pinned. The concurrent compaction phase copies
live objects to tospace, replacing fromspace references with objects’ tospace addresses. Just

Algorithm 17.10: Collie’s load barrier trap

 1    GCtrap(address, oldRef):
 2       mirror = mirror(oldRef)
 3       CompareAndSwap(address, oldRef, mirror)
 4       return *address

like Pauseless/C4, Collie compacts at page granularity and releases fromspace physical
pages early, allowing them to be reused. By the end of the marking phase, Collie has es-
tablished heap-stable referrer sets but these also include references in thread stacks and
registers. Thread stacks are next scanned individually in a pre-compaction ragged hand-
shake, pinning the target of any reference encountered — note that this does not require a
global rendezvous. This handshake also arms the LVB to trap on the load of any reference
to an object on a page that was relocatable at the start of the handshake. By the end of the
handshake, all objects either have stable referrer sets (and so are potentially movable) or
are pinned.
    Individually movable objects are moved to tospace by first copying their contents and
then updating the references in their referrer sets to point at their new locations. The
copy can be performed outside a transaction since any concurrent mutator access would
pin the object, but transactional memory is used to update the referrer set atomically with
respect to other threads. After the transaction is started, each reference in the object’s stable
referrer set is checked to ensure that it does not point to the object’s tospace mirror’s virtual
address (which would indicate that the reference in the referrer set has been updated); the
transaction aborts if any reference to a mirror address is found. Then, each reference in
the referrer set is replaced with a reference to the object’s new tospace location. Finally,
the transaction is committed. If a transaction fails or aborts for any reason, the object is
rendered pinned. The last step of a collection is to fix up references to pinned objects to
ensure that they point to the objects’ virtual addresses in the mirrored tospace. Because
the LVB is self-healing, this fixup traversal can be delayed and rolled into the next mark
phase, just as Pauseless/C4 do.
    Compared with Pauseless, Collie has been shown to offer significantly better mini-
mum mutator utilisation (MMU) and improved throughput in the compaction phase on
Azul’s Vega platform. The aborting load barrier may cause fragmentation as objects are
pinned on mirrored tospace pages, as with Staccato [McCloskey et al., 2008] or Chicken
[Pizlo et al., 2008], but this is limited to the working set of the mutators during collec-
tion. Finally, although Collie was developed on Azul’s Vega specialised hardware which
was withdrawn in 2013 in favour of software-only solutions, Iyengar et al. expect Collie
to be implementable on other hardware transactional memory systems such as Intel’s Re-
stricted Transactional Memory. We are unaware of any attempts to do so and Azul has not
deployed Collie, believing that C4 offers sufficient performance.

ZGC
ZGC [Lidén, 2018] is a non-generational, mostly-concurrent, parallel, mark-compact, re-
gion-based collector.8 ZGC’s original goals were to provide pause times of no more than
10 milliseconds (today these are typically less than a millisecond) at a throughput no more
than 15% worse than the OpenJDK G1 collector, and to handle a wide range of heap sizes
including very large ones.
     8 We are indebted to Yang and Wrigstad [2022] from whose primer on ZGC we have drawn heavily.

        63                     46     41                                                   0
        OOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO F R MM aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaOOO

        (a) Non-generational tagged pointer layout. The F bit is used for concurrent mark-
        ing through with finalisers, the R bit is the relocated bit, and the two MM bits are
        mark bits.

        63      57                                                     15                  0
         aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaOOO RRRR MM mm FF rr OOOO

        (b) Generational tagged pointer layout. The four R bits indicate the good colour
        (only one of which is set at any time), the M and m bits are mark bits for the old
        and young generations, respectively, the F bits are used for concurrent marking
        through with finalisers and the two r bits indicate whether the field is tracked in a
        remembered set.

Figure 17.4: ZGC tagged pointer layouts. The a bits are the address the
        pointer holds (with 64-bit alignment, the three lower-order bits are 000).

    Like Pauseless , ZGC uses tagged pointers and self-healing load barriers. Figure 17.4a
shows its tagged pointer layout. A group of four higher-order bits determine a colour. The
four bits are named F (finalisable), R (relocated), M1 and M0 (marked). A given pointer will
have only one of R, M0 and M1 set, so these can be thought of as the colour of the pointer.
We explain on page 403 how F is used in dealing with Java finalisation. At any given time,
only one of R, M0 or M1 is the good colour; loading pointers of other colours forces a load
barrier slow path (see Algorithm 17.11). To allow direct access to objects using a pointer of
any colour, the heap is triple mapped.
    ZGC is a mostly-concurrent algorithm, with main phases similar to those of Pauseless.
In particular, the Mark and Remap steps are run side-by-side. The main phases are:

STW1: The initial stop-the-world phase comprises three steps. (i) Flip the good colour
   to either M0 or M1 (they alternate from cycle to cycle). As will be seen, the previ-
   ous good colour will have been R, so this colour change immediately invalidates all
   pointers (causes them to have a bad colour). (ii) Arrange for threads to allocate from
   fresh regions. All objects in the new regions will be considered live throughout this
   collection cycle. (iii) Scan the roots, replacing non-null pointers with a version of
   good colour, obtained by applying the self-healing mark barrier, and push them onto
   the mark stack. The mark barrier is the same as the load barrier in Algorithm 17.11
   but does not return a result and therefore is streamlined in the obvious ways.

Mark/Remap: Marking takes the typical steps: pop an item from the marking thread’s
    mark stack; try to mark the object; and if that succeeds, proceed to process the pointer
    slots of the object, using the self-healing mark barrier. Marking also records the
    volume of live data in the marked object’s region. Just as with Pauseless, ZGC may
    discover a stale reference to a region condemned in the previous collection cycle. The
    mark barrier remaps these references to point to the new location of their target and
    tints them with the good colour.

STW2: The second handshake’s purpose is to check if marking is complete, and it may be
   entered more than once. To reduce the number of times it is needed, ZGC does indi-
   vidual handshakes with each thread first to ascertain if the thread has any remaining
   marking work.

Reference Processing/Condemned Regions: This phase combines the identification of con-
     demned regions (called evacuation candidates in ZGC), namely regions containing
     objects that should be evacuated, with the processing of weak reference objects. Both
     the ZGC and Shenandoah collectors handle reference processing in a similar intri-
     cate fashion, so we cover it separately on page 403. This phase uses the volume of
     live data associated with each region to determine which regions to evacuate. Since
     ZGC only allocates into fresh regions, lightly occupied regions waste space. Like
     other compacting collectors, ZGC prioritises evacuating the most sparsely occupied
     regions in order to reclaim the most space with the least effort.

STW3: The third stop-the-world handshake establishes an invariant that mutators never
   see a pointer to an object in a condemned region. It does this by relocating objects in
   condemned regions referenced by roots and updating the roots to point to the relo-
   cated copies of their targets. To maintain this invariant, this handshake also changes
   the good colour to R (for relocated), which immediately invalidates all pointers (they
   now have a bad colour).

Relocate: In this phase, collector threads relocate objects in condemned regions. If mu-
     tators encounter a pointer to such an object, they attempt to relocate it, and will
     self-heal the pointer. As more than one thread may attempt to relocate an object at
     the same time, ZGC uses a compare-and-swap to set the forwarding address in the
     relocation table; the winner’s copy will be used and other competing threads will
     back out of their bump pointer allocations. As usual, a region’s relocation table is
     kept outside the region so that its physical pages can be reclaimed as soon as all the
     live objects it contains have been evacuated. Relocation completes when all live ob-
     jects in condemned regions have been relocated. However, some objects may retain
     R-coloured pointers. These pointers will be healed, either when a mutator next loads
     them or, at the latest, by the end of the Map/Remap step of the next collection cycle.

Choosing condemned regions. The policy used by ZGC to choose condemned regions is
to rank regions according to their occupancy, in order to maximise storage reclaimed per
byte copied. It selects regions with occupancy of no more than 75%.
    Yang et al. [2020] suggest using the evacuation mechanism to segregate objects accord-
ing to their hotness. Their Hot-Cold Segregated Garbage Collector (HCSGC) considers an
object to be hot if it has been accessed since the last collection cycle. The goal of this new
policy is not only to reclaim space but also to improve locality. It follows the principle that
the future order of mutator accesses is likely to follow their past order. Therefore, whereas
the previous policy aimed to have collector threads do as much evacuation as possible, this
policy aims to have mutators do it. That way, evacuated objects will be laid out in the order
they were accessed by mutators, leading to better cache locality and hardware prefetching.
    HCSGC uses an additional bitmap to indicate whether an object is considered hot. It
clears this bitmap at the start of each collection cycle. An object’s hot bit will be set by
a mutator if it encounters the object on the slow path of the load barrier. The object’s
hot bit will also be set by a collector thread if it encounters an R-coloured pointer to the
object, which indicates that a mutator accessed the object since the STW3 phase of the last
collection cycle. Collector threads maintain two allocation regions, one for hot objects and
one for cold, placing the new copies into one or other region according to their hot bit. In
contrast, mutators continue to use a single region since all objects they evacuate are hot,
by definition.
    To shift evacuation work more to mutators, HCSGC defers the Relocation step of ZGC
until the start of the next collection cycle (but still before STW1). Relocation will then

Algorithm 17.11: ZGC’s self-healing load barrier

 1   Read(src, i):
 2      addr ← &src[i]
 3      value ← *addr
 4      if isNull(value) || isGoodColour(value)
 5         return value
 6      if pointsIntoCondemned(value)
 7         good ← remap(value)                      /* looks up forwarding address */
 8      else
 9         good ← goodColour(value)      /* tints value with current good colour */
10      push(markStack, good)
11      selfHeal(addr, value, good)
12      return good
13

14   selfHeal(addr, value, good):
15      if isNull(good)
16         return
17      loop
18         old ← CompareAndSwap(addr, value, good)
19         if old = value || isNull(old) || isGoodColour(old)
20            return
21         value ← old

evacuate objects in condemned regions that mutators have not yet encountered, with most
of them being placed into collector threads’ regions for cold objects.
    Yang and Wrigstad [2022] evaluated ZGC using SPECjbb2015, a benchmark suitable
for testing response time (as opposed to throughput). They found that both typical and
more extremal pause times are shorter for ZGC— on the order of 1 millisecond versus
about 3 milliseconds for Shenandoah, and 100 milliseconds or more for OpenJDK’s G1
and Parallel collectors.

Generational ZGC. Originally, ZGC was not generational but Generational ZGC Karlsson
[2022] uses two logical generations, each of which can be collected independently and con-
currently. It uses a different representation of pointer colours from the non-generational
version, with many more tag bits. This means that it cannot use multiple mappings, and
instead has its load and store barriers deal with the tag bits explicitly. The load barrier
strips pointers of their colour as they are loaded, so references in registers and on the stack
are colourless. This means that it must use a store barrier to restore a proper colour when a
reference is written to the heap. These store barriers are now responsible for helping mark-
ing; the load barrier is now only responsible for updating stale pointers after Generational
ZGC has relocated objects. In these ways, it differs from both non-generational ZGC and
Pauseless/C4.
    Figure 17.4b shows the layout of Generational ZGC’s tagged pointers. It uses the
low-order 16 bits of pointers for colours rather than the four higher-order bits that non-
generational ZGC uses. Note that this layout also offers the possibility to increase the
maximum heap size from 16 to 128 terabytes. Of the 16 bits reserved for colours, 12 are
used. Schematically, the colour bits are RRRRMMmmFFrr0000. The RRRR bits are used by
the load barrier: exactly one is set in the good colour at any given time, thus encoding

which generation (or neither or both) is being relocated (hence the name, R) as follows.
These bits encode a relocation parity per generation, which is flipped at the start of the
corresponding generation’s relocation pause. This parity can be encoded as two bits, let’s
call them o (for old) and y (for young), and write them as oy. So if for example the number
is 10 and relocation of an old generation starts, the parity will flip to 00, and if then a
young relocation starts, it will flip to 01, and so on. The binary number oy denotes the
index of the corresponding RRRR bit that is expected to be set. This encoding avoids ABA
problems when phasing out stale pointers. The other bits are explained below.
    At any given time a current shift factor indicates the number of positions that the good
colour can be shifted until its low-order set bit just shifts out of low end of the word. On
an x86 processor such shifting places that bit in the carry flag, and simultaneously checks
whether the resulting value is zero. A ja (jump above) instruction will branch if both the
carry and zero flags are 0. Thus, if it branches, the value is a non-null pointer of bad colour.
A similar technique works for the ARM instruction set. This design avoids any further
shifting in the fast path case by having the shifted good pointer value be the address of
the referent. Note that an implication of this is that a pointer’s address bits need to be
shifted left different numbers of bit positions depending on the current good colour. The
shift factor is embedded in the shifting instructions for speed, so when the colour changes,
instructions have to be updated. This is accomplished by faking a flush of the cache of
generated code to cause the system to take a slow path that patches the shift factors.
    The MM bits alternate between 01 and 10 according to the marking cycle of the old
generation; mm acts likewise for the young generation. The FF bits indicate which cycle
of finaliser reachability bits the collector is currently using for the old generation (young
generation collections do not check finaliser reachability). Lastly, the rr bits deal with re-
membered sets, indicating whether the pointer is currently remembered. Values 01 or 10
(depending on the young generation collection cycle) indicate that the field containing the
pointer is remembered. The normal (‘cleared’) value for the rr bits is 11, explained be-
low. Note that all pointer values need to be coloured, including null values, so that all
remembered set entries get inserted correctly.
    The store barrier first checks whether any of the old pointer’s colour bits are bad, using
a testw instruction on the x86 and a mask of bad colour bits (similar methods will work
on other platforms). This is why this system uses the somewhat space-inefficient coding of
the alternating cycles as 01 or 10: to make it time-efficient to test whether all the colours
match the current cycle (have 0 in all the right places). If this test fails, the code branches
to a slow path that can take action, such as inserting the field into a remembered set, or
otherwise doing self-healing barrier work for atomic operations appropriate to the phase,
as in non-generational ZGC. The test mask is updated similarly to the shift factor in the
load barriers. The store barrier fast path shifts the pointer left by the shift factor and inserts
the current good colour before doing the actual store. The slow path of the store barrier
occurs at the first store of a pointer, exactly what is needed for efficient remembered set
maintenance (as well as snapshot-at-the-beginning marking). We can now explain why the
normal value of the rr bits is 11: it causes the testw always to conclude the colour is bad,
forcing a slow path check as to whether the new pointer should be remembered. Notice
that Generational ZGC uses double-buffered remembered sets and records the locations of
updated fields precisely in a bitmap. Each old generation region has two remembered set
bitmaps, one actively used by the store buffers and one used by the collector as a read-only
record of all old generation fields that potentially point to the young generation. Swapping
the two bitmaps atomically at the start of each young generation collection means that
mutator threads do not have to wait for the bitmaps to be cleared, and that store barriers
do not have to use a memory fence when recording old-young generation pointers.

    A young generation collection works as usual from statics, thread stacks and the re-
membered set to find all references to young objects, which can be evacuated after marking
as in non-generational ZGC. One detail here is that if a pointer previously in the remem-
bered set is found no longer to point into the young generation, then its rr bits are set to the
‘clear’ value, 11. Young generation collections allow regions to be aged without relocat-
ing their contents. This cheap promotion allows large objects to be allocated in the young
generation rather than the old one, as many generational collectors do. On the other hand,
only full heap collections process weak references or unload classes.

Shenandoah
Shenandoah [Flood et al., 2016] is a parallel, compacting collection algorithm aimed at pro-
viding short pause times for applications using large heaps. Like many other modern com-
pacting collectors, it is a region-based collector that prioritises sparsely occupied regions
(identified in the marking phase) for evacuation. At the time of writing, Shenandoah
is non-generational. In 2016 Flood et al. argued that programs such as web caches hold
onto objects just long enough to defeat generational collectors so, instead, Shenandoah fo-
cuses its effort on regions with fewer live objects, regardless of whether those objects are
young or old. They also argued that generational collection requires some kind of remem-
bered set, typically a card table, accesses to which lead to cache contention. However, it
is not clear that these concerns still hold and implementation of a generational version of
Shenandoah is in progress.
     Shenandoah’s equally sized regions may contain newly allocated objects, older objects
or a mixture. Its default policy is to choose regions for evacuation with at least 60% garbage
and to start a collection cycle when 75% of the regions have been allocated. Humongous
objects larger than a region are only copied during a full, stop-the-world collection.
     Shenandoah uses a deletion write barrier for marking. Originally, it also used a com-
bination of this barrier and a Brooks-style read barrier in its evacuation phase, with the
forwarding pointer placed immediately before the object (thus separate from the Java class
pointer and the header word used for marking and locking, allowing the indirection bar-
rier to be simple and thus faster). Shenandoah made some effort to optimise these barriers
away. First, its compiler employed global value numbering, which can identify and re-
move redundant barriers. Both load and write barriers can be avoided if the value is newly
allocated (since it will be in tospace), the value is a null pointer, the value is a constant or
the value itself came from a write barrier. Further, load barriers can be eliminated if the
value must be the same in both fromspace and tospace (Java final fields) or the value
came from a load barrier and there can be no interfering write barrier.
     However, these barriers have now been replaced in the evacuation phase with a single9
load barrier applied immediately after loading a reference (Algorithm 17.12). Like the
Pauseless and ZGC load barriers, this barrier is self-healing — where necessary, the load
barrier cooperates with the collector to copy not yet evacuated objects — but unlike those
barriers, it does not use pointer tags. Replacing the read and write barriers with a load
barrier simplified the implementation and improved its performance in a number of ways.
(i) The strong tospace invariant that threads only ever see a canonical reference to an object
makes it easier to reason about the state of collection and objects. (ii) The number of places
where barriers are inserted is reduced. (iii) Equality tests are simpler because there is only
one copy of an object. (iv) Barriers are placed where references are loaded rather than
the typically hotter locations where the references are used. (v) As the fromspace copy is
  9 Different flavours of this load barrier are used for normal objects and weak references.

Algorithm 17.12: Shenandoah’s self-healing load barrier

 1   Read(src, i):
 2      addr ← &src[i]
 3      obj ← *addr
 4      if not isGCactive()                            /* fast path: accesses thread−local flag */
 5         return obj
 6      if not isInCollectionSet(obj)
 7         return obj
 8

 9      fwd = resolveForwardee(obj)                       /* access forwarding pointer, if one */
10      if obj ̸= fwd
11       CAS(addr, fwd, obj)                                                       /* self−heal */
12       return fwd
13

14      fwd = loadSlowpath(obj)               /* once per location with non−forwarded object */
15      CAS(addr, fwd, obj)
16      return fwd

no longer used, Shenandoah can write the forwarding pointer into it rather than having
to dedicate an extra word to the forwarding pointer; this reduces both heap and cache
pressure. (vi) Finally, rather than being always on, the load barrier can be made conditional
on whether a collection is in progress and the referent is in a condemned region.
   The Shenandoah collection cycle consists of the following phases. Note that recent
improvements have reduced the time spent in stop-the-world phases (on the next page).
STW1: Initial stop-the-world marking phase to prepare the heap and application threads.
Mark: Concurrently scan thread stacks using stack barriers (see Section 11.5) to ensure
    consistency. Trace the heap marking objects. Mutators use a deletion write barrier
    to ensure consistency. The collector threads use work stealing for load balancing.
    Note that pointers to objects evacuated in the previous collection cycle are no longer
    updated in this phase but in a subsequent one.
STW2: Final stop-the-world marking phase drains marking queues. There is no need to
   rescan roots as Shenandoah uses a deletion write barrier. This phase also selects
   condemned regions.
Concurrent roots and reference processing: Evacuate and update all references in threads
    and all weak references, and clear and enqueue any unreachable weak references.
    Evacuate and update all weak roots (such as JNI weak references and some inter-
    nal structures like the interned string table), and clear unreachable weak roots. Free
    any regions with no live objects. Unload unused classes and process any remaining
    strong roots such as references in compiled code regions.
Relocate: Concurrently evacuate live objects from condemned regions. Shenandoah re-
     quires that objects in condemned regions not be updated by mutators. Rather, the
     object must first be copied and may then be updated. Mutators cooperate with col-
     lector threads in this regard. There may be a race between copying an object and in-
     stalling the indirection to the new copy, but the algorithm uses a compare-and-swap
     for the update, so one thread will win the race and the others can simply rewind their
     allocation pointers.

Update references: Concurrently sweep the heap to update any remaining pointers to
    evacuated objects.
Concurrent cleanup: Free the condemned regions.

Reducing stop-the-world time in Shenandoah and ZGC
The original version of Shenandoah [Flood et al., 2016] completed marking in a stop-the-
world phase. As well as ensuring that all live objects are marked, this phase dealt with a
number of issues that are tricky to handle concurrently. These include processing weak
references and finalisers, and class unloading. Handling these matters took up more than
half the time of the final mark phase. More recently, Shenandoah and ZGC have adopted
similar approaches to reduce the time spent in stop-the-world phases. These include using
stack barriers to allow the collector to process thread stacks concurrently, and concurrent
reference processing and class unloading. All of these improvements reduced pause times
substantially.

Concurrent reference processing. As we noted earlier in this chapter, Java’s semantics
make concurrent reference processing delicate. First, there may be a race between the col-
lector processing a weak reference by nulling its referent field and a mutator resurrecting
the referent by making it strongly-reachable. Second, if multiple weak reference objects re-
fer to the same target, they must behave consistently. ZGC and Shenandoah use five steps
to process weak references concurrently.
   1. During the Map/Remap phase of a cycle, marking builds a discovered list of addresses
      of weak reference objects found whose referent was not strongly marked at the time
      the weak reference object was discovered. The discovered list is a superset of the
      weak references that should be cleared. Note that a SoftReference also requires
      that the system’s policy hold for it (for example, an ‘always clear’ policy or an ‘LRU
      max heap’ policy, which clears the SoftReference if it has not been used recently
      enough).
   2. In stop-the-world phase STW2, resurrection is disabled. Fetching the target of a
      weak reference (other than a PhantomReference) will return null if the target is
      not marked or a pointer to its target if it is marked.
   3. In the concurrent Reference Processing phase, the discovered list is pruned to remove
      any weak references that should not be cleared and to clear those that should be.
   4. After this, resurrection is re-enabled.
   5. Finally, the discovered list is made available to components that use it to post weak
      reference objects to their registered queues.
    Objects with finalisers need to be marked specially, as finalisably reachable. This is be-
cause these objects need to be retained until they are finalised, but not treated as if they are
strongly-reachable. Three mark states are needed: (strongly) marked, finalisably marked
and unmarked. Marking propagates the strongly marked and finalisably marked wave-
fronts together, in one pass. In the case of ZGC, any tagged pointers that are followed in
this finalisable trace are updated with both F and the good colour. Strong marking is pre-
ferred: if an object previously marked as finalisable is discovered, its transitive closure is
strongly marked (in ZGC’s case, clearing the F bit).
    Class unloading is important for applications that make heavy use of class loaders,
such as application servers and integrated development environments (IDEs), and is also

relevant to Java’s anonymous classes and lambdas. Class unloading requires determining
whether a class loader is reachable, and unlinking and cleaning any unreachable loader,
class or other data structure including compiled code. This is usually performed in a stop-
the-world phase, but ZGC and Shenandoah manage class unloading concurrently by us-
ing compiled method entry barriers, which indicate that the compiled code may have been
invalidated. The aim is to evacuate and update references in a method before it executes
and to handle other methods concurrently. A compiled method entry barrier is invoked
before a method is first executed in a cycle in order to scan the method’s code for embedded
constants, evacuating the referent and updating the reference. These barriers are enabled
in the final stop-the-world pause of a collection cycle and disabled when a collector thread
processes the method or when a Java thread is first about to execute the method.

17.6     Issues to consider
This chapter has laid out the basic principles of concurrent copying collection and con-
current compaction to reduce fragmentation, while also avoiding long pauses. As in any
concurrent collector algorithm, the collector must be protected against mutations that can
otherwise cause lost objects. But because the collector is moving objects, the mutator must
also be protected against accessing stale copies. Some algorithms protect the mutator by
making sure it operates with a tospace invariant so that it can never hold references to
stale fromspace objects [Baker, 1978]. Others protect the mutator by making it forward to
tospace copies as they are created but otherwise allow it to continue operating in from-
space [Brooks, 1984]. Still others permit continued operation in fromspace, so long as
updates eventually propagate to tospace [Nettles et al., 1992; Nettles and O’Toole, 1993].
Once copying has finished, all the mutators flip to tospace in a single step. Dispensing with
this global transition can mean accumulating chains of multiple versions, which mutators
must traverse to find the most up-to-date copy [Herlihy and Moss, 1992]. Alternatively, by
performing updates on both copies, mutators can be transitioned one at a time [Hudson
and Moss, 2001, 2003; Ugawa et al., 2018]. Compaction can be performed in similar ways
but without the need to copy all objects at every collection [Kermany and Petrank, 2006;
Click et al., 2005; Azul, 2008; Flood et al., 2016; Lidén, 2018].
    These approaches may result in longer pauses than non-moving concurrent collection:
on any given heap access, the mutator may need to wait for an object (or objects) to move
or indirect to the current version. Indeed, Baker [1992a] devised his Treadmill algorithm
as an antidote to the churn present in his original copying collector [Baker, 1978]. While
copying or compaction are needed to avoid fragmentation, they can present particular
difficulties for applications that are sensitive to prolonged or frequent pauses. Often, such
applications also operate in environments where memory is unusually constrained, such
as embedded systems, where defragmentation can be even more important.
    Many of the concurrent collectors discussed in this chapter rely on parallel threads,
trading much increased CPU cycles for lower latencies. This increased use of resources
does not come for free in a multi-tenancy system. In the next chapter, we discuss alterna-
tive ways to reduce expected latency times with lower total resource use. The following
Chapter 19 then considers how to manage concurrent copying or concurrent compaction
while tightly bounding pause times for more demanding applications.
