Chapter 18

Concurrent reference counting

We discussed reference counting in Chapter 5. The two chief issues facing naive refer-
ence counting were its inability to collect garbage cycles and the high cost of manipulating
reference counts, particularly in the face of races between different mutator threads. The
solution to cyclic garbage was trial deletion (partial tracing). We used deferred reference
counting to avoid having mutators manipulate reference counts on local variables and co-
alescing to avoid having to make ‘redundant’ changes to reference counts that would be
cancelled out by later mutations; a useful side effect of coalescing is that it tolerates mu-
tator races. All three solutions required stopping the world while the collector reconciled
reference counts and reclaimed any garbage. In this chapter, we will relax this requirement
and consider the changes that need to be made in order to allow a reference counting col-
lector thread to run concurrently with mutator threads but, before we do, we look at LXR,
a high-performance, mostly non-concurrent (mostly)-reference counting algorithm.

18.1     LXR: Latency-critical ImmiX with Reference counting
Latency-critical ImmiX with Reference counting (LXR) [Zhao et al., 2022a,b] is primarily a
high-performance, coalescing, generational, deferred, sticky reference counter but uses
a concurrent, snapshot-at-the-beginning tracing collector to reclaim both garbage cycles
and objects whose reference counts are stuck. LXR applies reference count increments
in stop-the-world pauses during which it can also defragment the heap by opportunis-
tically evacuating either young objects or mature objects in sparsely occupied blocks; its
decrements are applied lazily and concurrently with mutators’ execution. One of the most
interesting aspects of LXR is that it raises the question of whether the complexity of con-
current copying/compacting garbage collectors is worthwhile. Implemented in OpenJDK
with the MMTk memory management toolkit,1 LXR has demonstrated performance that
is competitive with other modern collectors such as G1 in large heaps but offers better
throughput and especially better latency in heaps as tight as 1.3× minimum heap size. It
also uses fewer total resources such as CPU cycles [Zhao et al., 2022b, Section 5.5].

Heap structure. LXR builds on the RC Immix heap structure [Shahriyar et al., 2013] where
heap organisation was identified as the principal cause of the performance gap between
existing high-performance reference counters and modern tracing collectors such as immix
[Blackburn and McKinley, 2008]. As we noted earlier, heap management based on free-lists
  1 MMTk: a high-performance language-independent memory management framework, https://mmtk.io.

18.1. LXR: LATENCY-CRITICAL IMMIX WITH REFERENCE COUNTING                                   406

suffers from a number of problems including internal and external fragmentation. Free-
list layout also leads to poor cache locality as objects allocated contemporaneously may
be dispersed, for instance among several segregated free-lists, in contrast to bump pointer
allocation which would allocate these objects together. RC Immix modified the authors’
previous reference counter [Shahriyar et al., 2012] by replacing its free-list allocation with
immix’s heap structure of 32-kilobyte blocks of 256-byte lines. Bump pointer allocation
also allows whole blocks or contiguous free lines within a block to be zeroed more effi-
ciently, en masse, rather than an object at a time, as a free-list allocator must do. Both immix
and RC Immix bump allocate small and medium-sized objects into gaps of contiguous
whole lines in partially filled blocks (see Section 10.6). The allocator places new objects
contiguously into empty lines, skipping occupied lines; objects may span lines, but not
blocks. Lines and blocks are not reclaimed until all the objects they contain are dead.

Reference counting. Whereas RC Immix tracks the number of live objects on a line and
in a block, LXR stores a two-bit, sticky reference count for each object in a side reference
count table; objects whose reference count reaches three become ‘stuck’ and can only be
reclaimed by a concurrent tracing collector thread. Importantly, objects in LXR are born
dead, with a reference count of zero. As with other coalesced reference counters (see Sec-
tion 5.4), reference count increments and decrements are applied in frequent epochs. In-
crements and decrements are generated either by the LXR write barrier (Algorithm 18.1),
or when root scanning at each reference counting epoch boundary (when LXR applies an
increment to each object reachable from the roots — recursively for young objects — and
buffers a corresponding decrement for the next epoch). The barrier is field rather than ob-
ject remembering and uses one unlogged bit per field (also held in side metadata). The
log lock (again, in side metadata) can be per-field or of coarser granularity, though for ef-
ficiency markAsLoggedAndUnlock should be able to clear the unlogged bit and release
the log lock in one step. As noted in Algorithm 18.1, looping is not needed if the log locks
are per-field (not coarse).
    As usual for a coalesced reference counter, at each epoch boundary LXR first applies
increments to the referents of all the fields in the modifiedFieldsBuffer and then ap-
plies decrements to objects recorded in the decrementsBuffer. Whenever an object’s
reference count is reduced to zero, LXR enqueues the dead object for recursive decrements
of the referents of its fields. An epoch is complete when both the decrementsBuffer
and the recursive decrement queue are empty. To avoid long pauses, LXR restarts muta-
tors and processes decrements lazily in a separate thread which runs immediately after
each stop-the-world pause and completes before the next pause starts.
    Coalesced reference counting allows LXR (and RC Immix to handle short-lived objects
very efficiently by treating them as implicitly dead, with a reference count of zero. Young
objects (allocated in the current epoch) cannot generate decrements since (i) their pointer
fields are originally null, and (ii) there were no pointers to them from the stack or the heap
at the start of the epoch. Furthermore, LXR generates increments from a young object
only if and when the object receives its first reference count increment (from zero to one)
at the end of the epoch in which it was created (thus transitively applying increments to
surviving young objects). If the weak generational hypothesis holds, most objects will die
within an epoch and therefore can be reclaimed without any reference counting increments
or decrements. Instead, LXR sweeps all young blocks at the end of the reference counting
pause, adding each one to its two global lists of either free or partially free blocks. After
lazy decrement processing is complete, LXR sweeps mature blocks, but only those that
contain an object that has received a decrement.
18.1. LXR: LATENCY-CRITICAL IMMIX WITH REFERENCE COUNTING                                    407

Algorithm 18.1: LXR field-logging write barrier

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      field ← &src[i]
 3      if unLogged(field)                    /* unsynchronised test of per−field unlogged bit */
 4         log(field)
 5      src[i] ← value
 6

 7   log(field):
 8      do                                   /* looping only needed if lock is coarse */
 9         if tryLogLock(field)        /* returns false if another thread is logging */
10            old ← *field                                  /* remember old referent */
11            markAsLoggedAndUnlock(field)
12            push(decrementsBuffer, old)                           /* log old referent*/
13            push(modifiedFieldsBuffer, field)                   /* log field address */
14         else:                          /* must wait for old referent to be logged */
15            waitUntilLogUnlocked(field)
16      while unLogged(field)

Concurrent tracing. LXR (and RC Immix use a tracing collector in the background, as
needed, to reclaim garbage cycles. In LXR, this collector also handles objects whose refer-
ence counts are stuck. The write barrier needed by coalesced reference counting to capture
the referents of overwritten fields is also just what is needed for LXR’s Yuasa-style concur-
rent snapshot-at-the-beginning tracing collector. A run of the tracing collector is seeded
from the roots set of a reference counting collection but may span several epochs. An opti-
misation is to have the trace visit only mature objects, ignoring objects with a zero reference
count — normally a snapshot-at-the-beginning algorithm would preserve young objects.
In order to avoid interference with a running trace, the reference counter immediately
marks and scans (for reference count decrementing) any mature object that it determines
to be dead unless the trace has already marked it. Note that, since marking and reference
count work are mutually exclusive, the former being done only outside of pauses and the
latter only during pauses, there is no race condition. This allows the reference counter to
reclaim objects promptly but prevents the trace from following a pointer to a deleted ob-
ject. Unmarked objects are reclaimed in the first epoch after the trace has completed. To
limit their cost, LXR triggers traces only if a reference counting epoch finds too few empty
blocks or if the predicted volume of uncollected dead mature objects exceeds a threshold.

Evacuation. The LXR design is based on the belief that concurrent copying is intrinsically
expensive. It reclaims most objects without copying. However, some copying is necessary
to defragment the heap: LXR can do this opportunistically but only during mutator pauses.
Shahriyar et al. [2013] noted that any young object that survives its first epoch will receive
an increment from every referent. This pause is an opportunity to move surviving young
objects (which are identified by their reference counts incrementing from zero to one). LXR
targets all blocks that contain only young objects, evacuating their contents into partially
free (preferentially) or completely empty blocks, if any are available. Most notably, LXR
respects pause time targets, stopping copying when a time threshold is reached, at which
point further objects are left in place. Mature objects can also be compacted opportunisti-
cally as the LXR write barrier supports the maintenance of remembered sets. This ‘double
duty’ of the LXR write barrier is one of its key insights and innovations. Each remembered
18.1. LXR: LATENCY-CRITICAL IMMIX WITH REFERENCE COUNTING                                 408

set tracks all pointers into a condemned set of blocks within a contiguous 4-megabyte re-
gion of the heap. Before each concurrent trace, LXR identifies blocks that are estimated
from the reference count table to be most sparsely occupied; these form the condemned
sets. LXR does not maintain remembered sets continuously but initialises them by pig-
gybacking on a concurrent trace, which must traverse every pointer into the condemned
sets, and discards the remembered sets in the pause when the condemned sets are evacu-
ated. The write barrier remembers any new reference into the sets created subsequently.
Remembered sets that are maintained for more than one epoch risk having entries that are
stale because the object has been reclaimed by the reference counter. LXR avoids this by
tagging each line and each remembered set pointer source entry with a reuse counter. Line
reuse counts are incremented whenever the line is reused (and all reuse counts are reset
to zero at the start of each trace). If evacuation finds that a remembered set entry’s reuse
count is older than that of the line to which the entry refers, it discards the entry. LXR may
evacuate one or more condemned sets at each stop-the-world pause, depending on time
budget. It evacuates each set by tracing from roots and the remembered set, copying ob-
jects and leaving forwarding pointers. Any reference to something outside the condemned
set is ignored, thus bounding the number of objects traced.
    While LXR does not represent generations explicitly, it is essentially generational in
character, using frequent pauses to copy young survivors opportunistically (with a non-
zero tenuring threshold). Thus it exploits the weak generational hypothesis. Both LXR and
explicitly generational collectors use remembered sets for evacuation. The LXR increment
buffer also resembles a remembered set but remembers unconditionally all old object fields
that have been modified, whereas a filtering generational remembered set might remem-
ber only where an old-young pointer has been stored. However, LXR runs collections of
young objects (typically by stop-the-world copying) and mature objects (concurrent trac-
ing) simultaneously and somewhat independently. Reference counting is key here to the
prompt reclamation of dead objects.

Triggers. LXR uses a number of heuristics to control collection. As well as triggering a
pause if the heap is full, it also triggers a pause if the number of increments or the pre-
dicted number of survivors exceed thresholds. These heuristics guard against long pauses
due to increment processing and copying of young objects. The survivor predictor is an
exponential decay predictor, conservatively biased to higher survival rates. To manage
fragmentation, LXR triggers concurrent tracing based on the number of free blocks or the
predicted heap wastage, defined as uncollected dead mature objects plus fragmentation.

Scalability and performance. LXR was designed with scalability and immediacy in mind.
It supplies fresh blocks in a lock-free manner to thread-local allocators, with minimal con-
tention. Reference counts are inherently local so increments and decrements can be applied
in parallel. Work stealing is used for load balancing and very large arrays are partitioned.
Most decrements are performed concurrently. The field remembering write barrier is re-
ported to have a geometric mean overhead of only 1.6% compared with no barrier. Only
the tertiary mechanism, concurrent tracing, has significant potential for scalability issues.
    Measuring the overheads of garbage collectors is difficult, as is ascribing the causes of
these overheads; see, for example, the methodology of Cai et al. [2022] for measuring over-
heads — they also provide a detailed analysis of a number of modern collectors, serial,
parallel and concurrent, implemented in OpenJDK 17. Zhao et al. show that LXR offers
excellent latency and throughput, compared with other collectors implemented in Open-
JDK 11, when running the DaCapo benchmarks,2 which require minimum heap sizes in
  2 DaCapo Chopin evaluation release, 2021.
18.2. SIMPLE REFERENCE COUNTING REVISITED                                                                 409

                     Thread 1 Write(o,i,x)               Thread 2 Write(o,i,y)
                     addReference(x)                     addReference(y)
                     old ←o[i]                           old ←o[i]
                     deleteReference(old)                deleteReference(old)
                     o[i]←x                              o[i]←y

Figure 18.1: Reference counting must synchronise the manipulation of
        counts with pointer updates. Here, two threads race to update an object
        field. Note that old is a local variable of each thread’s Write method.

the range of 7 to 3,689 megabytes. LXR delivered throughput competitive with G1 and
better than the concurrent compacting collectors Shenandoah and ZGC , but with signifi-
cantly lower 99.99% latency and overall resource consumption compared with all of those
collectors. We can ask why LXR demonstrates better performance than some modern con-
current copying collectors. Garbage collection is a time-space trade-off, and concurrent
copying collectors often need large heaps, especially for applications with very high allo-
cation rates, if they are not to revert to stop-the-world collection. In particular, concurrent
compacting collectors cannot reclaim any space until marking is complete, and can then re-
lease early only those regions that are completely empty. Consequently, they require more
headroom in the heap than deferred reference counting which reclaims space occupied
by dead objects much more promptly (in LXR’s case, for all objects that are not reachable
only from garbage cycles). Throughput is affected by the cost of barriers, and concurrent
copying is inherently expensive. Even with self-healing load barriers, the frequency and
CPU cycle cost of using read barriers is higher than that of write barriers, which LXR uses.
Furthermore, LXR avoids applying barriers to most objects since they are allocated dead
and most die young. The opportunity cost of running multiple threads is also a consider-
ation in many environments. Cai et al. [2022] found that the total cost (CPU cycles across
all threads) of Shenandoah and ZGC was much higher than that of G1. However, LXR’s
behaviour is more comparable to G1 in this respect while anecdotal results suggest it con-
sistently uses fewer CPU cycles.

18.2       Simple reference counting revisited
We now return to think about concurrent reference counting. To be correct, reference
counting algorithms must preserve the invariant that an object’s reference count is equal
to the number of references to that object. Maintaining this invariant becomes more com-
plicated with multiple mutator threads. At first sight, it may seem that it is more difficult
to Write safely than to Read safely. Updating a pointer slot requires three actions: the
reference count of the new target must be incremented, that of the old target be decre-
mented and the pointer written. It is important that these three actions be coordinated,
even though multiple mutator threads may manipulate pointers to the objects in ques-
tion.3 Objects must not be reclaimed prematurely (for example, because their reference
count has temporarily dropped to zero) nor is it desirable for garbage to float indefinitely
in the heap. Figure 18.1 illustrates the problem. Here, even if all the reference count incre-
ments and decrements are performed atomically, some thread interleavings may lead to
an incorrect result because the reference count of old may be decremented twice and the
reference count of one of the new targets may be too high.
   3 Note that we are not concerned about the correctness of the user program in the face of races, but we must

ensure the consistency of the heap.
18.2. SIMPLE REFERENCE COUNTING REVISITED                                                 410

Algorithm 18.2: Eager reference counting with locks

 1   Read(src, i):
 2      lock(src)
 3         tgt ← src[i]
 4         addReference(tgt)
 5      unlock(src)
 6      return tgt
 7

 8   Write(src, i, ref):
 9      addReference(ref)
10      lock(src)
11         old ← src[i]
12         src[i] ← ref
13         deleteReference(old)
14      unlock(src)

    The difficulty of concurrent reference counting does not lie solely with incrementing
or decrementing reference count fields. This can be done easily enough with an atomic
primitive operation such as AtomicIncrement, discussed in Chapter 13. The harder
problem is to synchronise reference count modifications with pointer loads or stores; in
Algorithm 5.1 we simply required the mutator Read and Write actions to be atomic. The
simplest way to do this is to lock the object containing the field that is being read or writ-
ten, src, as illustrated in Algorithm 18.2. This is safe. After Read has locked src, the
value of field i cannot change. If it is null, Read is trivially correct. Otherwise, src holds
a reference to some object tgt. The reference counting invariant ensures that tgt’s ref-
erence count cannot drop to zero before src is unlocked since there is a reference to tgt
from src. Thus, we can guarantee that tgt cannot be freed during the Read and that
addReference will be able to update the count rather than potentially corrupting mem-
ory. A similar argument establishes the safety of Write.
    It is appealing to hope that we can find a lock-free solution, using commonly available
primitive operations. Unfortunately, single memory location primitives are insufficient
to guarantee safety. The problem does not lie in Write. Imagine that, instead of the
coarser grain lock, we use atomic increments and decrements to update reference counts
and compare-and-swap for the pointer write, as in Algorithm 18.3. If ref is non-null,
then the writing thread holds a reference to it so ref cannot be reclaimed until Write
returns (whether or not we use eager or deferred reference counting). Write spins, at-
tempting to set the pointer field until we are successful: at that point, we know that next
we will decrement the count of the correct old object and that only the winning thread
will do this. Note that the reference count of this old target remains an overestimate until
deleteReference(old) is called, and so old cannot be prematurely deleted.
    We cannot apply the same tactic in Read, though. Even if Read uses a primitive atomic
operation to update the reference count, unless we lock src it is possible that some other
thread will delete the pointer src[i] and reclaim its target between the point that we load
the reference (line 19) and the increment of the reference count. The attempt to increment
the reference count may corrupt memory that has been freed and maybe reallocated.
    Although single memory location primitive operations are insufficiently powerful to
provide a solution, Detlefs et al. [2001, 2002b] show that the CompareAndSet2 primitive
discussed in Section 13.3 is sufficient. CompareAndSet2 can atomically update two inde-
18.3. BIASED REFERENCE COUNTING                                                              411

Algorithm 18.3: Eager reference counting with compare-and-swap is broken

 1   Write(src, i, ref):
 2      if ref ̸= null
 3         AtomicIncrement(&rc(ref))           /* ref guaranteed to be non−free */
 4      loop
 5         old ← src[i]
 6         if CompareAndSet(&src[i], old, ref)
 7             deleteReference(old)
 8             return
 9

10   deleteReference(ref):              /* ref guaranteed to be null or non−free */
11      if ref ̸= null
12         AtomicDecrement(&rc(ref))
13         if rc(ref) = 0
14            for each fld in Pointers(ref)
15                deleteReference(*fld)
16            free(ref)
17

18   Read(src, i):
19      tgt = src[i]
20      AtomicIncrement(&rc(tgt))                                                      /* oops! */
21      return tgt

Algorithm 18.4: Eager reference counting with CompareAndSet2

 1   Read(src, i, root):
 2      loop
 3         tgt ← src[i]
 4         if tgt = null
 5             return null
 6         rc ← rc(tgt)
 7         if CompareAndSet2(&src[i], &rc(tgt), tgt, rc, tgt, rc+1)
 8             return tgt

pendent memory locations. Although this is not sufficient to maintain accurate reference
counts at all times, it is sufficient to guarantee the weaker invariant that (i) while there
remains a pointer to an object, its reference count cannot be zero, and (ii) if there are no
pointers to an object, its reference count will eventually become zero. In Algorithm 18.4,
CompareAndSet2 is used to increment the reference count and simultaneously to check
that the pointer to the object still exists, thus avoiding the possibility of modifying an ob-
ject’s header after it has been freed. An alternative if it is available is transactional memory,
though using a transaction for each write may have high cost.

18.3     Biased reference counting
Choi et al. [2018] found that, in a selection of Swift programs, 99% of client and 93% of
server objects were private, and that the overwhelming majority of reference counting
18.4. BUFFERED REFERENCE COUNTING                                                         412

operations were to private objects (93% for client and 87% for server programs). Their
biased reference counting technique takes advantage of this by using two reference count
fields. The owner thread updates the first, biased, counter using non-atomic operations,
while non-owner threads use atomic operations to update the second, shared, counter. Both
14-bit counters, two flag bits (Merged and queued) and a thread ID are stored in the
64-bit word that Swift uses for a reference count. The algorithm can be understood by
considering the five invariants that it maintains.

  I1: An object can only be deallocated if the sum of the biased and shared reference counts
      is zero.

  I2: The biased reference count must be non-negative. When the biased reference count
      reaches zero, the owner sets the Merged flag, making the biased reference count
      inaccessible.

  I3: The shared reference count may be negative. For instance, a thread may create an
      object and point a global reference to it, only for this reference to be removed by a
      non-owner. To prevent a leak, when a non-owner removes a reference that would
      cause the shared count to become negative for the first time, it adds a reference to the
      object to the owner’s QueuedObjects list and sets the Queued flag.

  I4: The owner gives up ownership when it merges counters either implicitly when the
      biased reference count becomes zero or explicitly if it finds the object in its Queued-
      Objects list. Periodically, the owning thread examines this list.

  I5: An object can only be placed in QueuedObjects list once and is removed from the
      list when the counters are explicitly merged.

Choi et al. found that biased reference counting reduced the average execution time of
client programs by 22.5% and boosted the average throughput of server programs by 7.3%.

18.4     Buffered reference counting
Eager reference counting schemes require either locks or multi-word atomic primitives,
which are (currently) not widely available. Deferred reference counting partially finesses
the problem we saw in the previous section by not applying reference count operations
to local variables and deferring reclamation of objects with zero reference counts (see Sec-
tion 5.3). This leaves the question of how to reduce the overhead of pointer writes to object
fields. We now turn to look at buffered reference counting techniques that only use simple
loads and stores in the mutator write barrier, yet support multithreaded applications.
    In order to avoid the cost of synchronising reference count manipulations by differ-
ent mutator threads, DeTreville [1990] had mutators log the old and new referents of each
pointer update to a buffer (in a hybrid collector for Modula-2+ that used mark-sweep as
an occasional backup collector to handle cycles). A single, separate reference counting
thread processed the log and adjusted objects’ reference counts, thereby ensuring that the
modifications were trivially atomic. In order to prevent inadvertently applying a reference
count decrement before an increment that causally preceded it (and hence prematurely re-
claiming an object), increments were applied before decrements. Unfortunately, buffering
updates does not resolve the problem of coordinating the reference count manipulations
with the pointer write. DeTreville offered two solutions, neither of which is entirely satis-
factory. His first approach was, as above, to protect the entire Write operation with a lock.
18.5. CONCURRENT, CYCLIC REFERENCE COUNTING                                               413

This ensures that records are correctly appended to the shared buffer as well as synchro-
nising the updates. To avoid the cost of making every write atomic, his second solution
provided each mutator thread with its own buffer, which was periodically passed to the
reference counting thread, but this required the programmer to take care to ensure that
pointer writes were performed atomically, if necessary performing the locking manually,
to avoid the problems illustrated by Figure 18.1.
    Bacon and Rajan [2001] also provided each thread with a local buffer but required the
update of the pointer field to be atomic, as for example in Algorithm 18.5; a compare-and-
swap with retry could be used to do this. The mutator write barrier on a processor adds
the old and new values of slot i to its local myUpdates buffer (line 9). Once again, refer-
ence counting of local variables is deferred, and time is divided into ragged epochs to ensure
that objects are not prematurely deleted, by using a single shared epoch number plus per-
thread local epoch numbers. Periodically, just as with deferred reference counting, a
processor will interrupt a processor and scan all the stacks of each local thread that has
been active in that epoch, logging references found to a local myStackBuffer. The pro-
cessor then transfers its myStackBuffer and myUpdates to the collector, and updates
its local epoch number, e. Finally, it schedules the collector thread of the next processor
before resuming the interrupted thread.
    The collector thread runs on the last processor. In each collection cycle k, the collec-
tor applies the increments of epoch k and the decrements of epoch k − 1. Finally, it in-
crements the global epoch counter (for simplicity, we assume an unbounded number of
global updatesBuffers in Algorithm 18.5). The advantage of this technique is that it
is never necessary to halt all mutators simultaneously: the collector is on-the-fly and the
state transitions are simply Type I (see Section 15.3). Note how the collector uses a variant
of deferred reference counting. At the start of the collection, the counts of objects directly
referenced from thread stacks (in this epoch) are incremented; at the end of the cycle, those
of objects directly reachable from the stacks in the previous epoch are decremented.

18.5     Concurrent, cyclic reference counting
This leaves the question of collecting garbage cycles by reference counting without intro-
ducing stop-the-world pauses. The Recycler [Bacon et al., 2001; Bacon and Rajan, 2001] re-
claims cyclic garbage by tracing candidate subgraphs, applying trial deletion to reference
counts. Although buffering successfully devolves reference counting to a spare processor,
the Recycler faces three problems in collecting cycles in a concurrent world.
   • It cannot guarantee that it will retrace the same subgraph since the graph may be
     modified by mutators while the Recycler is detecting garbage cycles.
   • Pointer deletions may disconnect portions of the subgraph.
   • Reference counts may be out of date.
    To resolve these problems, the asynchronous Recycler operates in two phases. The first
phase is much the same as the synchronous collector described in Chapter 5. However, the
asynchronous collector defers the freeing of objects discovered by collectWhite (Algo-
rithm 5.5) to the next phase which checks that these objects are indeed still garbage. There
are several disadvantages to this approach. In theory, but probably not in practice, it is
possible for some garbage cycles not to be collected — the collector is not guaranteed to
be complete. Further, trial deletion cannot use the original reference count but must add
a second, cyclic reference count field to object headers. Third, the algorithm must trace
candidate cycles again, in the second phase, in order to avoid incorrectly reclaiming live
18.6. TAKING A SNAPSHOT OF THE HEAP                                                             414

Algorithm 18.5: Concurrent buffered reference counting

 1   shared epoch
 2   shared updatesBuffer[ ]                                              /* one buffer per epoch */
 3

 4   Write(src, i, ref):
 5      if src = Roots
 6         src[i] ← ref
 7      else
 8         old ← AtomicExchange(&src[i], ref)
 9         log(old, ref)
10

11   log(old, new):
12      myUpdates ← myUpdates + [⟨old, new⟩]
13

14   collect():
15      /* each processor passes its buffers on to a global updatesBuffer */
16      myStackBuffer ← [ ]
17      for each local ref in myStacks                            /* deferred reference counting */
18           myStackBuffer ← myStackBuffer + [⟨ref, ref⟩]
19      atomic
20           updatesBuffer[e] ← updatesBuffer[e] + myStackBuffer
21      atomic
22           updatesBuffer[e] ← updatesBuffer[e] + myUpdates
23      myUpdates ← [ ]
24      e ← e + 1
25

26       me ← myProcessorId
27       if me < MAX_PROCESSORS       /* schedule collect() on the next processor */
28          schedule(collect, me+1)
29       else                        /* the last processor updates the reference counts*/
30          for each ⟨old, new⟩ in updatesBuffer[epoch]
31             addReference(new)
32          for each ⟨old, new⟩ in updatesBuffer[epoch−1]
33             deleteReference(old)
34          release(updatesBuffer[epoch−1])                       /* free the old buffer */
35          epoch ← epoch + 1

objects. It also adds overhead to the reference counting write barrier, as it must fix the
colours of objects left white or grey by improper traversals.
    The fundamental problem is that the Recycler is trying to apply an algorithm designed
for synchronous collection in a world where the topology of the object graph is continually
changing. Next, we see below how this circle can be squared by providing the Recycler
with a fixed snapshot of the heap.

18.6      Taking a snapshot of the heap
We saw in Chapter 5 how coalesced reference counting provided the collector with a snap-
shot of the heap. Thread-local buffers, passed synchronously to the collector, held replicas
18.6. TAKING A SNAPSHOT OF THE HEAP                                                           415

                                                  A
         Collector’s
             log
                                          X           X

                                                                            Some thread’s
                               B              D           C                     log

Figure 18.2: Concurrent coalesced reference counting: in the previous epoch
       A was modified to point to C and the values of its reference fields logged.
       However, A has been modified again in this epoch (to point to D), and so
       marked dirty and logged again. The original referent B can be found in the
       collector’s global log, just as in Figure 5.2. The reference to C that was added
       in the previous epoch will be in some thread’s current log: this log can be
       found from A’s getLogPointer field.

Algorithm 18.6: Sliding views: update reference counts

 1   incrementNew(entry):                  /* use the entry in the collector’s log */
 2      obj ← objFromLog(entry)                              /* the current object */
 3      if not dirty(obj)
 4         replica ← copy(obj)                /* copy the object’s reference slots */
 5         if dirty(obj)
 6            replica ← getLogPointer(obj)          /* entry in some thread’s log */
 7      else
 8         replica ← getLogPointer(obj)
 9

10      for each fld in Pointers(replica)
11         child ← *fld
12         if child ̸= null
13            rc(child) ← rc(child) + 1
14            mark(child)                                        /* if tracing young generation */

of objects into which pointers had been written. Every thread was halted at the start of
a collection cycle, its buffers were transferred to the collector, and fresh buffers allocated.
The collector simply used the replica to find and decrement the reference counts of the old
targets, and the current version of the object to find and increment reference counts of the
new targets. All dirty objects were cleaned.
    Let us see first how we can allow the reference counting thread to run concurrently with
the mutators (after a brief pause to transfer buffers), and then consider how to make that
concurrent algorithm on-the-fly. In the first case, all the mutator threads can be stopped
temporarily while their buffers are transferred to the collector. However, once all the mu-
tator threads have transferred their buffers, they can be restarted. The collector’s task is
to modify the reference counts of the old and new children of every modified object. Ref-
erence decrements can be handled as before, using the replicas in the logs, but handling
increments is more involved (Algorithm 18.6). The task is to increment the reference counts
of the children of each object in the collector’s log, using the state of the object at the time
that the log was transferred. There are two cases to consider, since the logged object may
have been modified since the logs were transferred to the collector.

    If the object remains clean, its state has not changed, so the reference counts of its cur-
rent children are incremented. Note that incrementNew in Algorithm 18.6 must check
again after making a replica of a clean object in case it was dirtied while the copy was
being taken.
    If the object has been modified since the logs were transferred, then it will have been
re-marked dirty and its state at the time of the transfer can be found in a fresh log buffer
of some mutator. The object’s dirty pointer will now refer to this log, which can be read
without synchronising with that thread. Consider the example in Figure 18.2. A has been
modified again in this epoch, which complicates finding C, the target of the last update to
A in the previous epoch. As A is dirty, its previous contents will be held in some thread’s
current local log (shown on the right of the figure): the log refers to C. Thus, we can
decrement the reference count of B and increment the reference count of C. In the next
epoch, C’s reference count will be decremented to reflect the action Write(A, 0, D).

18.7     Sliding views reference counting
For the snapshot of the heap, we stopped the world while threads’ modification buffers
were transferred to the collector. We relax that restriction now, instead stopping threads
one at a time, on-the-fly. This gives a distorted view of the heap. In this sliding view, the
values of different objects are recorded (and transferred to the collector thread) at different
times. Sliding views require neither locks nor atomic instructions (at least, assuming se-
quential consistency), but coordinate mutators and collector threads with four handshakes
between each mutator thread and the collector thread. We consider what modifications
need to be made to the algorithm to support weaker consistency models later. Sliding
views can be used in several contexts: for plain reference counting [Levanoni and Petrank,
1999, 2001, 2006], for managing the old generation of generational [Azatchi and Petrank,
2003] and age-oriented [Paz et al., 2003, 2005b] collectors, and for integration with cyclic
reference counting collectors [Paz et al., 2005a, 2007]. Here, we consider how sliding views
can be used in an age-oriented collector and then extend it to reclaim cyclic structures.

Age-oriented collection
Age-oriented collectors partition the heap into young and old generations. Unlike tradi-
tional generational collectors, both generations are collected at the same time: there are no
nursery collections and inter-generational pointers do not need to be trapped. Appropriate
policies and techniques are chosen for the management of each generation. Since the weak
generational hypothesis expects most objects to die young, and young objects are likely
to have high mutation rates (for example, as they are initialised), a young generation ben-
efits from a collector tuned to low survival rates. In contrast, the old generation can be
managed by a collector tuned to lower death and mutation rates. Paz et al. [2003] adopt
a mark-sweep collector for the young generation (since it need not trace large volumes of
dead objects) and a sliding views reference counting collector for the old generation (as it
can handle huge live heaps). Their age-oriented collector does not move objects: instead,
each object has a bit in its header denoting its generation.
    On-the-fly collection starts by gathering a sliding view (Algorithm 18.7). Incremental
collection of a sliding view requires careful treatment of modifications made while the
view is being gathered. Pointer writes are protected by adding an incremental update
write barrier called snooping (Algorithm 18.8) to the Write operation of Algorithm 5.3.
This prevents missing a referent o whose only reference is removed from a slot s1 before
the sliding view reads s1 , and then is written to another slot s2 after s2 is added to the view.

Algorithm 18.7: Sliding views: the collector

 1   shared updates
 2   shared snoopFlag[MAX_PROCESSORS]                                 /* one per processor */
 3

 4   collect():
 5      collectSlidingView()
 6      on−the−fly handshake 4:
 7         for each thread t
 8             suspend(t)
 9             scanStack(t)
10             snoopFlag[t] ← false
11             resume(t)
12      processReferenceCounts()
13      markNursery()
14      sweepNursery()
15      sweepZCT()
16      collectCycles()
17

18   collectSlidingView():
19      on−the−fly handshake 1:
20          for each thread t
21              suspend(t)
22              snoopFlag[t] ← true
23              transfer t’s buffers to updates
24              resume(t)
25      clean modified and young objects
26      on−the−fly handshake 2:
27          for each thread t
28              suspend(t)
29              find modify-clean conflicts
30              resume(t)
31      reinforce dirty objects
32      on−the−fly handshake 3:
33          for each thread t
34              suspend(t)
35              resume(t)
36

37   processReferenceCounts():
38      for each obj in updates
39         decrementOld(obj)
40         incrementNew(obj)
41

42   collectCycles():
43      markCandidates()
44      markLiveBlack()
45      scan()
46      collectWhite()
47      processBuffers()

Algorithm 18.8: Sliding views: Write

 1   shared logs[MAX_PROCESSORS]                                          /* one per processor */
 2   shared snoopFlag[MAX_PROCESSORS]                                     /* one per processor */
 3   me ← myProcessorId
 4

 5   Write(src, i, ref):
 6      if src = Roots
 7         src[i] ← ref
 8      else
 9         if not dirty(src)
10             log(src)                                                                         $
11         src[i] ← ref                                                                         $
12         snoop(ref)                                                       /* for sliding view */
13

14   log(ref):
15      for each fld in Pointers(ref)
16         if *fld ̸= null
17             add(logs[me], *fld)
18      if not dirty(ref)                             /* commit the entry if ref is still clean */
19         entry ← add(logs[me], ref)
20         logPointer(ref) ← entry
21

22   snoop(ref):
23      if snoopFlag[me] && ref ̸= null
24         mySnoopedBuffer ← mySnoopedBuffer + [ref]                              /* mark grey */

Algorithm 18.9: Sliding views: New

 1   New():
 2      ref ← allocate()
 3      add(myYoungSet, ref)
 4      setDirty(ref)                                                          /* allocate dirty */
 5      return ref

     At the start of a cycle, each thread’s snoopFlag is raised (without synchronisation).
While the sliding view is being collected (and the snoopFlag is up for this thread), the
new referent of any modified object is recorded in the thread’s local mySnoopedBuffer
(line 24 of Algorithm 18.8). In terms of the tricolour abstraction, this Dijkstra-style barrier
marks ref grey. Objects are allocated dirty in the young generation (Algorithm 18.9) in
order to avoid activating the write barrier when their slots are initialised.
     In the first handshake, each thread is stopped, one at a time, its snoopFlag raised and
its local log and young set transferred to the collector’s updates buffer.
     Next, all modified and young objects are cleaned. This risks a race. As cleaning is per-
formed while mutator threads are running, it may erase the dirty state of objects modified
concurrently with cleaning. A second handshake therefore pauses each thread, again on
the fly, and scans its local log to identify objects modified during cleaning. The dirty state
of these objects is restored (‘reinforced’).

                                            Z

                 X                          Y
                                  X
                     Log

Figure 18.3: Sliding views allow a fixed snapshot of the graph to be traced by
      using values stored in the log. Here, the shaded objects indicate the state of
      the graph at the time that the pointer from X to Y was overwritten to refer to
      Z. The old version of the graph can be traced by using the value of X’s field
      stored in the log.

    A third, empty handshake ensures that no thread has fallen behind. The collector is
now ready to begin to mark the young generation and update the reference counts of the
old generation.
    Concurrent marking starts with a fourth handshake, again suspending threads one at a
time to scan their stacks in the usual way for mark-sweep and deferred reference counting
collectors. Each thread’s snoop flag can then be dropped.
    The items in each thread’s mySnoopedBuffer are transferred to the work list asyn-
chronously. The collector is then ready to process reference counts in the old generation.
Notice that the nursery cannot be marked until the old generation has been processed since
an update may have added a pointer from an old to a young object.
    Processing the old generation also requires the counts of old and new objects in the
updates buffer to be processed: if the reference count of a young object is updated (it
is reachable from the old generation and will be promoted), and that object has not been
marked, it is added to the marker’s work list.
    Once the old generation has been processed and all inter-generational references have
been discovered, the young generation is traced (markNursery), marking objects with the
incrementNew procedure, and swept (sweepNursery), freeing any unmarked object.
    Objects in the old generation can be reclaimed in the same way as with deferred refer-
ence counting. Any object that is unmarked, has a zero reference count and is not directly
referenced by a root, is reclaimed (sweepZCT). If an object with a zero reference count is
dirty, recursive freeing decrements the reference counts of its descendants, found from its
log entry (see Figure 18.3); otherwise, its current fields are used.

Sliding views cycle reclamation
As presented so far, the age-oriented collector can reclaim cycles in the nursery but not in
the old generation. Paz et al. [2007] combine the Recycler’s cycle collection algorithm with
an age-oriented collector. The difficulty that faced the asynchronous Recycler was that
the topology of the heap could vary under its feet. In contrast, sliding views presents the
collector with a fixed view of the heap, using the original version of unmodified objects or
18.8. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                     420

the logged copy of modified objects (see Figure 18.3). It is therefore possible for each pass
of the trial deletion algorithm to retrace the steps of the first pass. Thus, by working on the
sliding view of the heap, we can apply the simpler synchronous algorithm rather than the
more complicated, multi-coloured asynchronous algorithm of Bacon and Rajan [2001].
     Paz et al. introduce a number of optimisations that can further reduce the number of
objects that trial deletion must trace. Like Bacon and Rajan [2001], they ignore scalar objects
that cannot be members of cycles. Mature objects are considered for cycle reclamation only
if they have survived several collections. This requires a queue of candidate buffers rather
than a single one (they found a delay of two collection cycles to be effective). Paz et al. also
try to avoid considering objects that might be live, including root referents, snooped objects
and objects modified after the sliding view was collected. An additional markBlack phase
pre-processes these objects, marking them and their sliding view descendants black. This
raises a dilemma. The set of objects known to be live (actually, a subset of the dirty objects)
is not fixed during the collection, so it is not possible to identify how many reference count
modifications the collector might have made to an object before it became dirty. Hence, it
is not possible to restore its original count. Instead, cycle detection operates on a second,
cyclic, reference count. The alternative, to consider these objects regardless, would lead to
more objects being processed by the reference counter.

Memory consistency
The sliding views algorithms presented above assume sequential consistency, which pro-
cessors do not always guarantee. On the mutator side, it is important that the order of op-
erations in Write are preserved to ensure that (i) the values seen in the log are the correct
ones (that is, they represent a snapshot of the modified object as it was before the collec-
tion cycle started); (ii) the collector only reads completed log entries; and (iii) object fields
cannot be updated after a collection starts without being snooped. The handshakes used
by the algorithm solve some dependency issues on weakly consistent platforms (ensuring
that the collector only sees complete log entries, or that new references are snooped during
the collection cycle). Two further modifications are necessary. First, on the mutator side,
synchronisation must be added in the write barrier around the logging to ensure that it is
seen before the modification of the pointer. Levanoni and Petrank [2006] do this by placing
a memory fence before and after log(src) (line 10 in Algorithm 18.8). Second, something
similar is needed on the collector side. However, the approach above would be inefficient
since most objects are unlikely to be dirty since their log pointers have been reset. Instead,
on a weakly consistent platform, the collector can reduce the cost of synchronisation by
reading batches of values from the buffers into a local array before processing them.

18.8     Issues to consider
The immediate problem facing reference counting is how to ensure that objects’ reference
counts are correct in the face of concurrent modifications to the object graph. The simplest
solution is to require mutators to lock an object before it is modified. If the cost of locking
is considered to be too high, then an alternative solution must be found. Current solutions
rest on avoiding races between mutators that compromise the consistency of reference
counts. Note that the memory manager is only concerned to preserve the consistency of
the heap; whether or not mutator races violate the correctness of the user program is of no
interest to it.
    To preserve coherence, we must ask how we can serialise pointer writes and reference
count operations. A partial solution is to use deferred reference counting, since this defers
18.8. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                  421

reclamation of garbage objects and, in particular, devolves the task to a single collector
thread. However, this only accounts for pointer loads and stores, and not for writes into
object fields. Thus, the question becomes, how can we devolve reference count modifica-
tions necessitated by writes to pointer fields from the mutator threads to a collector thread?
One solution is for each mutator to buffer its reference counting operations and periodi-
cally pass them to the collector. A further step, coalesced reference counting, extends this
by taking a snapshot of objects before they are modified: this allows the collector thread
to avoid applying any redundant reference count modifications. In both cases reference
count manipulation and object reclamation is separated from the action of writing point-
ers and is performed by a single collector thread (although it would be relatively straight-
forward to use parallel collector threads). Taking a snapshot of the state of the heap also
simplifies concurrent cyclic reference counting. Trial deletion algorithms need to traverse
a subgraph of the heap multiple times. By traversing the snapshot, the collector can ensure
that it traces the same subgraph each time, even in the face of concurrent mutator activity.

Safe memory reclamation
Finally we note that there is a large and growing literature on safe reclamation of mem-
ory when using dynamic memory structures, from the ABA-prevention tags used in IBM’s
System 370 onwards. We pick out only a selection here. Broadly, these schemes require
a thread to reserve the set of objects that it is using in order to prevent premature recla-
mation of an object by another thread. Proposed schemes have been manual or automatic,
supported by atomic reference counting. Mechanisms may be epoch-based or pointer-based.
Differences between safe memory reclamation algorithms include the costs of protecting a
pointer and retiring an object (making it available for deallocation unless it is still in use
by other threads), the bounds on the number of objects retired but not yet deallocated and
restrictions on programming style.
     Epoch-based memory management (see, for example, Fraser [2004] or Hart et al. [2007]),
which is often the fastest approach, relies on a global epoch counter to reserve objects.
Before a thread starts to use a data structure, it logs the current epoch in a global record.
This implicitly reserves all objects that were not retired before the start of this epoch. To
retire an object, depending on the algorithm, a thread might append the object to a list
of retired objects, record the current epoch in the object’s header and update the epoch
(either immediately or after every so many retirements). An object can only be reclaimed
if it was retired before the earliest epoch reserved by any active thread. These techniques
are scheduler-dependent and tend to be vulnerable to the delay or failure of a single thread.
If some thread stalls while it is using a reserved data structure, all other threads may be
prevented from reclaiming reserved objects.
     In contrast, pointer-based schemes avoid the stalling problem by reserving only those
individual objects that a thread is using, but they tend to have higher overheads. The Pass
The Buck (PTB) scheme [Herlihy et al., 2002] provides lock-free progress to protect point-
ers and wait-free progress to retire objects but requires a double-word compare-and-swap
atomic instruction. Each thread creates a list of retired objects which may be proportional
to the number of threads. Hazard pointers [Michael, 2004] require only a single-word atomic
primitive. Before accessing an object, a thread must publish a pointer in a globally shared
data structure. Typically, a thread must load the pointer, write it to a hazard pointer, issue
a store-load (write-read) fence and then re-read the pointer to check that it has not changed.
Periodically, the hazard pointers of all threads are scanned to reclaim any object on the re-
tired list for which there is no hazard pointer. Drop The Anchor [Braginsky et al., 2013] is
an extension of hazard pointers with improved performance to protect pointers. However,
it may require non-trivial changes to algorithms that use it. Automatic Optimistic Access
18.8. ISSUES TO CONSIDER                                                                   422

[Cohen and Petrank, 2015] and Free Access [Cohen, 2018] are other lock-free reclamation
schemes that require programs to be written in a particular style.
    Ramalhete and Correia [2017] combine the lower overhead of epoch-based reclamation
with the non-blocking properties of hazard pointer by recording hazard eras rather than
hazard pointers. Publishing an era e guarantees that no object with a lifetime that overlaps
e will be reclaimed. All currently live objects are protected but objects created after this era
may be reclaimed, which is not possible in epoch-based reclamation.
    Anderson et al. [2021] combine ideas from reference counting and hazard pointers to
provide concurrent reference counting with wait-free, constant-time overhead, deferring
reference count decrements until no other thread can be incrementing them, and eliding
or deferring increments for short-lived objects.
    In contrast with epoch-based reclamation, in which threads reserve all objects created
after a certain time, or pointer-based reclamation schemes that reserve only individual ob-
jects, interval-based reclamation [Wen et al., 2018] allows a thread to reserve all blocks known
to have existed in a bounded interval of time. Like hazard pointers, interval-based recla-
mation avoids the risk of a stalled thread retaining an unbounded number of objects but,
unlike hazard pointers, does not need a memory fence on pointer loads.
    The Hyaline algorithm [Nikolaev and Ravindran, 2021] in its ‘robust’ versions bounds
memory usage by adopting the birth eras approach of hazard eras and interval-based recla-
mation, marking each object with a global counter in order to ensure that stalled threads
can only retain older objects. Unlike those two approaches, Hyaline relies on reference
counting but only during reclamation and not while accessing objects.
    OrcGC [Correia et al., 2021] is an automatic lock-free memory reclamation scheme that
combines counts of references from other objects (but not from thread stacks) with a pointer-
based mechanism, Pass The Pointer. It requires C++ type annotations to indicate which
references should be tracked. Pointers are protected in the same way as with hazard point-
ers or Pass The Buck and, similarly, to retire an object all hazardous pointers are scanned.
However, if a pointer to an object is found, the responsibility for freeing that object is
passed to the protecting thread. Beware And Cleanup [Gidenstam et al., 2009] is another
manual scheme that combines hazard pointers with atomic reference counting.
