Chapter 19

Real-time garbage collection

The concurrent and incremental garbage collection algorithms of the preceding chapters
strive to reduce the pause times perceived by the mutator by interleaving small increments
of collector work on the same processor as the mutator or by running collector work at the
same time on another processor. Many of these algorithms were developed with the goal
of supporting applications where long pauses result in the application providing degraded
service quality (such as jumpy movement of a mouse cursor in a graphical user interface).
Thus, early incremental and concurrent collectors were often called ‘real-time’ collectors,
but they were only real-time under certain strict conditions (such as restricting the size of
objects). However, as real-time systems are now understood, none of the previous algo-
rithms live up to the promise of supporting true real-time behaviour because they cannot
provide strong progress guarantees to the mutator. When the mutator must take a lock
(within a read or write barrier or during allocation), its progress can no longer be guaran-
teed. Worse, preemptive thread scheduling may result in the mutator being descheduled
arbitrarily in favour of concurrent collector threads. True real-time collection must account
precisely for all interruptions to mutator progress, while ensuring that space bounds are
not exceeded. Fortunately, there has been much progress in real-time garbage collection
that extends the advantages of automatic memory management to real-time systems.

19.1     Real-time systems
Real-time systems impose operational deadlines on particular tasks within an application.
These real-time tasks must be able to respond to application inputs (events) within a fixed
time window. A task that fails to meet its real-time constraint may degrade service (for
example, dropping a frame while displaying digital video), or much worse, cause catas-
trophic failure of the system (such as mis-timing the spark-plug ignition signal resulting
in damage to an internal combustion engine). Thus, a real-time system must not only be
correct logically, it must also be correct with respect to responsiveness to real-time events.
    A soft real-time system (like video display) can tolerate missed deadlines at the expense
of service quality. Too many missed deadlines will result in unacceptable quality of service,
but the occasional missed deadline will not matter much. Printezis [2006] suggests for
systems a soft real-time goal that specifies a maximum garbage collection time, a time slice
duration and an acceptable failure rate. In any interval in this time slice duration, the
collector should avoid using more than the allowed maximum collection time, and any
violations of this goal should be within the acceptable failure rate.
    Such a soft goal is inadequate for hard real-time systems (like engine control) which con-
sider missed deadlines to mean failure of the system. A correct hard real-time system

                                                               me

Figure 19.1: Unpredictable frequency and duration of conventional collec-
       tors. Collector pauses in grey.

must guarantee that all real-time constraints will be satisfied. In the face of such timing
constraints, it is important to be able to characterise the responsiveness of garbage collec-
tion in real-time systems in ways that reflect both needs of the application (hard or soft
real-time) and the behaviour of the garbage collector [Printezis, 2006].
    Overall performance or throughput in real-time systems is less important than pre-
dictability of performance. The timing behaviour of a real-time task should be able to be
determined analytically by design, or empirically during testing, so that its response-time
when deployed in the field can be known ahead of time (to some acceptable degree of
confidence). The worst-case execution time (WCET) of a task is the maximum length of time
the task could take to execute in isolation (that is, ignoring re-scheduling) on a particular
hardware platform. Multitasking real-time systems must schedule tasks so that their real-
time constraints are met. Knowing that these constraints will be met at run time involves
performing schedulability analysis ahead-of-time, assuming a particular (usually priority-
based) run-time scheduling algorithm.
    Real-time applications are often deployed to run as embedded systems dedicated to
a specific purpose, such as the example above of a control system for engine timing.
Single-chip processors predominate in embedded systems, so incremental garbage col-
lection techniques translate naturally to embedded settings, but with multicore embedded
processors becoming increasingly common, techniques for concurrent and parallel collec-
tion also apply. Moreover, embedded systems often impose tighter space constraints than
general-purpose platforms.
    For all of these reasons, stop-the-world, parallel or even concurrent garbage collectors
that impose unpredictable pause times are not suited to real-time applications. Consider
the collector schedule illustrated in Figure 19.1 which results when the effort required to
reclaim memory depends on the total amount and size of objects that the application uses,
the interconnections among those objects and the level of effort required to free enough
memory to satisfy future allocations. Given this schedule, the mutator cannot rely on
predictable and sustained utilisation of the processor.

19.2     Scheduling real-time collection
When and how to trigger collector work is the main factor affecting the impact of the collec-
tor on the mutator. Stop-the-world collectors defer all collector work until some allocation
attempt detects that space is exhausted and triggers the collector. An incremental collec-
tor will piggyback some amount of collector work on each heap access (using read/write
barriers) or allocation, or both. A concurrent collector will trigger some amount of col-
lector work to be performed concurrently (possibly in parallel) with the mutator, but im-
poses mutator barriers to keep the collector synchronised with the mutator. To maintain
steady-state space consumption, the collector must free and recycle dead objects at the
same rate (measured by space allocated) as the mutator allocates new objects. Fragmenta-
tion can lead to space being wasted so that in the worst case an allocation request cannot
be satisfied unless the collector itself or a separate compaction phase is able to relocate ob-
jects. But object relocation imposes an additional burden that can adversely affect real-time

bounds. While in general we are cautious about using minimum mutator utilisation where
response time is a more appropriate measure, given the usually known bounds on muta-
tor work needed to meet deadlines in real-time systems, minimum mutator utilisation is a
reasonable metric in this setting.
    There are a number of alternative techniques for scheduling the work of real-time
garbage collectors and for characterising how that work can affect the mutator [Henriks-
son, 1998; Detlefs, 2004b; Cheng and Blelloch, 2001; Pizlo and Vitek, 2008]. Work-based
scheduling imposes collector work as a tax on units of mutator work. Slack-based scheduling
runs collector work in the slack portions of the real-time task schedule (that is, when no
real-time task is running). The slack can be a significant fraction of overall time when real-
time tasks are infrequent or periodic (executing briefly at some known frequency). This can
be achieved easily in a priority-scheduled system by giving the collector a lower priority
than any of the real-time tasks. Time-based scheduling reserves a pre-defined portion of ex-
ecution time solely for collector work during which the mutator is stopped. This allows
meeting some pre-defined minimum mutator utilisation guarantee.

19.3     Work-based real-time collection
The classic Baker [1978] incremental semispace copying collector was one of the earliest at-
tempts at real-time collection. It uses a precise model for analysing for real-time behaviour
founded on the limiting assumption that objects (in this case Lisp cons cells) have a fixed
size. Recall that Baker’s read barrier prevents the mutator from accessing fromspace ob-
jects by making the mutator copy any fromspace object it encounters into tospace. This
work is bounded because the objects have a single fixed size. Also, each mutator allocation
performs some bounded amount of collector work (scanning some fixed number of grey
tospace fields, copying their fixed-size fromspace targets as necessary). The more fields
scanned per allocation, the faster the collection will finish, but the slower the mutator will
run. Baker derived bounds on both time and space for his collector. His space bound was
2R(1 + 1/k), where R is the reachable space, and k is the adjustable time bound defined
to be the number of fields scanned at each allocation. Baker did offer some solutions for
incremental copying of variable-sized arrays, but these do not feature in his analysis.

Parallel, concurrent replication
Blelloch and Cheng [1999] extended the analysis of Baker for multiprocessor collection
by devising a concurrent and parallel replicating copying collector for which they derive
bounds on space and time. In evaluating their subsequent practical implementation of this
collector, Cheng and Blelloch [2001] were the first to characterise intrusiveness of collec-
tion in terms of minimum mutator utilisation. Because their collector is still work-based,
regardless of the efforts to which it goes towards minimising pause times, it can still suffer
from unpredictable variation in the distribution of pauses that make it difficult to obtain
real-time guarantees for the mutator. In Section 19.5 we will see that minimum mutator
utilisation can also be used to drive time-based scheduling of real-time garbage collection
by making minimum mutator utilisation an input constraint to the collector. Still, Blelloch
and Cheng offer useful insights into the way in which pause times can be tightly bounded,
while also bounding space, so we consider its detailed design here.

Machine model. Blelloch and Cheng assume an idealised machine model. A real imple-
mentation must grapple with differences between this idealised model and the actual tar-
get machine. The machine assumed is a typical shared-memory symmetric multiprocessor,

having atomic test-and-set and fetch-and-add instructions for synchronisation. These are
supported directly in hardware or can be implemented easily on modern symmetric mul-
tiprocessors using load-linked/store-conditionally or compare-and-swap, though it is im-
portant that fetch-and-add be implemented fairly (with strict time bounds) so that all pro-
cessors make progress. They also assume a simple interrupt that is used to start and stop
incremental collection on each of the processors. This can be implemented using GC safe-
points, as described in Section 11.6. More importantly, they assume memory accesses to be
sequentially consistent, which makes practical implementation of the collector more diffi-
cult, since some memory accesses must be ordered appropriately to ensure correctness.
     The memory is organised as a contiguous set of locations addressable from [2..M + 1]
(so pointers with value 0 and 1 have special meaning) where M is the maximum memory
size. Each location can hold at least a pointer.
     For timing analysis, the longest time taken by any one instruction is used as the cost of
all instructions (interrupts occur between instructions and do not count towards this time).

Application model. The application model assumes the usual mutator operations Read
and Write, and New(n) which allocates a new object with n fields and returns a pointer
to the first field; it also includes a header word for use by the memory manager. In ad-
dition, Blelloch and Cheng require that on each processor every New(n) is followed by n
invocations of InitSlot(v) to initialise each of the n fields of the last allocated object of
the processor with v, starting at slot 0. A processor must complete all n invocations of
InitSlot before it uses the new object or executes another New, though any number of
other operations including Read and Write can be interleaved with the InitSlots. Fur-
thermore, the idealised application model assumes that Write operations are atomic (no
two processors can overlap execution of a Write). The memory manager further uses a
function isPointer(p, i) to determine whether the ith field of the object referenced by
p is a pointer, a fact often determined statically by the type of the object, or its class in an
object-oriented language.

The algorithm. The collector is structured as a replicating collector in the style of Net-
tles and O’Toole [1993] except that, instead of a fromspace invariant and logging updates,
the mutators obey a replication invariant: whenever the collector is active and a mutator
wishes to update an object, it must update both the primary and its replica (if one exists).
When the collector is active, all allocations make both a primary and a replica in tospace
for the mutators to manipulate. Blelloch and Cheng also use a snapshot-at-the-beginning
Yuasa-style deletion write barrier to ensure correctness.
    Blelloch and Cheng assume a header field forwardingAddress(p) on each primary
object p and copyCount(r) on each replica r (these can be stored in the same slot because
they only apply to a primary or replica, respectively). The header is used for several pur-
poses: for synchronisation on the primary to control which thread generates the replica,
as a forwarding pointer from the primary to the replica, as a count in the replica of how
much remains to be copied to it from the primary and to synchronise on the replica among
mutators and the thread copying the object. When a primary object p is white, there is
only a primary copy and its header is zero (forwardingAddress(p)=null). When the
object turns grey and space has been allocated for the replica r, the header of the primary
points to the replica (forwardingAddress(p)=r), and the header of the replica contains
how many fields remain to be copied (copyCount(r)=n). When the object turns black (is
fully copied), then the header of the replica will be zero (copyCount(r)=0).
    The heap is configured into two semispaces as shown in Figure 19.2. Fromspace is
bounded by the variables fromBot and fromTop which are private to each thread. The

                      fromBot                                                                   fromTop

         fromspace

            tospace       allocated                          free                           copy stack
                       toBot             free                          sharedStack                 toTop

Figure 19.2: Heap structure in the Blelloch and Cheng work-based collector

collector maintains an explicit copy stack in the top part of tospace holding pointers to
the grey objects. As noted in Section 14.6, Blelloch and Cheng offer several arguments
that this explicit copy stack allows better control over locality and synchronisation than
Cheney queues in sharing the work of copying among concurrent collector threads. The
area between toBot and free holds all replicas and newly allocated objects. The area
between sharedStack and toTop holds the copy stack (growing down from toTop to
sharedStack). When free=sharedStack, the collector has run out of memory. If the
collector is off when this happens, then it is turned on. Otherwise, an out of memory error
is reported. The variables toBot and toTop are also private to each thread, whereas free
and sharedStack are shared.
     The code for copying a slot from a primary object to its replica is shown in Algo-
rithm 19.1, where copyOneSlot takes the address of the grey primary object p as its argu-
ment, copies the slot specified by the current count stored in the replica, shades the object
pointed to by that slot (by calling makeGrey), and stores the decremented count. Finally,
the primary object p is still grey if it has fields that still need to be copied, in which case
it is pushed back onto the local copy stack (the operations on the local stack are defined
earlier in Algorithm 14.8).
     The makeGrey function turns an object grey if it is white (has no replica allocated for
it) and returns the pointer to the replica. The atomic test-and-set1 is used to check if the
object is white, since many processors could try to shade an object simultaneously, and it
is undesirable to allocate more than one replica in tospace. The processor that manages to
win this copy-copy race is the designated copier. The makeGrey function distinguishes three
cases for the header forwardingAddress(p).

   1. The testandset returns zero so this processor becomes the designated copier and
      allocates the tospace replica r, sets its header copyCount(r) to the length of the ob-
      ject, sets the header forwardingAddress(p) of the primary to point to the replica,
      pushes a reference to the primary on a private stack and returns the pointer to r.

   2. The TestAndSet returns non-zero, and the value of the header is a valid forwarding
      pointer so this pointer to the replica can be returned.

   3. The TestAndSet returns non-zero, but the value in the header is 1, so another pro-
      cessor is the designated copier but has not yet set the forwarding pointer. The current
      processor must wait until it can return the proper forwarding pointer.

    Algorithm 19.2 shows the code for the mutator operations when the collector is on. The
New operation allocates space for the primary and replica copies using allocate, and
sets some private variables that parametrise the behaviour of InitSlot, saying where
it should write initial values. The variable lastA tracks the address of the last allocated
object, lastL notes its length, and lastC holds the count of how many of its slots have
  1 Recall that this primitive, as we defined it, sets the word to 1 only if the whole word’s value is 0 — it does not

operate on just the low bit of the word. It is equivalent to a compare-and-swap of new value 1 for old value 0.

Algorithm 19.1: Copying in the Blelloch and Cheng work-based collector

 1   shared gcOn ← false
 2   shared free                                                                 /* allocation pointer */
 3   shared sharedStack                                                         /* copy stack pointer */
 4

 5   copyOneSlot(p):                                       /* p is the primary copy of a grey object */
 6      r ← forwardingAddress(p)                                        /* pointer to the replica copy */
 7      i ← copyCount(r) − 1                                              /* index of slot to be copied */
 8      copyCount(r) ← −(i+1)                           /* lock slot to prevent write while copying */
 9      v ← p[i]
10      if isPointer(p, i)
11          v ← makeGrey(v)                                                 /* grey if it is a pointer */
12      r[i] ← v                                                                     /* copy the slot */
13      copyCount(r) ← i                                  /* unlock object with decremented index */
14      if i > 0
15          localPush(p)                                                 /* push back on local stack */
16

17   makeGrey(p):                                                  /* p must be a primary copy */
18      if TestAndSet(&forwardingAddress(p)) ̸= 0 /* race to replicate primary */
19         /* we lost the race */
20         while forwardingAddress(p) = 1
21             /* do nothing: wait for a valid forwarding address */
22      else
23         /* we won the race */
24         count ← length(p)                                                /* length of primary */
25         r ← allocate(count)                                                  /* allocate replica */
26         copyCount(r) ← count                                   /* set copy counter for replica */
27         forwardingAddress(p) ← r                      /* set forwarding address for primary */
28         localPush(p)                                   /* push primary on stack for copying */
29      return forwardingAddress(p)
30

31   allocate(n):
32      ref ← FetchAndAdd(&free, n)
33      if ref + n > sharedStack                                            /* is tospace exhausted? */
34         if gcOn
35            error "Out of memory"
36         interrupt(collectorOn)                    /* interrupt mutators to start next collection */
37         allocate(n)                                                                 /* try again */
38      return ref

already been initialised. The InitSlot function stores the value of the next slot to be
initialised in both the primary and replica copies and increments lastC. These initial-
ising stores shade any pointers that are stored to preserve the strong tricolour invariant
that black objects cannot point to white objects. The statement collect(k ) incrementally
copies k words for every word allocated. By design, the algorithm allows a collection
cycle to start while an object is only partially initialised (that is, when a processor has
lastC̸=lastL).

Algorithm 19.2: Mutator operations in the Blelloch and Cheng collector (gcOn=true)

 1     lastA                                         /* per−processor pointer to last allocated object */
 2     lastL                                          /* per−processor length of last allocated object */
 3     lastC                                    /* per−processor count of number of slots last filled */
 4

 5     Read(p, i):
 6        return p[i]
 7

 8     New(n):
 9        p ← allocate(n)                                                          /* allocate primary */
10        r ← allocate(n)                                                            /* allocate replica */
11        forwardingAddress(p) ← r                                    /* primary forwards to replica */
12        copyCount(r) ← 0                                             /* replica has no slots to copy */
13        lastA ← p                                                                /* set last allocated */
14        lastC ← 0                                                                         /* set count */
15        lastL ← n                                                                        /* set length */
16        return p
17

18     atomic Write(p, i, v):
19        if isPointer(p, i)
20            makeGrey(p[i])                                                       /* grey old value */
21        p[i] ← v                                                /* write new value into primary */
22        if forwardingAddress(p) ̸= 0                               /* check if object is forwarded */
23            while forwardingAddress(p) = 1
24                /* do nothing: wait for forwarding address */
25            r ← forwardingAddress(p)                                     /* get pointer to replica */
26            while copyCount(r) = −(i+1)
27                /* do nothing: wait while slot concurrently being copied */
28            if isPointer(p, i)
29                v ← makeGrey(v)                           /* update replica with grey new value */
30            r[i] ← v                                                             /* update replica */
31        collect(k )                                                       /* execute k copy steps */
32

33     InitSlot(v):                          /* initialise next slot of last allocated */
34        lastA[lastC] ← v                                      /* initialise primary */
35        if isPointer(lastA, lastC)
36           v ← makeGrey(v)                       /* replica gets grey initial value */
37        forwardingAddress(lastA)[lastC++] ← v                   /* initialise replica */
38        collect(k)                                         /* execute k copy steps */

   The Write operation first shades any overwritten (deleted) pointer grey (to preserve
snapshot reachability), and then writes the new value into the corresponding slot of both
the primary and the replica (if it exists). When writing to a grey object, it is possible that
the designated copier is also copying the same slot. This copy-write race can lead to a lost
update if the mutator writes to the replica after the copier has read the slot from the pri-
mary but before it has finished copying the slot to the replica. Thus, the Write operation
waits for the copier, both to allocate the replica and to finish copying the slot. It is not a

Algorithm 19.3: Collector code in the Blelloch and Cheng work-based collector

 1   collect(k):
 2      enterRoom()
 3      for i ← 0 to k−1
 4         if isLocalStackEmpty()                                            /* local stack empty */
 5             sharedPop()                              /* move work from shared stack to local */
 6             if isLocalStackEmpty()                                  /* local stack still empty */
 7                break                                                   /* no more work to do */
 8         p ← localPop()
 9         copyOneSlot(p)
10      transitionRooms()
11      sharedPush()                                               /* move work to shared stack */
12      if exitRoom()
13         interrupt(collectorOff)                                           /* turn collector off */

problem for the mutator to write to the primary before the copier locks the slot, since the
copier will then copy that value to the replica. The while statements that force the mu-
tator to wait are both time-bounded, the first by the time it takes for the copier to allocate
the replica and the second by the time it takes for the copier to copy the slot.
    InitSlot is used for initialising stores instead of Write because it is much cheaper.
The uninitialised slots are implicitly null so do not need a deletion barrier to preserve
the snapshot. Also, the new object always has a replica so there is no need to check for
the replica’s presence. Finally, the collector is designed so that if a collection cycle starts
while an object is only partially initialised, only the initialised slots will be copied (see
collectorOn in Algorithm 19.4).
    Algorithm 19.3 shows the collector function collect(k), which copies k slots. The
shared copy stack allows the copy work to be shared among the processors. To reduce
the number of invocations of the potentially expensive sharedPop operation (which uses
fetch-and-add), to improve the chances for local optimisation, and to enhance locality, each
processor takes most of its work from a private local stack (the shared and private stack
operations are defined earlier in Algorithm 14.8). Only when there is no work available
in this local stack will the processor fetch additional work from the shared copy stack.
After copying k slots, collect places any remaining work back into the shared stack.
Note that no two processors can simultaneously execute the code to copy slots (obtaining
additional work from the shared copy stack) in lines 2–10 and move copy work back to the
copy stack after copying k slots in lines lines 10–12. This is enforced using the ‘rooms’ of
Algorithm 14.9, which we discussed in Section 14.6.
    Algorithm 19.4 shows the code to start (collectorOn) and stop (collectorOff)
the collector. Here, the only roots are assumed to reside in the fixed number of registers
REG private to each processor. The synch routine implements barrier synchronisation to
block a processor until all processors have reached that barrier. These are used to ensure
a consistent view of the shared variables gcOn, free, and sharedStack. When a new
collection cycle begins, each processor sets the replica header of its partially initialised last
allocated object to the last initialised slot lastC so that only the initialised slots need to
be copied. When the collection cycle ends, the registers and the last allocated object are
forwarded to refer to their replicas.

Algorithm 19.4: Stopping and starting the Blelloch and Cheng work-based collector

 1   shared gcOn
 2   shared toTop
 3   shared free
 4   shared count ← 0                                /* number of processors that have synched */
 5   shared round ← 0                                      /* the current synchronisation round */
 6

 7   synch():
 8      curRound ← round
 9      self ← FetchAndAdd(&cnt, 1) + 1
10      if self = numProc                                    /* round is done, reset for next one */
11         cnt ← 0
12         round++
13      while round = curRound
14         /* do nothing: wait until last processor changes round */
15

16   collectorOn():
17      synch()
18      gcOn ← true
19      toBot, fromBot ← fromBot, toBot                                                        /* flip */
20      toTop, fromTop ← fromTop, toTop
21      free, sharedStack ← toBot, toTop
22      stackLimit ← sharedStack
23      synch()
24      r ← allocate(lastL)                                     /* allocate replica of last allocated */
25      forwardingAddress(lastA) ← r                                       /* forward last allocated */
26      copyCount(r) ← lastC                                         /* set number of slots to copy */
27      if lastC > 0
28         localPush(lastA)                                         /* push work onto local stack */
29      for i ← 0 to length(REG)                                              /* make roots grey */
30         if isPointer(REG, i)
31             makeGrey(REG[i])
32      sharedPush()                                                 /* move work to shared stack */
33      synch()
34

35   collectorOff():
36      synch()
37      for i ← 0 to length(REG)                                                 /* make roots grey */
38         if isPointer(REG, i)
39            REG[i] ← forwardingAddress(REG[i])                                   /* forward roots */
40      lastA ← forwardingAddress(lastA)
41      gcOn ← false
42      synch()

Other practical improvements. The original formulation of the real-time replication al-
gorithm [Blelloch and Cheng, 1999] and its subsequent practical implementation [Cheng
and Blelloch, 2001; Cheng, 2001] describe a number of other practical improvements to
this algorithm. Instead of using fetch-and-add in every invocation of allocate, each
processor can allocate from a private allocation area as described in Section 7.7. Instead
of spin-waiting for the forwarding pointer in makeGrey, because the processor can know
the location at which it is going to place an object in its private space, it can then use a
compare-and-swap instead of test-and-set. Other improvements include deferring the col-
lector work performed in New and InitLoc until each local allocation area fills up with
(small) objects, avoiding the cost of double allocations (primary and replica) in New and
how to make Write atomic using rooms synchronisation (only one writer can enter the
‘writing room’ at any particular time).

Time and space bounds. The considerable effort taken by this algorithm to place a well-
defined bound on each increment of collector work allows for precise bounds to be placed
on space and the time spent in garbage collection. Blelloch and Cheng [1999] prove that
the algorithm requires at most 2( R(1 + 2/k) + N + 5PD ) memory words, where P is the
number of processors, R is the maximum reachable space during a computation (number
of words accessible from the root set), N is the maximum number of reachable objects,
D is the maximum depth of any object and k controls the tradeoff between space and
time, bounding how many words are copied each time a word is allocated. They also
show that mutator threads are never stopped for more than time proportional to k non-
blocking machine instructions. These bounds are guaranteed even for large objects and
arrays, because makeGrey progresses the grey wavefront a field at a time rather than a
whole object at a time.

Performance. Cheng and Blelloch [2001] implemented their collector for ML, a statically
typed functional language. ML programs typically have very high allocation rates, pos-
ing a challenge to most collectors. Results reported are for a 64-processor Sun Enterprise
10000, with processor clock speeds on the order of a few hundred megahertz. On a single
processor, the collector imposes an average (across a range of benchmarks) overhead of
51% compared to an equivalent stop-the-world collector. These are the costs to support
both parallel (39%) and concurrent (12%) collection. Nevertheless, the collector scales well
for 32 processors (17.2× speedup), while the mutator does not scale quite so well (9.2×
speedup), and near perfectly for 8 processors (7.8× and 7.2×, respectively). Minimum
mutator utilisation for the stop-the-world collector is zero or near zero for all benchmarks
at a granularity of 10 milliseconds, whereas the concurrent collector supports a minimum
mutator utilisation of around 10% for k = 2 and 15% for k = 1.2. Maximum pause times
for the concurrent collector range from 3 to 4 milliseconds.

Uneven work and its impact on work-based scheduling
The argument against work-based scheduling for real-time garbage collection is that it
results in uneven minimum mutator utilisation, with the operations of the mutator so
tightly coupled to those of the collector. A worst-case execution time analysis for work-
based copying collection must assume the worst-case time for all mutator operations on
the heap. For the Baker [1978] collector, reading a pointer slot may require copying its
target. For Lisp cons cells this is a bounded cost, but variable-sized objects like arrays
cause problems. Allocation can cause some fixed amount of collector work, and at the
beginning of the collection cycle will also involve the flip, scanning the roots and copying
their targets. This includes the global variables (bounded in each particular program) and

                                                               me

                                           1ms      0.1ms

Figure 19.3: Low mutator utilisation even with short collector pauses. The
       mutator (white) runs infrequently, while the collector (grey) dominates.

local (thread stack) variables (potentially unbounded up to stack overflow). In summary,
the worst case is so far from the usual case that the resulting worst-case execution time
analysis is virtually useless for schedulability analysis.
    There have been several attempts at containing these worst-case overheads for work-
based scheduling. To bound the cost of stack scanning, Cheng and Blelloch [2001] propose
dividing the stack into fixed-size stacklets. The flip only needs to scan the top-most stacklet
in which the mutator is currently active, leaving the other stacklets for later scanning in
due course. To prevent a mutator from returning to an unscanned stacklet, this approach
adds a stack barrier (recall Section 11.5) to the operations that pop the stacklets as the mu-
tator executes, requiring the mutator to scan the stacklet being returned to. Detlefs [2004b]
notes two approaches for handling the case in which the mutator attempts to return into
a stacklet that is already in the process of being scanned by the collector: either the mu-
tator must wait for the collector or the collector must abort the scanning of that stacklet,
deferring that work to the mutator.
    Similarly, variable-sized objects can be broken into fixed-size oblets, and arrays into
arraylets, to place bounds on the granularity of scanning/copying to advance the collector
wavefront. Of course, these non-standard representations require corresponding changes
to the operations for accessing object fields and indexing array elements, increasing space
and time overheads for the additional indirections [Siebert, 1998, 2000, 2010].
    Nevertheless, Detlefs considers the asymmetric overheads of pure work-based schedul-
ing to be the final nail in its coffin. For example, in the Baker concurrent copying collector
mutator operations have costs that vary greatly depending on where in the collector cycle
they occur. Before a flip operation, the mutator is only taxed for the occasional allocation
operation in order to progress the wavefront, while reads are most likely to load references
to already copied objects. For some time after the flip, when only mutator roots have been
scanned, the average cost of reads may come close to the theoretical worst case as they are
forced to copy their targets. Similarly, for the Blelloch and Cheng [1999] collector, even
though writes are much less common than reads, there is still wide variability in the need
to replicate an object at any given write.
    This variability can yield collector schedules that preserve predictably short pause
times, but do not result in satisfactory utilisation because of the frequency and duration
of collector work. Consider the schedule in Figure 19.3 in which pauses are bounded at a
millisecond, but the mutator is only permitted a tenth of a millisecond between them in
which to run. Even though collector work is split into predictably short bounded pauses,
there is insufficient time remaining for a real-time mutator to meet its deadlines.
    While work-based scheduling may result in collector overhead being spread evenly
over mutator operations, on average, the big difference between average cost and worst-
case cost leaves worst-case execution time analysis for work-based scheduling ineffective.
The result is unnecessary over-provisioning of processor resources resulting in reduced
utilisation of the processor by the mutator.
    In a non-copying concurrent collector, where the mutator write barrier simply shades
the source or old/new target object, mutator overheads for accessing the heap are rela-

                    fromBot                                                   fromTop
       fromspace

          tospace      evacuated                 free                    allocated
                    toBot            bottom                    top              toTop
                              scan

Figure 19.4: Heap structure in the Henriksson slack-based collector

tively tightly bounded. However, because allocations come in bursts, work-based schedul-
ing still results in wide variation in the garbage collection overheads imposed on mutators.
    For this reason, more advanced scheduling approaches treat collector work as some-
thing that must be budgeted for in a way that does not make it a pure tax on mutator work,
essentially by treating garbage collection as another real-time task that must be scheduled.
This results in mutator worst-case execution time analysis that is much closer to actual av-
erage mutator performance, allowing for better processor utilisation. Rare but potentially
costly operations, such as flipping the mutator, need only be short enough to complete
during the portion of execution made available to the collector.

19.4     Slack-based real-time collection
Henriksson attacks the real-time collector scheduling problem by adopting the rule that
garbage collection should be completely avoided while high priority (real-time) tasks are
executing [Magnusson and Henriksson, 1995; Henriksson, 1998]. Garbage collection work
is instead delayed until no high-priority tasks are eligible for execution. Allocation by
high-priority tasks is not taxed, while low-priority tasks perform some collector work
when allocating. A special task, the high-priority garbage collection task, is responsible for
performing collector work that was omitted while the high-priority tasks were execut-
ing, as implied by the allocations performed by the high-priority tasks. The high-priority
garbage collection task has a priority lower than other high-priority tasks, but higher than
the low-priority tasks. It must always ensure that enough free memory is initialised and
available for allocation to meet the requirements of the high-priority tasks. Thus, collector
work operates entirely in the slack in the real-time task schedule.
    The heap is configured into two semispaces as shown in Figure 19.4. New objects are
allocated at the top of tospace, at the position of the pointer top. Evacuated objects are
placed at the bottom of tospace, at the position designated by bottom. The collector scans
the evacuated objects in the usual Cheney style, evacuating all fromspace objects they refer
to. Low-priority threads perform some evacuation work incrementally as new objects are
allocated at the top of tospace. The position of scan indicates the progress of the collector
in scanning the evacuated objects.
    Henriksson describes his approach in the context of a Brooks-style concurrent copy-
ing collector that uses an indirection barrier on all accesses, including a Dijkstra insertion
write barrier to ensure that the new target object is in tospace, copying it if not. This
maintains a strong invariant for concurrent collection: no tospace object contains refer-
ences to fromspace objects. However, Henriksson does not impose the full copying cost
of the write barrier on high-priority tasks. Instead, objects are evacuated lazily. The write
barrier simply allocates space for the tospace copy, but without actually transferring the
contents of the fromspace original. Eventually, the garbage collector will run (whether as
the high-priority garbage collection task or as a tax on allocation by low-priority tasks)

                                                                        Fromspace
                                           C

                    B                  A
                          y                    x
                                                                          Tospace

      (a) Before a high-priority task performs B.y←A.x. The write barrier catches the
      assignment since the fromspace C object is not previously evacuated or sched-
      uled for evacuation.

                                                                        Fromspace
                                           C

                    B                  A                        C
                          y                    x
                                                                          Tospace

      (b) After having reserved a tospace location for C. A temporary toAddress
      pointer (dashed) to the reserved area prevents multiple tospace reservations for
      C. Forwarding pointers prevent access to the uninitialised reserved space.

                                                                        Fromspace
                                           C

                    B                  A                        C
                          y                    x
                                                                          Tospace

      (c) When the high-priority task pauses, the collector finishes evacuating C to its
      reserved tospace location and sets the forwarding pointers to refer to the tospace
      copy. A.x will be forwarded later when the A object is scanned by the collector.

Figure 19.5: Lazy evacuation in the Henriksson slack-based collector
                          Henriksson [1998]. Reprinted by permission.

and perform the deferred copying work when it comes to scan the contents of the tospace
copy. Before scanning the tospace version, the collector must copy the contents over from
the fromspace original. To prevent any mutator from accessing the empty tospace copy be-
fore its contents have been copied over, Henriksson exploits the Brooks indirection barrier
by giving every empty tospace shell a back-pointer to the fromspace original. This lazy
evacuation is illustrated in Figure 19.5.
    As sketched in Algorithms 19.5 and 19.6, the collector is similar to that of concur-
rent copying (Algorithm 17.1), but uses the Brooks indirection barrier to avoid the need
for a tospace invariant on the mutators and (like Sapphire) defers any copying from the
mutator write barrier to the collector. Note that the temporary toAddress pointer al-
lows the collector to forward references held in tospace copies, even while the muta-
tor continues to operate in fromspace, since this toAddress pointer is distinct from the
forwardingAddress header word used by the mutator.
    The collector itself is specified as a coroutine, so that collector execution interleaves
with the low-priority mutator tasks at well-defined yield points, though high-priority
tasks can preempt the collector at any time to regain control. If the collector is in the
middle of copying an object, the copy is simply aborted and restarted when the collector
resumes. Also, Henriksson assumes that the execution platform is a uniprocessor, so that
disabling scheduler interrupts is sufficient to implement atomic operations.

Scheduling the collector work
The amount of work to perform in each collector increment (controlled by the call to
behind) must ensure that fromspace is completely evacuated before tospace fills up, thus
finishing a collector cycle. Let us assume that the amount of work (in terms of bytes pro-
cessed) needed in the worst case to evacuate all live objects out of fromspace and to ini-
tialise enough memory to satisfy allocation requests of the high-priority threads during
a collection cycle is Wmax , and that after the flip at least Fmin bytes of memory must be
free and available for allocation. That is, Wmax indicates the maximum work needed to
complete a collection cycle and Fmin the minimum space that must be free when the cycle
completes. Then, the minimum garbage collection ratio GCRmin is defined as:

                                                  Wmax
                                      GCRmin =
                                                  Fmin

The current garbage collection ratio GCR is the ratio between performed garbage collection
work W and the amount A of new allocated objects in tospace:

                                                  W
                                          GCR =
                                                  A
Allocation by the mutator causes A to increase, while garbage collection work increases
W. The collector must perform enough work W to make sure that the current garbage
collection ratio is no less than the minimum garbage collection ratio (GCR ≥ GCRmin ).
This will guarantee that fromspace is empty (all live objects have been evacuated) before
tospace is filled, even in the worst case.
    Allocation of memory by low-priority tasks is throttled so that the current garbage
collection ratio GCR does not drop too low (below GCRmin ), by giving the collector task
priority. The upper bound on the collector work performed during allocation will be pro-
portional to the size of the allocated object.
    If a high-priority task is activated shortly before a semispace flip is due then the remain-
ing memory in tospace may not be sufficient to hold both the last objects to be allocated by

Algorithm 19.5: The Henriksson slack-based collector

 1   coroutine collector:
 2      loop
 3         while bottom < top                                        /* tospace is not full */
 4            yield /* revert to mutator */
 5         flip()
 6         for each fld in Roots
 7            process(fld)
 8            if not behind()
 9                yield /* revert to mutator */
10         while scan < bottom
11            scan ← scanObject(scan)
12            if not behind()
13                yield /* revert to mutator */
14

15   flip():
16      toBot, fromBot ← fromBot, toBot
17      toTop, fromTop ← fromTop, toTop
18      bottom, top ← toBot, toTop
19      scan ← bottom
20

21   scanObject(toRef):
22      fromRef ← forwardingAddress(toRef)
23      move(fromRef, toRef)
24      for each fld in Pointers(toRef)
25         process(fld)
26      forwardingAddress(fromRef) ← toRef
27      return toRef + size(toRef)
28

29   process(fld):
30      fromRef ← *fld
31      if fromRef ̸= null
32         *fld ← forward(fromRef)                       /* update with tospace reference */
33

34   forward(fromRef):
35      toRef ← forwardingAddress(fromRef)
36      if toRef = fromRef                                        /* not evacuated */
37         toRef ← toAddress(fromRef)
38         if toRef = null           /* not scheduled for evacuation (not marked) */
39            toRef ← schedule(fromRef)
40      return toRef
41

42   schedule(fromRef):
43      toRef ← bottom
44      bottom ← bottom + size(fromRef)
45      if bottom > top
46         error "Out of memory"
47      toAddress(fromRef) ← toRef                      /* schedule for evacuation (mark) */
48      return toRef

Algorithm 19.6: Mutator operations in the Henriksson slack-based collector

 1   atomic Read(src, i):
 2      src ← forwardingAddress(src)                                   /* Brooks indirection */
 3      return src[i]
 4

 5   atomic Write(src, i, ref):
 6      src ← forwardingAddress(src)                                   /* Brooks indirection */
 7      if ref in fromspace
 8         ref ← forward(ref)
 9      src[i] ← ref
10

11   atomic NewHighPriority (size):
12      top ← top − size
13      toRef ← top
14      forwardingAddress(toRef) ← toRef
15      return toRef
16

17   atomic NewLowPriority (size):
18      while behind()
19         yield /* wake up the collector */
20      top ← top − size
21      toRef ← top
22      if bottom > top
23         error "Out of memory"
24      forwardingAddress(toRef) ← toRef
25      return toRef

the high-priority task and the last objects to be evacuated from fromspace. The collector
must ensure a buffer between bottom and top for these objects large enough to hold all
new objects allocated by the high-priority tasks while the collector finishes the current cy-
cle. To do this, the application developer must estimate the worst-case allocation needed
by the high-priority tasks in order to run, as well as their periods and worst-case execution
times for each period. Henriksson suggests that this job is easy enough for the developer
because high-priority tasks in a control system are written to be fast and small, with little
need to allocate memory. He provides an analytical framework for deciding schedulabil-
ity and the memory headroom needed by high-priority tasks, given a large set of program
parameters such as task deadlines, task periods, and so on.

Execution overheads
The overhead to high-priority tasks for collector activity consists of tight bounds on the
instructions required for memory allocation, pointer dereferencing and pointer stores. Of
course, instruction counts alone are not always a reliable measure of time, in the face of
loads that may miss in the cache. Worst-case execution time analysis must either assume
caches are disabled (slowing down all loads), or the system must be tested empirically to
ensure that real-time deadlines are met under the expected system load.
    Heap accesses require single instruction indirection through the forwarding pointer,
plus the overhead of disabling interrupts. Pointer stores have worst-case overhead on

the order of twenty instructions to mark the target object for later evacuation. Allocation
requires simply bumping a pointer and initialising the header (to include the forwarding
pointer and other header information), having overhead on the order of 10 instructions.
    Low-priority tasks have the same overheads for heap accesses and pointer stores. On
allocation, the worst-case requirement is to perform collector work proportional to the
size of the new object. The exact worst case for allocation depends on the maximum object
size, total heap size, maximum live object set, and the maximum collector work performed
within any given cycle.
    Worst-case latency for high-priority tasks depends on the time for the collector to com-
plete (or abort) an ongoing item of atomic work, which is short and bounded. Henriksson
states that latency is dominated more by the cost of the context switch than the cost of com-
pleting an item of atomic work.

Programmer input
The programmer must provide sufficient information about the application program, and
the high-priority tasks, to compute the minimum garbage collection ratio and to track the
garbage collection ratio as the program executes so that the collector does not disrupt the
high-priority tasks. The period and worst-case execution times for each high-priority task
is required, along with its worst-case allocation need for any one of its periodic invocations,
so as to calculate the minimum buffer requirements to satisfy high-priority allocations. The
programmer must also provide an estimate of the maximum live memory footprint of the
application. These parameters are sufficient to perform worst-case execution time anal-
ysis, and schedulability analysis, for the high-priority real-time tasks. Henriksson [1998]
provides further details.

19.5     Time-based real-time collection: Metronome
Slack-based scheduling of the collector requires sufficient slack available in the sched-
ule of high-priority real-time tasks in which to run the collector. Time-based scheduling
treats minimum mutator utilisation as an input to the scheduling problem, with the sched-
uler designed to maintain minimum mutator utilisation while providing real-time bounds.
This approach was first used in the Metronome real-time garbage collector for Java [Bacon
et al., 2003a]. Metronome is an incremental mark-sweep collector with partial on-demand
compaction to avoid fragmentation. It uses a deletion write barrier to enforce the weak
tricolour invariant, marking live any object whose reference is overwritten during a write.
Objects allocated during marking are black. The overhead of simply marking on writes is
much lower (and more predictable) than replicating as in Blelloch and Cheng [1999].
    After sweeping to reclaim garbage, Metronome compacts if necessary, to ensure that
enough contiguous free space is available to satisfy allocation requests until the next collec-
tion. Like Henriksson [1998], Metronome uses Brooks-style forwarding pointers, imposing
an indirection on every mutator access.

Mutator utilisation
Metronome guarantees the mutator a predetermined percentage of execution time, with
use of the remaining time at the collector’s discretion: any time not used by the collector
will be given to the mutator. By maintaining uniformly short collector pause times, Metro-
nome is able to give finer-grained utilisation guarantees than traditional collectors. Using

                                                                                   me
                                                   500µs

                                                                         10ms

Figure 19.6: Metronome utilisation. Collector quanta are shown in grey and
       mutator quanta in white.

                           100
                           90
                           80
                           70
           Ulisaon (%)

                           60
                           50
                           40
                           30
                           20
                           10
                            0
                                 0        100    200       300     400       500    600   700
                                                                 Time (ms)

Figure 19.7: Overall mutator utilisation in Metronome

collector quanta of 500 microseconds over a 10-millisecond window, Metronome sets a de-
fault mutator utilisation target of 70%. This target utilisation can also be tuned further for
the application to meet its space constraints. Figure 19.6 shows a 20-millisecond Metro-
nome collector cycle split into 500-microsecond time slices. The collector preserves 70%
utilisation over a 10-millisecond sliding window: there are at most 6 collector quanta and
correspondingly at least 14 mutator quanta in any window. Here, each collector quantum
is followed by at least one mutator quantum so that pauses are limited to the length of
one quantum, even if utilisation would still be preserved by back-to-back quanta so as to
minimise pauses. Given a minimum mutator utilisation target below 50%, a window may
schedule more collector quanta than mutator quanta, so some instances of back-to-back
collector quanta will be needed to ensure that the collector gets its share of the window.
    Of course, when the collector is not active all quanta can be used by the mutator, giv-
ing 100% utilisation. Overall, the mutator will see utilisation drop during periods that
the collector is running, but never lower than the target utilisation. This is illustrated in
Figure 19.7, which shows overall mutator utilisation dropping for each collector cycle.
    Figure 19.8 shows mutator utilisation over the same collector cycle that was illustrated
in Figure 19.6 (grey bars indicate each collector quantum while white is the mutator). At
time t on the x-axis this shows utilisation for the 10-millisecond window leading up to
time t. Note that while the schedule in Figure 19.6 is perfect in that utilisation is exactly
70% over the collector cycle, real schedules will not be quite so exact. A real scheduler will
typically allow collector quanta to run until minimum mutator utilisation is close to the
target MMU and then back off to prevent overshooting the target.
    Section A of the figure is a staircase graph where the descending portions correspond to
collector quanta and the flat portions correspond to mutator quanta. The staircase shows

                                        A         B            C         D         E
                       100

                       90
       Ulisaon (%)

                       80

                       70

                                 200                  210                    220
                                                            Time (ms)

Figure 19.8: Mutator utilisation in Metronome during a collection cycle
                        First published on IBM developerWorks: http://www.ibm.com/developerworks

the collector maintaining low pause times by interleaving with the mutator, as utilisation
steps down to the target. Section B comprises only mutator activity so as to preserve
mutator utilisation across all sliding windows that cover that section. It is common to
see this pattern showing collector activity only at the beginning of a window because the
collector runs whenever it is allowed to (while preserving pause times and utilisation).
This means the collector will exhaust its allotted time at the beginning and then allow the
mutator to recover for the remainder of the window. Section C shows collector activity
when mutator utilisation is near the target. Ascending portions represent mutator quanta,
where the scheduler detects utilisation rising above the target, and descending portions
are collector quanta where the scheduler permits the collector to run to bring utilisation
back close to the target. The sawtooth results from the interleaving of the mutator with the
collector to preserve low pause times while also preserving the target utilisation. Section
D shows that once the collector finishes its cycle, the mutator must run for a while before
utilisation begins to rebound. In Section E the mutator regains 100% utilisation stepping
up the staircase from the target.

Supporting predictability
Metronome uses a number of techniques to achieve deterministic pause times while guar-
anteeing collector safety. The first of these addresses the unpredictability of allocating
large objects when the heap becomes fragmented. The remainder advance predictability
by keeping collector pause times deterministically short.

Arraylets. Metronome was implemented to support arraylets to allow allocation of arrays
in multiple chunks. This allows a degree of tolerance to fragmentation without the need
to perform compaction (which can adversely affect predictability). Large arrays can be
allocated as a single contiguous spine object, which then contains pointers to separately
allocated fixed-size arraylets that contain the array elements. The size is a power of two
so that the division operation needed for indexing can be implemented using a shift. This
allows simple computation of the element position, using an extra indirection through the

spine. Metronome uses an arraylet size of two kilobytes and a maximum block size of
16 kilobytes for the spine, allowing arrays of up to 8 megabytes in size.

Read barrier. Like Henriksson [1998], Metronome uses a Brooks-style read barrier to en-
sure that the overhead for accessing objects has uniform cost even if the collector has
moved them. Historically, read barriers were considered too expensive to implement in
software — Zorn [1990] measured their running-time overhead at around 20% — but
Metronome applies several optimisations to reduce their overhead to 4% on average (and
we saw in earlier chapters that several modern collectors have adopted load barriers).
First, it uses an eager read barrier, forwarding all references as they are loaded from the
heap, to make sure that they always refer to tospace. Thus, accesses from the stacks and
registers via these references incur no indirection overhead. In contrast, a lazy read barrier
would incur indirection every time a reference held in the stacks or registers is used. The
cost for this is that whenever a collector quantum moves objects, it must also forward all
references held in the registers and stacks. Second, Metronome applies several common
compiler optimisations to reduce the cost of read barriers, such as common subexpression
elimination and specialised optimisations such as barrier sinking to move the barrier to the
point of use, allowing the barrier and use null-checks to be combined [Bacon et al., 2003a].

Scheduling the collector. Metronome uses two different threads to control for both con-
sistent scheduling and short, uninterrupted pause times. The alarm thread is a very high
priority thread (higher than any mutator thread) that wakes up every 500 microseconds.
It acts as the ‘heartbeat’ for deciding whether to schedule a collector quantum. If so, it ini-
tiates suspension of the mutator threads and wakes the collector thread. The alarm thread
is active only long enough to carry out these duties (typically under 10 microseconds) so
that it goes unnoticed by the application.
    The collector thread performs the actual collector work for each collector quantum. It
must first complete the suspension of the mutator threads that was initiated by the alarm
thread. Then it will perform collector work for the remainder of the quantum, before
restarting the mutator threads and going back to sleep. The collector thread can also pre-
emptively sleep if it is unable to complete its work before the quantum ends.
    Metronome produces consistent CPU utilisation because the collector and mutator are
interleaved using fixed time quanta. However, time-based scheduling is susceptible to
variations in memory requirements if the mutator allocation rate varies over time.

Suspending the mutator threads. Metronome uses a series of short incremental pauses to
complete each collector cycle. However, it must still stop all the mutator threads for each
collector quantum, using a handshake mechanism to make all the mutator threads stop
at a GC safe-point. At these points, each mutator thread will release any internally held
run-time metadata, store any object references from its current context into well-described
locations, signal that it has reached the safe-point and then sleep while waiting for a re-
sume signal. Upon resumption, each thread will reload object pointers for the current
context, reacquire any necessary run-time metadata that it previously held and then con-
tinue. Storing and reloading object pointers allows the collector to update the pointers
if their targets move during the quantum. GC safe-points are placed at regularly spaced
intervals by the compiler so as to bound the time needed to suspend any mutator thread.
    The suspend mechanism is only used for threads actively executing mutator code.
Threads that do not access the heap, threads executing non-mutator ‘native’ code and al-
ready suspended mutator threads (such as those waiting for synchronisation purposes)
are ignored. If these threads need to begin (or return to) mutating the heap (for example,

when returning from ‘native’ code, invoking operations of the Java Native Interface, or
accessing other Java run-time structures), they will suspend themselves and wait for the
collector quantum to complete.

Ragged root scanning. Metronome scans each complete thread stack within a single col-
lector quantum so as to avoid losing pointers to objects. Developers must make sure not to
use deep stacks in their real-time applications so as to permit each stack to be scanned in
a single quantum. Though each whole stack must be scanned atomically in a single quan-
tum, Metronome does allow scanning of distinct thread stacks to occur in different quanta.
That is, the collector and mutator threads are allowed to interleave their execution while
the collector is scanning the thread stacks. To support this, Metronome imposes an inser-
tion write barrier on all unscanned threads, to make sure they do not hide a root reference
behind the wave front before the collector can scan it.

Analysis
One of the biggest contributions of Metronome is a formal model of the scheduling of
collection work and its characterisation in terms of mutator utilisation and memory usage
[Bacon et al., 2003a]. The model is parametrised by the instantaneous allocation rate A∗ (τ )
of the mutator over time, the instantaneous garbage generation rate G ∗ (τ ) of the mutator
over time and the garbage collector processing rate P (measured over the live data). All are
defined in units of data volume per unit time. Here, time τ ranges over mutator time,
idealised for a collector that runs infinitely fast (or in practice assuming there is sufficient
memory to run without collecting).
    These parameters allow simple definitions of the amount of memory allocated during
an interval of time (τ1 , τ2 ) as:
                                                         Z τ2
                                       α∗ (τ1 , τ2 ) =          A∗ (τ ) dτ                            (19.1)
                                                          τ1

and similarly for garbage generated as:
                                                         Z τ2
                                      γ∗ (τ1 , τ2 ) =           G ∗ (τ ) dτ .                         (19.2)
                                                          τ1

The maximum memory allocated for an interval of size ∆τ is:

                                     α∗ (∆τ ) = max α∗ (τ, τ + ∆τ )                                   (19.3)
                                                    τ

which gives the maximum allocation rate:2

                                                          α∗ (∆τ )
                                           a∗ (∆τ ) =              .                                  (19.4)
                                                            ∆τ
The instantaneous memory requirement of the program (excluding garbage, overhead,
and fragmentation) at a given time τ is:

                                     m∗ (τ ) = α∗ (0, τ ) − γ∗ (0, τ ).                               (19.5)

   Of course, real time must also include the time for the collector to execute, so it is
helpful to introduce a function Φ : t → τ that maps from real time t to mutator time τ,
  2 Note carefully here the distinction between a∗ (the maximum allocation rate over an interval) and α∗ (the

maximum allocated memory over an interval).

where τ ≤ t. A function that operates in mutator time is written f ∗ , whereas a function
that operates in real time is written f . Thus, the live memory of the program at time t is:

                                      m(t) = m∗ (Φ(t))                                  (19.6)

and the maximum memory requirement over the entire program execution is:

                               m = max m(t) = max m∗ (τ ).                              (19.7)
                                        t           τ

Time utilisation. Time-based scheduling has two additional parameters: the mutator quan-
tum Q T and the collector quantum CT , being the amount of time that the mutator and collec-
tor, respectively, are allowed to run before yielding. These allow derivation of minimum
mutator utilisation as:
                                           Q T · ⌊ QT∆t
                                                     + CT ⌋ + x
                                u T (∆t) =                                            (19.8)
                                                    ∆t
where Q T · ⌊ QT∆t
                +CT ⌋ is the length of whole mutator quanta in the interval and x is the size
of the remaining partial mutator quantum, defined as:

                                                         ∆t
                                                                      
                     x = max 0, ∆t − ( Q T + CT ) · ⌊          ⌋ − CT .                (19.9)
                                                      Q T + CT

Asymptotically, minimum mutator utilisation approaches the expected ratio of total time
given to the mutator versus the collector:

                                                      QT
                                  lim u T (∆t) =            .                          (19.10)
                                 ∆t→∞              Q T + CT

    For example, consider a perfectly scheduled system that has a collector quantum CT =
10, which is the maximum pause that will be experienced by the mutator. Figure 19.9 plots
minimum mutator utilisation for mutator quanta of Q T = 2.5, Q T = 10 and Q T = 40.
Notice that u T (∆t) converges to QTQ+TCT in the limit for large ∆t, and that more frequent
collection (reducing the mutator quantum Q T ) leads to faster convergence. Also, note that
the x term has more impact at the small time scales of interest in real-time systems. Of
course, in practice the collector will usually only run intermittently, so u T (∆t) is only a
lower bound on mutator utilisation.

Space utilisation. As already noted, space utilisation will vary depending on the mutator
allocation rate. Assuming constant collector rate P, at time t the collector will run for time
m(t)/P to process the m(t) live data (work is proportional to the tracing needed to mark
the live data). In that time, the mutator will run for quantum Q T per quantum CT of the
collector. Thus, to run a collection at time t requires an excess space overhead of:
                                                                         
                                                               m(t) Q T
                            e T ( t ) = α ∗ Φ ( t ), Φ ( t ) +     ·                   (19.11)
                                                                P    CT

allowing definition of the maximum excess space required as:

                                      eT = max eT (t).                                 (19.12)
                                              t

Freeing an object in Metronome can take as long as three collection cycles: one to collect
the object, two if the object became garbage only after the current snapshot cycle began so

                  1

                                                             Q T = 40
                 0.8

                 0.6
      u T (∆t)

                                                             Q T = 10

                 0.4

                                                             Q T = 2.5
                 0.2

                  0
                       10                100                   1000                 10000
                                                    ∆t

Figure 19.9: Minimum mutator utilisation u T (∆t) for a perfectly scheduled
        time-based collector. CT = 10. Utilisation converges to QTQ+TCT . Increasing the
        frequency of the collector (reducing the mutator quantum) produces faster
        convergence.

it cannot be collected until the next cycle, and three if the object needs also to be relocated
before its space can be reused.
    Thus, the space required (ignoring internal fragmentation) at time t is:

                                      s T (t) ≤ m(t) + 3eT                                 (19.13)

while the overall space needed is:

                                        s T ≤ m + 3eT .                                    (19.14)

These are in the worst case that all garbage objects are dragged into the next collector cycle
and that they all need to be moved. The expected space needed is simply m + eT .

Mutation. Mutation also has a space cost because the write barrier must record every
deleted and inserted reference. It must filter null references and marked objects so as
to place a bound on collector work (at most, all the objects in the heap will be marked
live), while keeping the cost of the write barrier constant. Thus, in the worst case, the
write log can have as many entries as there are objects. This space must be accounted for
by treating allocation of the log entries as an indirect form of allocation.

Sensitivity. Metronome will behave as predicted only when given accurate estimates of
the parameters used to describe the application and the collector: the application alloca-
tion rate A∗ (t) and garbage generation rate G ∗ (t), and the collector processing rate P and
the quantisation parameters Q T and CT . Utilisation u T depends solely on Q T and CT , so

utilisation will remain steady (subject only to any jitter in the operating system delivering
a timely quantum signal and the minimum quantum it can support).
     The excess space required for collection eT (t), which determines the total space s T
needed, depends on both maximum application memory usage m and the amount of mem-
ory allocated over an interval. If the application developer underestimates either the total
space required m or the maximum allocation rate a∗ , then the total space requirement s T
may grow arbitrarily. Time-based collectors suffer from such behaviour particularly when
there are intervals of time in which the allocation rate is very high. Similarly, the estimate
of the collector processing rate P must be a conservative underestimate of the actual rate.
     Fortunately, a collection cycle runs for a relatively long interval of mutator execution
time:
                                              m(t) Q T
                                       ∆τ =         ·
                                                P     CT
so the allocation rate in that time will be close to the average allocation rate, resulting in
little variation in space consumed so long as the estimate of maximum memory required
m is accurate.

Comparison with work-based scheduling. A similar analysis of work-based scheduling
yields the opportunity to compare time-based and work-based scheduling. However, this
analysis is compromised because operations of the mutator can affect the time allocated
to it. More formally, for time-based scheduling the time dilation Φ from t to τ is linear
and fixed, whereas for work-based scheduling the dilation is variable and non-linear, and
dependent on the application.
    The parameters for work-based scheduling reflect that the mutator and collector inter-
leave by triggering the collector after some amount of allocation to perform some amount
of collector work: the work-based mutator quantum QW and collector quantum CW being
the amount of memory that the mutator and collector, respectively, are allowed to allo-
cate/process before yielding.
    Because work-based time dilation is variable and non-linear, there is no way to obtain a
closed-form solution for minimum mutator utilisation. Each collector increment processes
CW memory at rate P, so each pause for collection takes time d = CW /P. Each mutator
quantum involves allocation of QW memory, so the minimum total mutator time ∆τi for i
quanta is the minimum ∆τi that solves the equation:

                                      α∗ (∆τi ) = iQW .                                (19.15)

Increasing the time interval does not decrease the maximum amount of allocation in that
time, so α∗ (∆τ ) increases monotonically. Thus, ∆τi > ∆τi−1 , so Equation 19.15 can be
solved using an iterative method. Let k be the largest integer such that:

                                       kd + ∆τk ≤ ∆t                                   (19.16)

so that the minimum mutator utilisation over an interval ∆t is:
                                                 ∆τk + y
                                     uW (∆t) =                                         (19.17)
                                                   ∆t
where ∆τk is the time taken by k whole mutator quanta in ∆t and y is the size of the
remaining partial mutator quantum, defined as:

                            y = max(0, ∆t − ∆τk − (k + 1) · d).                        (19.18)

Note that minimum mutator utilisation uW (∆t) will be zero for ∆t < d. Moreover, any
large allocation of nQW bytes will force the collector to perform n units of work leading to

a pause lasting time nd in which the mutator will experience zero utilisation. This reveals
analytically that the application developer must take care with a work-based collector to
achieve real-time bounds by avoiding large allocations and making sure that allocation is
spaced evenly.
    Now, minimum mutator utilisation depends on the allocation rate a∗ (∆τ ), where ∆τ ≤
∆t, and on the collector processing rate P. Suppose that the interval ∆t over which we
require real-time performance is small (say, 20 milliseconds), so the peak allocation rate
for this interval is likely to be quite high. Thus, at real-time scales work-based minimum
mutator utilisation uW (∆t) will vary considerably with the allocation rate. In contrast, note
that the ∆τ in which the time-based collector is dependent on allocation rate is at a much
larger scale: the time needed for a complete garbage collection cycle.
    Analysing for space, the excess space required to perform a collection at time t is:
                                                            QW
                                     eW ( t ) = m ( t ) ·                              (19.19)
                                                            CW
and the excess space required for a collection cycle over its whole execution is:
                                                     QW
                                        eW = m ·        .                              (19.20)
                                                     CW
These will be accurate as long as the application developer’s estimate of total live memory
m is accurate. Also, note that the excess eW for a whole collection cycle will exceed the
maximum memory m needed for execution of the program unless QW < CW . The space
requirement of the program at time t is:

                                     sW (t) ≤ m(t) + 3eW                               (19.21)

and the space required overall is:

                                       sW = m + 3eW .                                  (19.22)

   To sum up, while a work-scheduled collector will meet its space bound so long as
m is correctly estimated, its minimum mutator utilisation will be heavily dependent on
the allocation rate over a real-time interval, while a time-based collector will guarantee
minimum mutator utilisation easily but may fluctuate in its space requirements.

Robustness
Time-based scheduling yields the robustness needed for real-time collection, but when
the input parameters to the collector are not accurately specified, it may fail to reclaim
sufficient memory. The only way for it to degrade gracefully is to slow down the allocation
rate.
    One approach to reducing the total allocation rate is to impose a generational scheme.
This treats the nursery as a filter to reduce the allocation rate into the primary heap. Fo-
cusing collector effort on the portion of the heap most likely to yield free memory results
in higher mutator utilisation and also reduces the amount of floating garbage. However,
traditional nursery collection is unpredictable both in terms of the time to collect and the
quantity of data that is promoted. Syncopation is an approach for performing nursery col-
lection synchronously with the mature-space collector, where the nursery is evacuated at
the beginning of the mature-space collection cycle and at the start of sweeping, as well as
outside the mature-space collection cycle [Bacon et al., 2005]. It relies on an analytic solu-
tion for utilisation in generational collection taking the nursery survival rate as a parame-
ter and sizing the nursery such that evacuation is only needed once per real-time window.

The analysis informs whether generational collection should be used in any given appli-
cation. Syncopation handles the situation where temporary spikes in allocation rate make
it impossible to evacuate the nursery quickly enough to meet real-time bounds by moving
the work triggered by the temporary spike to a later time. Frampton et al. [2007] adopt
a different approach, allowing nursery collection to be performed incrementally so as to
avoid having pause times degenerate to the time needed to evacuate the nursery.
    Another strategy for slowing the allocation rate is simply to add an element of work-
based collection to slow the mutator down, but of course this can lead to missed dead-
lines. Alternatively, slack-based scheduling achieves this by preempting the low-priority
threads as necessary for the collector to keep up with allocation. So long as sufficient low-
priority slack is available, real-time deadlines will be preserved. These observations lead
to the following Tax-and-Spend methodology that combines slack-based and time-based
scheduling.

19.6     Combining scheduling approaches: Tax-and-Spend
Metronome works best on dedicated uniprocessor or small multiprocessor systems, be-
cause of its need to suspend the mutator while an increment of collector work is per-
formed. Typical work-based collectors can suffer latencies that are orders of magnitude
worse than time-based schemes. Henriksson’s slack-based scheduling is best suited to
periodic applications and is fragile under overload conditions when there is no available
slack. To address these limitations, Auerbach et al. [2008] devised a general scheduling
methodology called Tax-and-Spend that subsumes the work-based, slack-based and time-
based approaches. When applied to Metronome, the Tax-and-Spend methodology results
in latencies almost three times shorter, comparable utilisation at a time window two and a
half times shorter, and mean throughput improvements of 10% to 20%.
    The basic principle of Tax-and-Spend is that each mutator thread is required to engage
in some amount of collection work (taxation) at a rate and intervals appropriate to its
desired minimum mutator utilisation. Collection work also proceeds in any available slack
left over by the mutators, building up credits that mutators can later spend to preserve or
improve their utilisation by avoiding some amount of collector work.
    Taxation can occur at any GC safe-point as a result of some global decision, but a
thread-specific check for pending collector work is imposed on every slow path allocation
(when the thread’s local allocation buffer is exhausted) that also enables a decision based
on mutator work (measured by units of allocation, thread execution time, safe-points exe-
cuted, absolute physical time, or whatever virtualised time makes sense).

Tax-and-Spend scheduling
As we have already seen, minimum mutator utilisation is simple for developers to rea-
son about because they can consider the system as just running somewhat slower than the
native processor speed until the responsiveness requirements approach the quantisation
limits of the garbage collector. As a measure of garbage collector intrusiveness, minimum
mutator utilisation is superior to maximum pause time since it accounts for clustering
of the individual pauses that cause missed deadlines and pathological slowdowns. Tax-
and-Spend scheduling allows different threads to run at different utilisations, providing
flexibility when threads have widely varying allocation rates, or for threads having partic-
ularly stringent deadlines that must be interrupted as little as possible. Also, background
threads on spare processors can be used to offload collector work to obtain high utilisation
for mutator threads. The time metric can be physical or virtual as best suits the application.

Of course, this does mean that any analysis of the application must compose the real-time
constraints of the individual threads to obtain a global picture of application behaviour.

Per-thread scheduling. To manage per-mutator utilisation, Tax-and-Spend must measure
and schedule collector work based on per-thread metrics and allow a collector increment
to be charged to a single mutator thread. All collector-related activity can be accounted
for in each thread (including the overheads of extending the mutation log, initialising an
allocation page, and other bookkeeping activities). The collector can track all of these so as
to avoid scheduling too much work on any given mutator thread.
    Also, by piggybacking collector increments on mutator threads before a thread volun-
tarily yields to the operating system (say, to take an allocation slow path or to perform I/O
or execute native code that does not access the heap) Tax-and-Spend avoids having the
operating system scheduler assume that the thread has finished with its operating system
time quantum and schedule some unrelated thread in its place. This is particularly impor-
tant in a loaded system. By interleaving mutation and collection on the same operating
system thread the operating system scheduler is less likely to interfere in the scheduling
of the collection work.
    Allowing different threads to run with different utilisations is important when alloca-
tion rates vary significantly across threads or when high-priority threads like event han-
dlers desire minimal interruption. This also permits threads that can tolerate less stringent
timing requirements to lower their quantisation overheads by running with larger quanta,
and so increase throughput.

Tax-based versus slack-based scheduling. Slack-based scheduling works well in classical
periodic real-time systems, but it degrades badly when the system is overloaded and has
insufficient slack. This makes it poorly suited to queuing, adaptive (where the system sat-
urates the processor to compute as accurate a result as possible but tolerates less accuracy
to avoid total overload) or interactive real-time systems. Work-based scheduling taxes mu-
tator allocation work, choosing some amount of collector work proportional to allocation
work that will permit the collector to finish its cycle before memory is exhausted. It often
suffers from poor minimum mutator utilisation and wide variations in pause time. Time-
based scheduling taxes mutator utilisation to interleave the collector with the mutator for
given amounts of processor time. It is robust to overload because the tax continues to be
assessed, but when there is sufficient slack in the system it can result in unnecessary jitter
since collection can occur at any time so long as minimum mutator utilisation requirements
are preserved.

Combining tax-based and slack-based scheduling. Tax-and-Spend combines these dif-
ferent scheduling approaches by adopting an economic model. Each mutator thread is
subject to a tax rate that determines how much collector work it must perform for a given
amount of execution time, specified as a per-thread minimum mutator utilisation. Dedi-
cated collector threads run at low or idle priority during slack periods and accumulate tax
credits for their work. Credits are typically deposited in a single global account, though it
is possible to consider policies that use multiple accounts.
    The aggregate tax over all threads, combining the tax on the mutator threads with the
credits contributed by the collector threads, must be sufficient for the collector to finish its
cycle before memory is exhausted. The number of background collector threads is typi-
cally the same as the number of processors, configured so that they naturally run during
slack periods in overall system execution. They execute a series of quanta each adding
the corresponding amount of credit. On real-time operating systems, it is desirable to run

these threads at some low real-time priority rather than the standard idle priority so that
they are scheduled similarly to other threads that perform real work rather than as a true
idle thread. These low-priority real-time threads will still sleep for some small amount of
time, making it possible for non-real-time processes to make progress even when collec-
tion might saturate the machine. This enables administrators to log in and kill run-away
real-time processes as necessary.
    Each mutator thread is scheduled according to its desired minimum mutator utilisa-
tion, guaranteeing that it can meet its real-time requirements while also allowing the col-
lector to make sufficient progress. When a mutator thread is running and its tax is due, it
first attempts to withdraw credit from the bank equal to its tax quantum. If this is success-
ful, then the mutator thread can skip its collector quantum because the collector is keeping
up, so the mutator only pays tax when there is insufficient slack-scheduled background
collection. Even if only a partial quantum’s credit is available, then the mutator can per-
form a smaller quantum of collector work than usual. Thus, if there is any slack available,
the mutator can still run with both higher throughput and lower latencies without having
the collector falling behind. This treats slack in a uniprocessor and excess capacity in a
multiprocessor in the same way.

Tax-and-Spend prerequisites
Tax-and-Spend requires an underlying garbage collector that is both incremental (so col-
lector work can be levied as a work-scheduled tax on the mutator threads) and concurrent
(so slack-scheduled collector work can run on a spare processor concurrently with the mu-
tators). To exploit multiprocessors effectively it should also be parallel (so slack-scheduled
collector work can run concurrently with work-scheduled collector work). While Metro-
nome is incremental, it was not originally devised to be concurrent, because time-based
scheduling requires that the mutator interleave with the collector at precise intervals, with
the mutator suspended while the collector executes. Thus, Tax-and-Spend makes two
key changes. First, collector work occurs in collector threads concurrently with mutator
threads. This makes it easy for the collector threads to exploit any available slack on some
processors while the other processors continue to run mutator threads. Second, mutator
threads can be taxed by piggybacking an increment of collector work on them when the
load on the system makes it necessary to steal some time from the mutator.
    Concurrent collection by itself is insufficient, since it devolves scheduling of the collec-
tor threads to the operating system which does not provide the precision needed to meet
real-time guarantees and prevent heap exhaustion. Even a real-time operating system can-
not account for the allocation patterns and space needs of the application in making its
scheduling decisions.
    We describe below how Tax-and-Spend extends Metronome to achieve on-the-fly, con-
current, parallel and incremental collection. These extensions are similar to those of other
on-the-fly and parallel collectors, but we reiterate them this context for completeness.

Ragged epochs for global consensus. Rather than stopping all the mutator threads to
impose global consensus about the current activities of the collector, Tax-and-Spend sub-
stitutes a ragged epoch protocol. This is used for several purposes. For example, during
certain phases of the collector all the mutators must install a particular write barrier. Al-
ternatively, for termination of the collector, all mutator threads must have drained their
private store buffer. The thread installing the barrier, or checking for termination, uses the
epoch mechanism to assert that the new state is in effect for all threads.
    The epoch mechanism uses a single shared epoch number that can be atomically in-
cremented by any thread to initiate a new epoch, plus a per-thread local epoch number.

Each thread updates its local epoch number by copying the shared epoch, but it does so
only at GC safe-points. Thus, each thread’s local epoch is always less than or equal to
the shared epoch. Any thread can examine the local epochs of all threads to find the least
local epoch, which is called the confirmed epoch. Only when the confirmed epoch reaches
or passes the value a thread sets for the global epoch can it be sure that all other threads
have noticed the change. On weakly ordered hardware, a thread must use a memory fence
before updating its local epoch. To cope with threads waiting on I/O or executing native
code, Tax-and-Spend requires that they execute a GC safe-point on return to update their
local epoch before they resume epoch-sensitive activities. Thus, such threads can always
be assumed to be at the current epoch, so there is no need to wait for them.

Phase agreement using ‘last one out’. Metronome easily achieved agreement on the col-
lector phase (such as marking, sweeping, finalising and so on) because all collector work
occurred on dedicated threads that could block briefly to effect a phase change, so long
as there was enough remaining time in their shared collector quantum. With concurrent
collection piggy-backed on the mutator threads, each mutator might be at a different place
in its taxation quantum, so it is essential that phase detection be non-blocking or else a
taxed mutator might fail to meet its deadlines. Using ragged epochs for this is not efficient
because it does not distinguish taxed mutator threads from others. Instead, the ‘last one
out’ protocol operates by storing a phase identifier and worker count in a single shared
and atomically updatable location.
    Every taxed mutator thread atomically increments the worker count, leaving the phase
identifier unchanged. When a mutator thread exhausts its taxation quantum without com-
pleting the phase, it atomically decrements the worker count, also leaving the phase identi-
fier unchanged. When any thread believes that the phase might be complete because there
is (apparently) no further work to do in that phase, and it is the only remaining worker
thread (the count is one), then it will change the phase and decrement the worker count in
one atomic operation to establish the new phase.
    This protocol only works so long as each worker thread returns any incomplete work
to a global work queue when it exits. Eventually there will be no work left, some thread
will end up being the last one and it will be able to declare the next phase.
    Unfortunately, termination of the mark phase in Metronome is not easily achieved us-
ing this mechanism, because the deletion barrier employed by Metronome deposits the
overwritten pointer into a per-thread mutation log. Mark phase termination requires that
all threads have an empty mutation log (not just those performing collector work). Thus,
Tax-and-Spend introduces a final marking phase in which the remaining marking work
is handled by one thread which uses the ragged epoch mechanism to ensure that there
is global agreement that all the mutation logs are empty. If this check fails, then the de-
ciding thread can declare a false alarm and switch back to parallel marking. Eventually
all the termination conditions will be met and the deciding thread can move to the next
post-marking phase.

Per-thread callbacks. Most phases of a collection cycle need just enough worker threads
to make progress, but others require that something be done by (or to) every mutator
thread. For example, the first phase of collection must scan every mutator stack. Other
phases require that the mutator threads flush their thread-local state to make information
available to the collector. To support this, some phases impose a callback protocol instead
of ‘last one out’.
    In a callback phase, some collector master thread periodically examines all the muta-
tor threads to see if they have performed the desired task. Every active thread that has

not is asked to call back at their next GC safe-point to perform the required action (stack
scanning, cache flushing, and so on). Threads waiting on I/O or executing native code are
prevented from returning while the action is performed on their behalf. Thus, the maxi-
mum delay to any thread during a callback phase is the time taken to perform the action.

Priority boosting to ensure progress. A real-time collector must make progress so that it
finishes collection before the heap is exhausted. All three of the prior protocols (ragged
epochs, last one out and callback) can be prevented from making progress if some lower
priority thread is unable to respond because higher priority threads are saturating the
processors. The solution is to boost the priority of the lower priority thread temporarily
until it has been heard from.

19.7     Controlling fragmentation
A real-time collector must bound both its time and its space consumption. Unfortunately,
over time, fragmentation can eat away at the space bound. Accounting for fragmentation
is impossible without precise characterisation of application-specific behaviours such as
pointer density, average object size and locality of object size. Thus, a real-time collector
must be designed to manage and limit fragmentation in some way. One way to achieve
this is through compaction. Another approach is to allocate objects in fragments (oblets
and arraylets) so as to preclude external fragmentation at the expense of some (bounded)
internal fragmentation and overhead on the mutator to access the appropriate fragment
during reads and writes to the heap. In this section we discuss both of these approaches.
    The challenge in concurrent compaction is for the collector to relocate objects concur-
rently with the mutator while guaranteeing that mutator accesses retain tight time bounds.
The replicating collectors discussed in Chapter 17 and that of Blelloch and Cheng [1999]
were originally devised expressly to allow concurrent copying but they maintain two
copies of each object. Keeping these copies consistent on modern multiprocessors that
lack strict coherence usually requires some form of locking, particularly for volatile
fields. Moreover, replicating collectors may rely on a synchronous termination phase to
ensure that the mutator roots have been forwarded. Per-object locking does not scale.
Compressor and Pauseless rely on page-level synchronisation using page protection, but
suffer from poor minimum mutator utilisation both because of the cost of the traps and
because they are work-based, with a trap storm following a phase shift.
    The absence of lock-freedom means we cannot guarantee progress of the mutator, let
alone preserve time bounds. There are a number of approaches to making mutator accesses
wait-free or lock-free in the presence of concurrent compaction, which we now discuss.

Incremental compaction in Metronome
Metronome was designed as a mostly non-copying collector under the assumption that
external fragmentation is rare. It uses arraylets to break large objects (arrays) into chunks
which form the largest contiguous units allocated by the system. This combination greatly
reduces the number of objects that must be copied in order to minimise fragmentation.
Bacon et al. [2003b] derive an analytical framework to decide how many pages to defrag-
ment during each collection so as to ensure that the mutator never needs to wait for any
allocation request. Because Metronome is an incremental collector, it can perform defrag-
mentation while all the mutator threads are stopped. When the mutator threads resume,
they are forwarded to any copies as necessary via the Brooks indirection barrier. There is
no need to be concerned with mutators seeing objects in the middle of being copied. The
only cost to the mutator is the cost of the extra indirection, which has tight time bounds.

Algorithm 19.7: Replication copying for a uniprocessor

 1    atomic Read(p, i):
 2       return p[i]
 3

 4    atomic Write(p, i, value):                                     /* p may be primary or replica */
 5       /* deletion barrier code also needed here for snapshot collection */
 6       p[i] ← value
 7       r ← forwardingAddress(p)
 8       r[i] ← value
 9       /* insertion barrier code also needed here for incremental update collection */

The Tax-and-Spend extension of Metronome is a concurrent collector but it does not per-
form any compaction.
   The Bacon et al. framework divides the defragmentation work (as determined by
the derived defragmentation target) as evenly as possible across the size classes of their
segregated-fits allocator. Each size class consists of a linked list of pages (as opposed to
individual objects). The algorithm for defragmenting a size class consists of the following
steps.
     1. Sort the pages by the number of unused (free) objects per page from dense to sparse.
     2. Set the allocation page to the first (densest) non-full page in the resulting list.
     3. Set the page to evacuate to the last (sparsest) page in the list.
     4. While the target number of pages to evacuate in this size class has not been met, and
        the page to evacuate is not the page in which to allocate, move each live object from
        the sparsest page to the next available free cell on the allocation page (moving to the
        next page in the list whenever the current allocation page fills up).
This moves objects from the sparsest pages to the densest pages. It moves the minimal
number of objects and produces the maximal number of completely full pages. The choice
of the first allocation page in Step 2 as the densest non-full page may result in poor cache
locality because previously co-located objects will be spread among the available dense
pages. To address this, one can set a threshold for the density of the page in which to
allocate at the head of the list, so that there are enough free cells in the page to satisfy the
locality goal.
    References to relocated objects are redirected as they are scanned by the subsequent
tracing mark phase. Thus, at the end of the next mark phase, the relocated objects of the
previous collection can be freed. In the meantime, the Brooks forwarding barrier ensures
proper mutator access to the relocated objects. Deferring update of references to the next
mark phase has three benefits: there is no extra ‘fixup’ phase, fewer references need to be
fixed (since any object that dies will never be scanned) and there is the locality benefit of
piggybacking fixup on tracing.

Incremental replication on uniprocessors
Before considering more complicated schemes for concurrent compaction, it is worth not-
ing that many real-time applications run in embedded systems, where uniprocessors have
been the predominant platform. Preserving atomicity of mutator operations (with respect
to the collector and other mutators) is simple on a uniprocessor, either by disabling sched-
uler interrupts or by preventing thread switching except at GC safe-points (making sure

that mutator barriers never contain a GC safe-point). In this setting, the collector can freely
copy objects so long as mutators subsequently access only the copy (using a Brooks indi-
rection barrier to force a tospace invariant), or they make sure to update both copies (in
case other mutators are still reading from the old version in a replicating collector).
    Kalibera [2009] compares replication copying to copying with a Brooks barrier in the
context of a real-time system for Java running on uniprocessors. His replication scheme
maintains the usual forwarding pointer in all objects, except that when the object is repli-
cated the forwarding pointer in the replica refers back to the original instead of to itself
(in contrast to Brooks [1984]). This arrangement allows for very simple and predictable
mutator barriers. On Read the mutator need not be concerned whether it is accessing a
fromspace or tospace object, and can simply load the value from whichever version the
mutator references. All that Write needs to do is to make sure that the update is per-
formed on both versions of the object to keep them coherent. Pseudo-code for these bar-
riers (omitting the support necessary for concurrent tracing) is shown in Algorithm 19.7.
Not surprisingly, avoiding the need to forward every read is a significant benefit, and the
cost of the double-write is negligible given that most of the time both writes will be to the
same address because the forwarding address is a self-reference.
    Concurrent compaction on a multiprocessor prevents us from assuming that Read
and Write can be made straightforwardly atomic. For that we must consider more fine-
grained synchronisation among mutators, and between mutator and collector, as follows.

Stopless: lock-free garbage collection
Pizlo et al. [2007] describe an approach to concurrent compaction for their lock-free Stopless
collector that ensures lock-freedom for mutator operations (allocation and heap accesses)
even while compaction proceeds concurrently. Unlike Blelloch and Cheng [1999], Stopless
does not require that the mutator update both copies of an object to keep them coherent. In-
stead, it enforces a protocol that always updates just one definitive copy of the object. The
innovation in Stopless is to create an intermediate ‘wide’ version of the object being copied,
where each field has an associated status word, and to use a double-word CompareAnd-
SwapWide to synchronise copying of those fields with mutation. The field’s status word
changes atomically with its data and indicates the up-to-date location of the data (in the
fromspace original, the wide copy, or the final tospace copy). As in Blelloch and Cheng
[1999] a header word on each object stores a Brooks forwarding pointer, either to the wide
copy or to the tospace copy. During the compaction phase, mutator and collector threads
race to create the wide copy using compare-and-swap to install the forwarding pointer.
    Once the wide copy has been created, and its pointer installed in the original’s forward-
ing pointer header field, the mutator can only update the wide copy. The status word on
each field lets the mutator know (via read and write barriers) where to read/write the
up-to-date field, encoding the three possibilities: inOriginal, inWide and inCopy. All
status words on the fields in the wide object are initialised to inOriginal. So long as
the status field is inOriginal, then mutator reads occur on the fromspace original. All
updates (both by the collector as it copies each field and the mutator as it performs up-
dates) operate on the wide copy, atomically updating both the field and its adjacent sta-
tus to inWide using CompareAndSwapWide. The collector must assert that the field is
inOriginal as it copies the field. If this fails, then the field has already been updated by
the mutator and the copy operation can be abandoned.
    Once all fields of an object have been converted to inWide (whether by copying or
mutation), the collector allocates its final ‘narrow’ version in tospace, whose pointer is then
installed as a forwarding pointer into the wide copy. At this point there are three versions
of the object: the out-of-date fromspace original which forwards to the wide copy, the

up-to-date wide copy which forwards to the tospace copy, and the uninitialised tospace
copy. The collector concurrently copies each field of the wide copy into the narrow tospace
copy, using CompareAndSwapWide to assert that the field is unmodified and to set its
status to inCopy. If this fails, then the field was updated by the mutator and the collector
tries again to copy the field. If the mutator encounters an inCopy field when trying to
access the wide copy, then it will forward the access to the tospace copy.
    Because Stopless forces all updates to the most up-to-date location of a field, it also
supports Java volatile fields without the need for locking. It is also able to simulate
application-level atomic operations like compare-and-swap on fields by the mutator. For
details see Pizlo et al. [2007]. The only remaining issue is coping with atomic operations
on double-word fields (such as Java long) where the CompareAndSwapWide is not able
to cover both the double-word field and its adjacent status word.3 The authors of Stopless
propose a technique based on emulating n-way compare-and-swap using the standard
compare-and-swap [Harris et al., 2002].
    Some might object to the space overhead of Stopless (three copies including one double-
width), but Pizlo4 points out that so long as sparse pages are being evacuated, with at most
one-third occupancy, one can make use of the dead space for the wide copies. Of course,
the reason for evacuating the page is that it is fragmented, so there may not be sufficient
contiguous free space available for all the copies. But if segregated-fits allocation is used,
then the free portions are uniformly sized, and it is possible to allocate the wide objects
in multiple wide fragments so as to allocate each data field and its status word side-by-
side. In Stopless, the space for the wide objects is retained until the next mark phase has
completed, having forwarded all pointers to their tospace copies.

Staccato: best-effort compaction with mutator wait-freedom
Whereas Metronome performs compaction while the mutator is stopped during a collector
quantum, Staccato [McCloskey et al., 2008] permits concurrent compaction without requir-
ing the mutators to use locks or atomic operations like compare-and-swap in the common
case, even on multiprocessors with weak memory ordering. Storms of atomic operations
are avoided by moving few objects (only as necessary to reclaim sparsely occupied pages)
and by randomising their selection.
    Staccato inherits the Brooks-style indirection barrier of Metronome, placing a forward-
ing pointer in every object header. It also relies on ragged synchronisation: the mutators are
instrumented to perform a memory fence (on weakly ordered machines like the PowerPC)
at regular intervals (such as GC safe-points) to bring them up to date with any change to
global state. The collector reserves a bit in the forwarding pointer to denote that the ob-
ject is being copied (Java objects are always word-aligned, so a low bit in the pointer can
be used). This COPYING bit and the forwarding pointer can be changed atomically using
compare-and-swap/set. To move an object, the collector performs the following steps.
  1. Set the COPYING bit using compare-and-swap/set. Mutators access the forwarding
     pointer without atomic operations, so this change takes some time to propagate to
     the mutators.
  2. Wait for a ragged synchronisation where every mutator performs a read fence to
     ensure that all mutators have seen the update to the COPYING bit.
  3. Perform a read fence (on weakly ordered machines) to ensure that the collector sees
     all updates by mutators from before they saw the change to the COPYING bit.
  3 We observe that some processors offer a 16-byte compare-and-swap that can be used to solve this problem.
  4 Filip Pizlo, personal communication.

Algorithm 19.8: Copying and mutator barriers (while copying) in Staccato

 1   copyObjects(candidates):
 2      for each p in candidates
 3         /* set COPYING bit */
 4         CompareAndSet(&forwardingAddress(p), p, p | COPYING)
 5         waitForRaggedSynch(writeFence; readFence)
 6                                /* ensure mutators flush pending writes & see COPYING bits */
 7      readFence()                    /* ensure collector sees mutator updates from before CAS */
 8      for each p in candidates
 9         r ← allocate(length(p))                                               /* allocate the copy */
10         move(p, r)                                                           /* copy the contents */
11         forwardingAddress(r)                                       /* the copy forwards to itself */
12         add(replicas, r)                                                 /* remember the copies */
13      writeFence()                             /* flush the copies so the mutators can see them */
14      waitForRaggedSynch(readFence)                            /* ensure mutators see the copies */
15      for each (p in candidates, r in replicas)
16         /* try to commit the copy */
17         if not CompareAndSet(&forwardingAddress(p), p | COPYING, r)
18              /* the commit failed so deal with it */
19              free(r)                                                     /* free the aborted copy */
20              add(aborted, p)                                             /* remember the aborts */
21      return aborted
22

23   Access(p):
24      r ← forwardingAddress(p)                                    /* load the forwarding pointer */
25      if r & COPYING = 0
26           return r                           /* only use the forwarding pointer if not copying */
27      /* try to abort the copy */
28      if CompareAndSet(&forwardingAddress(p), r, p)
29           return p                                                        /* the abort succeeded */
30      /* collector committed or another aborted */
31      atomic                           /* force reload of current forwardingAddress(p) */
32           r ← forwardingAddress(p)
33      return r
34

35   Read(p, i):
36      p ← Access(p)
37      return p[i]
38

39   Write(p, i, value):
40      p ← Access(p)
41      p[i] ← value

  4. Allocate the copy, and copy over the fields from the original.
  5. Perform a write fence (on weakly ordered machines) to push the newly written state
     of the copy to make it globally visible.
  6. Wait for a ragged synchronisation where every mutator performs a read fence to
     ensure that it has seen the values written into the copy.
  7. Set the forwarding address to point to the copy and simultaneously clear the COPY-
     ING bit using compare-and-swap/set. This commits the move of the object. If this
     fails, then the mutator must have modified the object at some point and the move is
     aborted.
The collector will usually want to move a number of objects, so the cost of the ragged syn-
chronisation can be amortised by batching the copying, as illustrated by the copyObjects
routine in Algorithm 19.8. This takes a list of candidates to be moved and returns a list
of aborted objects that could not be moved.
    Meanwhile, when the mutator accesses an object (to examine or modify its state for any
reason), it performs the following steps:
  1. Load the forwarding pointer.
  2. Use the forwarding pointer as the object pointer only if the COPYING bit is clear.
  3. Otherwise, try to abort the copy by using a compare-and-set to clear the COPYING
     bit (which is the same as storing the original pointer).
  4. Use the forwarding pointer (with the COPYING bit cleared) as the object pointer only
     if the compare-and-set succeeds.
  5. Otherwise, the failure of the compare-and-set means either that the collector com-
     mitted the copy or else another mutator aborted it. So, reload the forwarding pointer
     using an atomic read (needed on weakly ordered machines), guaranteed to see the
     current value of the forwarding pointer (that is, the value placed there by the collec-
     tor or other mutator).
These steps are shown in the Access barrier helper function, used by both Read and
Write in Algorithm 19.8.
    We note that when using compare-and-swap (instead of compare-and-set) Access can
avoid the atomic read of the forwarding pointer and simply use the value that Compare-
AndSwap returns, as shown in Algorithm 19.9, clearing its COPYING bit just in case the
compare-and-swap succeeded.
    McCloskey et al. note that frequently accessed objects might prove difficult to relocate
because their move is more likely to be aborted. To cope with this, they suggest that when
such a popular5 object is detected, then its page can be made the target of compaction.
That is, instead of moving the popular object off of a sparsely populated page, it suffices
simply to increase the population density of the page.
    Also, abort storms can occur when the collector chooses to move objects that have tem-
poral locality of access by the mutator, so degrading its minimum mutator utilisation be-
cause of the need to run an increased number of compare-and-swap operations in a short
time. This is unlikely because only objects on sparsely populated pages are moved, so
objects allocated close together in time are unlikely all to move together. The probability
of correlated aborts can be reduced by breaking the defragmentation into several phases
  5 Not to be confused with an object that is the target of many heap references.

Algorithm 19.9: Heap access (while copying) in Staccato using compare-and-swap

 1   Access(p):
 2      r ← forwardingAddress(p)                                    /* load the forwarding pointer */
 3      if r & COPYING = 0
 4            return r                          /* only use the forwarding pointer if not copying */
 5      /* otherwise try to abort the copy */
 6      r ← CompareAndSwap(&forwardingAddress(p), r, p)
 7      /* failure means collector committed or another aborted so r is good */
 8      return r & ˜COPYING                   /* success means we aborted so clear COPYING bit */

to shorten the time window for aborts. Also, the set of pages chosen for defragmentation
in each phase can be randomised. Finally, by choosing to run several defragmentation
threads at much the same time (though not synchronously, and respecting minimum mu-
tator utilisation requirements), there will be fewer mutator threads running so reducing
the likelihood of aborts.

Chicken: best-effort compaction with mutator wait-freedom for x86
Pizlo et al. [2008] offer a solution similar to Staccato. Chicken (Algorithm 19.10), devel-
oped independently, is essentially the same as Staccato, though they assume the stronger
memory model of x86/x86-64. This means that only writes need abort a copy (because
atomic operations order reads) and that the ragged synchronisations need not perform the
read fence. Both Staccato and Chicken support wait-free mutator reads and writes, and
wait-free copying at the cost that some copy operations might be aborted by the mutator.

Clover: guaranteed compaction with probabilistic mutator lock-freedom
Pizlo et al. describe an alternative approach called Clover that relies on probabilistic detec-
tion of writes by the mutator to deliver guaranteed copying with lock-free mutator accesses
(except in very rare cases) and lock-free copying by the collector. Rather than preventing
data races between the collector and the mutator, Clover detects when they occur, and in
that rare situation may need to block the mutator until the copying phase has finished.
Clover picks a random value α to mark fields that have been copied and assumes that the
mutator can never write that value to the heap. To ensure this, the write barrier includes a
check on the value being stored and will block the mutator if it attempts to do so.
    As the collector copies the contents of the original object to the copy it marks the origi-
nal fields as copied by overwriting them with the value α using compare-and-swap. When-
ever the mutator reads a field and loads the value α it knows that it must reload the up-to-
date value of the field via the forwarding pointer (which points to the original if its copy
has not been made yet, or the copy if it has). This works even if the true value of the field
is α from before the copy phase began.
    Whenever the mutator tries to overwrite a field containing the value α, it knows that it
must store to the up-to-date location of the field via the forwarding pointer. If the mutator
actually tries to store the value α, then it must block until copying ends (so that α no longer
means a copied field that must be reloaded via the forwarding pointer). We sketch Clover’s
collector copying routine and mutator barriers in Algorithm 19.11.
    For some types α can be guaranteed not to clash with a proper value: pointers usually
have some illegal values that can never be used and floating point numbers can use any

Algorithm 19.10: Copying and mutator barriers (while copying) in Chicken

 1   copyObjects(candidates):
 2      for each p in candidates
 3         /* set COPYING bit */
 4         forwardingAddress(p) ← p | COPYING
 5      waitForRaggedSynch()                            /* ensure mutators see COPYING bits */
 6      for each p in candidates
 7         r ← allocate(length(p))                                           /* allocate the copy */
 8         move(p, r)                                                       /* copy the contents */
 9         forwardingAddress(r)                                   /* the copy forwards to itself */
10         /* try to commit the copy */
11         if not CompareAndSet(&forwardingAddress(p), p | COPYING, r)
12              /* the commit failed so deal with it */
13              free(r)                                                 /* free the aborted copy */
14              add(aborted, p)                                         /* remember the aborts */
15      return aborted
16

17   Read(p, i):
18      r ← forwardingAddress(p)                                    /* load the forwarding pointer */
19      return r[i]
20

21   Write(p, i, value):
22      r ← forwardingAddress(p)                                    /* load the forwarding pointer */
23      if r & COPYING ̸= 0                     /* only use the forwarding pointer if not copying */
24          /* otherwise try to abort the copy */
25          CompareAndSet(&forwardingAddress(p), r, r & ˜COPYING)
26          /* failure means collector committed or another aborted */
27          r ← forwardingAddress(p)                      /* reload forwardingAddress(p) */
28      r[i] ← value

one of the NaN (Not a Number) forms so long as the program never generates them. For
other types, α needs to be chosen with care to minimise overlap with values used in the
program. To make the chance of overlap virtually impossible, Pizlo et al. [2008] offer an
innovative solution using a random choice for α. They use the largest width Compare-
AndSwapWide available on the processor to assert copying of multiple fields at once. For
example, modern x86-64 processors support a 128-bit compare-and-swap, resulting in the
infinitesimal chance of overlap of 2−128 . Of course, this implies that when testing for α ev-
ery Read/Write must look at the full aligned 128-bit memory location and extract/insert
the value to load/store.

Stopless versus Chicken versus Clover
Pizlo et al. compare Chicken and Clover to their earlier Stopless collector as well as to a
non-compacting concurrent mark-sweep collector. Qualitatively, Stopless cannot guaran-
tee progress to the collector, because there is a chance that repeated writes to a field in a
‘wide’ copy may cause copying to be postponed indefinitely. Chicken guarantees progress
for the collector, at the expense of aborting some copies. Pizlo et al. claim that Clover can

Algorithm 19.11: Copying and mutator barriers (while copying) in Clover

 1    copySlot(p, i):
 2       repeat
 3          value ← p[i]
 4          r ← forwardingAddress(p)
 5          r[i] ← value
 6       until CompareAndSet(&p[i], value, α)
 7

 8    Read(p, i):
 9       value ← p[i]
10       if value = α
11           r ← forwardingAddress(p)
12           value ← r[i]
13       return value
14

15    Write(p, i, newValue):
16       if newValue = α
17          sleep until copying ends
18       repeat
19          oldValue ← p[i]
20          if oldValue = α
21              r ← forwardingAddress(p)
22              r[i] ← newValue
23              break
24       until CompareAndSet(&src[i], oldValue, newValue)

guarantee collector progress, though in the simple formulation presented here it may stall
waiting to install α into a field it is copying while the mutator repeatedly updates the field,
causing its compare-and-swap to fail repeatedly.
     All three algorithms aim for lock-free heap access, but with subtle differences. Chicken
guarantees wait-free access for both reads and writes. Clover and Stopless provide only
lock-free writes, and reads require branching. Clover’s lock-free writes are only probabilis-
tic, since it is possible that a heap write must be stalled until copying is complete as noted
above.
     Clover never aborts an object copy. Stopless can abort copying an object in the unlikely
situation that two or more mutator threads write to the same field at much the same time
during entry into the compaction phase (see Pizlo et al. [2007] for details). Chicken is much
less careful: any write to an object while it is being copied will force the copy to abort.
     Benchmarks comparing these collectors and non-compacting concurrent mark-sweep
collection show that throughput is highest for the non-compacting collector (because it
has much simpler barriers). The copying collectors install their copying-tailored barriers
only during the compaction phase by hot-swapping compiled code at phase changes us-
ing the techniques of Arnold and Ryder [2001]. Chicken is fastest (three times slow-down
while copying according to Pizlo6 ), though it results in many more copy aborts, followed
by Clover (five times slower while copying) and Stopless (ten times slower while copy-
ing). All the collectors scale well on a multiprocessor up to six processors. Because of the
throughput slow-downs, copying degrades responsiveness to real-time events for both
     6 Filip Pizlo, personal communication.

Clover and Stopless. Responsiveness for Chicken is much better because it stays out of the
mutator’s way by aborting copies quickly when necessary.

Fragmented allocation
The preceding discussion of compaction for real-time systems reveals that any real-time
collector relying on defragmentation to ensure space bounds must trade off throughput
and responsiveness to real-time events against the level of fragmentation it is willing to tol-
erate. Wait-freedom of mutator heap accesses was guaranteed only by Chicken/Staccato at
the price of aborting some copies. Stopless and Clover offer stronger space guarantees but
only with the weaker progress guarantee of lock-freedom for heap accesses. A real-time
collector needing hard space bounds may find this tradeoff unacceptable.
    For this reason, Siebert has long advocated bounding external fragmentation by allo-
cating all objects in (logically if not physically) discontiguous fixed-size chunks [Siebert,
1998, 2000, 2010], as implemented in his Jamaica virtual machine for real-time Java. Ja-
maica splits objects into a list of fixed-size oblets, with each successive oblet requiring an
extra level of indirection to access, starting at the head of the list. This results in linear-time
access for object fields, depending on the field index. Similarly, arrays are represented as a
binary tree of arraylets arranged into a trie data structure [Fredkin, 1960]. Thus, accessing
an array element requires a number of indirections logarithmic in the size of the array. The
main problem with this scheme is this variable cost of accessing arrays. Worst-case exe-
cution time analysis requires knowing (or bounding) statically the size of the array being
accessed. However, array size in Java is a dynamic property, so there is no way to prove
general bounds for programs in which array size is not known statically. Thus, in the ab-
sence of other knowledge, the worst-case access time for trie-based arrays can in general
be bounded only by the size of the largest allocated array in the application, or (worse) the
size of the heap itself if that bound is unknown.
    To solve this problem, Pizlo et al. [2010b] marry the spine-based arraylet allocation tech-
niques of Metronome to the fragmented allocation techniques of Jamaica in a system they
call Schism. By allowing objects and arrays to be allocated as fixed-size fragments, there is
no need to worry about external fragmentation. Moreover, both object and array accesses
have strong time bounds: indirecting a statically known number (depending on the field
offset) of oblets for object accesses, and indirecting through the spine to access the appro-
priate arraylet for array accesses. To a first order approximation (ignoring cache effects)
both operations require constant time. Schism’s scheme for allocating fragmented objects
and arrays is illustrated in Figure 19.10. An object or array is represented by a ‘sentinel’
fragment in the heap. Every object or array has a header word for garbage collection and
another to encode its type. The sentinel fragment, representing the object or array, contains
these and additional header words to encode the remaining structure. All references to an
object or array point to its sentinel fragment.
    Objects are encoded as a linked list of oblets (Figure 19.10a). An array that fits in a single
fragment is encoded as in Figure 19.10b. Arrays requiring multiple arraylet fragments are
encoded with a sentinel that refers to a spine that contains pointers to each of the arraylet
fragments. The spine can be ‘inlined’ into the sentinel fragment if it is small enough, as
in Figure 19.10c. Otherwise, the spine must be allocated separately. Stilkerich et al. [2014]
proposed a modification of this scheme that incorporates bidirectional object layouts.
    The novelty of Schism is that separately allocated array spines need not be allocated
in the object/array space. That space is managed entirely as a set of fixed-size fragments
using the allocation techniques of the immix mark-region collector. The 128-byte lines of
immix are the oblet and arraylet fragments of Schism. Schism adds fragmented allocation
and on-the-fly concurrent marking to immix, using an incremental update Dijkstra-style

                 gc                                                                       gc
                type                                                                     type
                                                                                           n

                                    payload
                 payload

                                                                                          payload
(a) A two-fragment object with a payload of                        (b) A single-fragment array with a payload
six to twelve words. The sentinel fragment has                     of up to four words. The sentinel fragment
three header words: a fragmentation pointer                        has four header words: a null fragmentation
to the next object fragment, a garbage collec-                     pointer, a garbage collection header, a type
tion header and a type header. Each fragment                       header and an actual length n ≤ 4 words, fol-
has a header pointing to the next.                                 lowed by the inlined array fields.

                                               gc
                                              type       payload

                                                                     payload

                                                                               payload
                                                0
                                                n
                                               spine

    (c) A multi-fragment array with a payload of up to three fragments (up to 24 words). The
    sentinel fragment has five header words: a non-null fragmentation pointer to the inlined
    array spine, a garbage collection header, a type header, a pseudo-length 0 indicating frag-
    mentation and an actual length 4 < n ≤ 24 words, at negative offsets from the inlined spine.
    Payload fragments have no headers.

                            gc
                           type
                                               payload

                                                         payload

                                                                    payload

                                                                               payload

                                                                                         payload

                             0

                            n
                            spine

    (d) An array with a payload of four or more fragments (more than 24 words). The sen-
    tinel fragment has four header words: a non-null fragmentation pointer to the separately
    allocated array spine, a garbage collection header, a type header and a pseudo-length 0 in-
    dicating fragmentation, followed by the rest of the sentinel which is unused. The spine has
    a two-word header: the actual length and a forwarding pointer (at the same negative offsets
    from the spine as in (c)). Payload fragments have no headers.

Figure 19.10: Fragmented allocation in Schism
                         Pizlo et al. [2010b], doi: 10.1145/1806596.1806615
               © 2010 Association for Computing Machinery, Inc. Reprinted by permission.

insertion barrier. The fragments never move, but so long as there are sufficient free frag-
ments available, any array or object can be allocated. Thus, fragmentation is a non-issue,
except for the variable-sized array spines.
    To bound the fragmentation due to array spines, Schism allocates them in a separately
managed space that uses replication copying collection to perform compaction. Because
the array spines are immutable (they contain only pointers to arraylet fragments, which
never move), there is no problem of dealing with updates to the spines. Indeed, a mutator
can use either a fromspace primary spine or tospace replica spine without fear. Moreover,
each spine has a reference from at most one array sentinel. When replicating, the reference
to the primary from the sentinel can be lazily replaced with a reference to the replica at the
collector’s leisure, without needing to synchronise with the mutator. Mutators can freely
continue to use the spine primary or switch over to using the spine replica when next they
load the spine pointer from the sentinel. Once replication of the spines has finished, the
fromspace spines can be discarded without needing to fix any other pointers because the
tospace spines have only the single reference from their sentinel. A ragged synchronisation
of the mutators ensures that they all agree and are no longer in the middle of any heap
access that is still using a fromspace spine.
    Schism has a number of desirable properties. First, mutator accesses to the heap are
wait-free and tightly bounded (costing constant time). Second, fragmentation is strictly
controlled. Indeed, Pizlo et al. prove that given the number and type of objects and arrays
(including their size) in the maximum live set of the program, then total memory needed
for the program can be strictly bounded at 1.3104 b where b is the size of the maximum
live set. Third, as proposed for Jamaica virtual machine by Siebert [2000], Schism can
run with contiguous allocation of arrays (objects are always fragmented) when there is
sufficient contiguous space. Contiguous arrays are laid out as in Figure 19.10d, except with
the payload extending into successive contiguous fragments. This allows for much faster
array access without indirection through the spine. These properties mean that Schism has
superior throughput compared to other production real-time collectors, while also being
tolerant of fragmentation by switching to fragmented allocation of arrays when contiguous
allocation fails. This comes at the cost of some slow-down to access the fragmented arrays.
The cost of the read and write barrier machinery to access fragmented arrays is a reduced
throughput that is 77% of that for pure concurrent mark-region garbage collection (without
the fragmented array access support).
    For application developers requiring predictability of the cost for array accesses, Schism
can be configured always to use fragmented allocation for arrays at the cost of having to
perform spine indirections on all array accesses. The benefit for this is much improved
maximum pause times. Since all allocations are performed in terms of fragments, pauses
due to allocation are essentially the cost of zero-initialising a 4-kilobyte page in the slow
path of allocation — 0.4 milliseconds on a 40-megahertz embedded processor. When al-
locating arrays contiguously, the allocator must first attempt to locate a contiguous range
of fragments, which slows things down enough to cause maximum pauses around a mil-
lisecond on that processor.

19.8     Issues to consider
Real-time systems demand precise control over garbage collection to ensure short pauses
and predictable minimum mutator utilisation. This chapter has brought together tech-
niques from all the previous chapters in order to achieve these goals. In the absence of
parallelism and concurrency, real-time collection is conceptually straightforward so long
as collection can be scheduled to preserve adequate responsiveness and performance. Our

focus here has been on the real-time collection algorithms themselves, and not so much
on how to integrate their schedulability with that of the application. Real-time application
developers still need accurate analysis of worst-case execution time to feed into schedula-
bility analyses that will ensure that real-time constraints will be met [Wilhelm et al., 2008].
    The literature on real-time systems offers an abundance of guidance on analysis of
garbage collected applications for worst-case execution time and schedulability [Kim et al.,
2001; Robertz and Henriksson, 2003; Chang and Wellings, 2005, 2006a,b; Chang, 2007;
Chang and Wellings, 2010; Cho et al., 2007, 2009; van Assche et al., 2006; Kalibera et al., 2009;
Feizabadi and Back, 2005, 2007; Goh et al., 2006; Kim et al., 1999, 2000, 2001; Kim and Shin,
2004; Schoeberl, 2010; Zhao et al., 1987]. Kalibera et al. [2011] examined different techniques
for scheduling the work of collectors in the context of the Minuteman real-time collection
framework, built on top of a real-time Java virtual machine that is compiled to C ahead
of time. Choosing the scheduling strategy is a key part of the design of a real-time sys-
tem. Kalibera et al. found that neither slack-based nor time-based scheduling was superior
to the other. Although hybrid scheduling such as that of Auerbach et al. [2008] is strictly
more powerful than time-based scheduling, neither does it subsume slack-based schedul-
ing nor does slack-based scheduling subsume hybrid scheduling. Some workloads were
only schedulable with a time-based collector, while others were only schedulable with a
slack-based one. However, hybrid scheduling performed best in their experiments.
    While we have focused on minimum mutator utilisation as the primary metric for mea-
suring garbage collector responsiveness over time, we note that other metrics may be just
as important. Printezis [2006] argues that application-specific metrics are often more ap-
propriate. Consider a periodic real-time task that must deliver a response within a fixed
window. From the perspective of this task, minimum mutator utilisation is immaterial,
so long as the real-time expectations of that task are met. Moreover, minimum mutator
utilisation and maximum pause time may be difficult to account for when the only pauses
related to garbage collection that the mutator experiences are those due to executing the
non-inlined slow path of a read or write barrier, or the slow path during allocation when
the thread’s local allocation buffer is exhausted. For some collectors, such as Schism, these
are the only collector-related pauses that the mutator will see (assuming collector work can
be offloaded to another processor). Should these pauses be charged to the garbage collec-
tor? If so, then how can a system account for them? Pizlo et al. [2010a] even go so far as to
account for these slow paths using specialised hardware for on-device profiling of an em-
bedded processor. To aid developers lacking such specialised hardware, Pizlo et al. [2010b]
provide a worst-case execution mode for their Schism collector that forces slow path exe-
cution so that developers can get some reasonable estimate of worst-case execution times
during testing.
