Chapter 20

Energy-aware garbage collection

While the vast majority of work on garbage collection has been about improving perfor-
mance in execution time or possibly in space requirements, the energy consumed by com-
puter systems has become a primary concern. While this may be obvious for systems that
run from limited power such as smart phones and unplugged laptops, it is also of concern
more broadly as computing consumes an increasingly large share of energy worldwide.
Therefore, some researchers have considered the energy consumption of managed systems
and in particular the impact of garbage collection.
    To first approximation, one would expect that if one collector configuration results in
shorter execution time or higher throughput than another, then it consumes less power
(energy per unit time). This may often be the case, but given the complexities of modern
computer systems, it is far from universally true, because different components consume
energy at different rates and also because their energy consumption can be controlled to
some extent via such features as dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) of proces-
sors, lower power modes for selected memory banks and scheduling on processors with
different micro-architectures (such as simple in-order versus aggressively superscalar out-
of-order). We now turn our attention to analyses of garbage collection energy consumption
and approaches to controlling and mitigating it.
    First, here is a simplified overview of the causes of energy consumption in processors
and memories. Typical processors consist mostly of CMOS (complementary metal-oxide
silicon) logic gates. These gates consume power in two basic ways, dynamic and leakage,
leading to the power equation Pcpu = Pdyn + Pleak . Without going into the physics and
electronics in detail, a useful model for dynamic power is Pdyn = a CV f 2 , where C is the
overall capacitance of the processor (a given, as far as we are concerned), V is the power
supply voltage and f is the clock frequency. The constant a has to do with how many
bits change value, on average, at each clock cycle, either from 0 to 1 or 1 to 0, which is
a function both of processor design and the code being executed, but again essentially a
constant for our purposes. For internal devices to have time to acquire enough electric
charge during a clock cycle, at higher frequencies f the voltage V must be higher as well.
This leads to Pdyn scaling more like f α for some α where 2 < α < 3. Pleak , on the other
hand, acts more like a power loss across a resistor and is thus proportional to V but not
affected by f . Now we can see why DVFS can be used to control energy consumption:
lower voltages and frequencies reduce both Pdyn and Pleak . Note, though, that energy is
power over time. Running an algorithm more slowly consumes less power (energy per
unit time) but may consume more energy overall because the algorithm takes more time.
    Moving from processors to memories, memory can be static or dynamic. Static memory
consumes power continuously to maintain the state of each bit. Dynamic memory keeps

CHAPTER 20. ENERGY-AWARE GARBAGE COLLECTION                                               466

the state in small capacitors that slowly (compared to computer clock speeds) leak charge.
Their bits need to be read periodically and rewritten, called refreshing. Static memory bits
require more area on an integrated circuit, but they operate much faster. They are typically
used for registers and on-chip caches, where speed is critical. Dynamic random access
memory (DRAM) is typically used for the larger main memory. Dynamic memory draws
more power than static memory when idling, because of its refreshing, but both draw
substantially more power when accessed. Dynamic memory reads are destructive and
require writing back, similar to a refresh cycle. Also a dynamic memory typically reads
out many more bits than a single word — though they can be held in a buffer and used
to provide results for accesses to nearby locations or larger transfers, often a cache line
at a time. Static CMOS memories consume power similarly to the processor, and can
be modeled with it. Dynamic memory power can also be modeled with a CV f 2 where
a will have to do with the number of accesses, and V and f are not as adjustable as the
processor is with DVFS. It also has a time-dependent component because of refresh, which
plays a role similar to Pleak in processors. Detailed DRAM power consumption is affected
by many factors concerning the spatial and temporal distribution of accesses, bits flipped
in each direction, and so on, but for general understanding we can think of the energy
consumption as varying with the number of accesses a and the overall time.
    While our discussion here is definitely over-simplified, it helps explain why the total
energy consumed by a workload might be higher at very low clock frequencies (leakage
and DRAM refresh might dominate) and at very high clock frequencies (because of the
dependence of energy consumption on f α ).

Changing collector algorithm. Several researchers have considered how the choice of col-
lection algorithm impacts energy consumption. Velasco et al. [2005] characterised energy
consumption of five tracing stop-the-world collectors from the JMTk suite of collectors
available at the time with Jikes RVM. Their evaluation was conducted by running simula-
tions with Dynamic Simple Scalar, an extension of SimpleScalar [Austin et al., 2002] that han-
dles dynamic code generation, and using the CACTI tool [Shivakumar and Jouppi, 2001]
to estimate power consumption. They compared five SPECjvm98 benchmarks under these
collectors: MarkSweep (non-generational mark-sweep), SemiSpace (non-generational semi-
space copying), GenCopy (generational with copying in the old generation), GenMS (gen-
erational with a semispace nursery and mark-sweep in the old generation) and CopyMS
(generational where survivors are immediately copied to the old generation and managed
by mark-sweep thereafter).
    Their findings included: (i) allocation has a significant impact on energy consumption,
and sequential allocation via a bump pointer does better than free-list allocation; (ii) L2
cache miss rates also have a significant impact, with CopyMS and GenMS providing the
best results in that regard; and (iii) heap size affects which algorithm consumes the least
energy, with SemiSpace doing better in larger heaps and worse in smaller ones. With
no single technique dominating, these results suggest that managed language implemen-
tations might do well to offer choice from several collection algorithms if the goal is to
minimise energy consumption.
    Griffin et al. [2005] considered how to improve energy efficiency in a Java virtual ma-
chine designed for embedded devices (such as smart phones). They developed a modified
version of Sun’s Kilobyte Virtual Machine (KVM). KVM employed a simple non-generational
mark-compact algorithm, which induces a lot of copying of objects and significant pauses.
Their modified collector employed deferred reference counting and used the original mark-
compact algorithm as a backup to reclaim cyclic garbage. They further developed two
techniques that helped reduce the cost of stack scanning. The first was frame tagging, used
to help avoid generating stack maps over and over. A stack frame has a tag that can have
CHAPTER 20. ENERGY-AWARE GARBAGE COLLECTION                                                 467

one of three values: (i) dirty, which indicates that the frame’s stack map has not been gen-
erated; new frames start dirty; (ii) clean, which indicates that the frame’s stack map has
been generated and is available via a pointer in the frame; and (iii) saved, which indicates
that the frame’s referents have had their reference counts incremented in the heap, as if
the frame were heap resident. Working from the top (most recently pushed) frame, the
tags must obey the order: all dirty before all clean before all saved. Re-entering a clean or
saved frame requires reverting it to dirty, and in the case of a saved frame, decrementing
reference counts. This can be accomplished with a stack barrier. Frame tagging offered
considerable savings and might be applied in other collectors. However, this may have
had to do with the more frequent collections required on a device with limited memory.
    The second optimisation technique they applied was pointer tagging. In this optimi-
sation, pointers in clean frames that had already been seen in a scan from the oldest clean
frame to the newest were tagged by setting a stolen bit. The referents had their reference
counts incremented only once, rather than multiple times, helping reduce the number of
reference count overflows. This technique could also be applied in other systems.
    When objects are reclaimed because of reference count decrements, their space is put
onto lists that are searched first when allocating, thus aiming to reuse space before try-
ing to allocate from or near the wilderness. If, after processing deferred reference counts,
an allocation request still cannot be satisfied, then adjacent free blocks are coalesced and
placed on wilderness lists. If the allocation still cannot be satisfied, the system falls back to
the original mark-compact algorithm.
    Griffin et al. evaluated their collector on six benchmarks and found that it reduced the
number of mark-compact collections by 93% to 100%. It also reduced energy consumption,
with up to 85% reduction in memory access energy and smaller reductions in execution en-
ergy. A three-bit reference count field captured over 99% of the reference counts. It seems
that the deferred reference counting approach acted similarly to generational collection in
reducing the number of full tracing collections of the heap, similar to experience with the
LXR collector.
    Hussein et al. [2015b] examined concurrent collectors in the Android Dalvik Java vir-
tual machine. They measured energy consumption in an actual system at a high (48,000
per second) sampling rate. The schemes they compared were: Dalvik’s usual concurrent
mark-sweep (CMS); CMS extended to scan thread stacks on-the-fly; generational CMS
(GenCMS), where mutators may perform young generation collection themselves; GenCMS
with all work performed by mutators in the foreground (GenCMSfg); and GenCMS with all
work performed by a separate collector thread (GenCMSbg). Their findings included: (i) in-
creased throughput from using a larger heap does not necessarily result in lower energy
consumption, which is related to DVFS decisions; (ii) the GenCMSbg scheme causes in-
creased energy consumption because it induces more context switches and also heap size
reductions; and (iii) multithreaded applications benefited in their responsiveness (mini-
mum mutator utilisation) from GenCMSfg collection, but GenMSbg and GenCMS con-
current collectors were better for larger heaps. They suggested that energy consumption
could be better managed by controlling when the background collector thread is enabled
and by having the heap size adjustment policy integrated with DVFS decision making.

DVFS. Hussein et al. [2015a] considered the effect on execution time and energy consump-
tion of applying DVFS to collector threads. Their setting was again the Android Dalvik
Java virtual machine platform and its concurrent mark-sweep collector. They measured a
live system running DaCapo and specJVM benchmarks. By pinning the collector threads
and varying their processors’ voltage and frequency, they found they could achieve 30%
energy savings at a speed reduction of 10%, about a 20% reduction in energy-delay product
(our calculation).
CHAPTER 20. ENERGY-AWARE GARBAGE COLLECTION                                               468

Global coordination. An approach complementary to adjusting the collection algorithm
is to use a coordinated central collection service. This requires an environment of trust.
Hussein et al. [2017] examine this approach in the context of the Android Run-Time (ART),
which differs from the original Dalvik virtual machine in that it compiles applications to
native code when they are installed. It also features a much improved allocator and its col-
lector supports non-moving generational collection. The collection service runs as a sepa-
rate thread and handles all collection requests when it is running. (The system falls back to
having each application collect separately if the service is not running.) When the service
receives a request, generally because some thread is running low on memory, it typically
chooses to collect the heap of the thread that it judges to have the most garbage. Some of
the memory reclaimed can then be given to the original requestor, which may be running
in a different heap than the one that was collected. The service applies techniques in-
cluding trimming the heap with the highest fragmentation first, delaying collection when
memory is available, and adjusting individual heap allocation thresholds based on allo-
cation rates rather than static thresholds. To enable this centralised decision making, the
service gathers statistics globally (such as available memory), from each process, and from
each heap. Additionally, when performing collection the clock frequency of the processor
running the collector is capped, to reduce energy consumption. The results they obtained
from running selected benchmarks were: 50% fewer collections, 10% reduction in memory
required, reduced execution time and energy consumption (each by a few percent) and
shorter pause times (order of 10%).
     Sartor and Eeckhout [2012] also explored global policies which related to running multi-
threaded Java programs on multicore processors. Their findings included: (i) isolating the
collector threads to particular cores can increase execution time by up to 20%; (ii) lowering
the clock frequency of cores running collector threads affects performance less than does
lowering the frequency of cores running application threads; (iii) on a single socket system,
it is best to have the number of application and collector threads be the same, and both be
the number of cores on the socket; (iv) on a two socket system, it is best to co-locate appli-
cation threads and their collector threads, and to have the number of collector threads be
half the number of application threads; and (v) pinning threads to specific cores does not
always improve performance and sometimes makes things worse.

Asymmetric multicore processors. Given that collector threads often make demands dif-
ferent from those of mutators, asymmetric multicore processors present opportunity to
save energy as with DVFS: running the collector on a less capable, slower processor can
save substantial energy without slowing down the overall application much. Cao et al.
[2012] showed that collection is often memory-bound, that is, collector threads’ processors
are often waiting on memory and do not exhibit as much instruction-level parallelism as
do mutators. Hence, the collector does not benefit as much as mutators do from being run
on, say, a superscalar out-of-order processor versus a simpler in-order one. Akram et al.
[2016] considered in more detail when to run collector threads on ‘big’ (faster, more energy
hungry) cores versus ‘small’ ones. They found that stop-the-world phases benefited from
being run on ‘big’ cores, and that otherwise the critical factor was whether or not the ap-
plication would end up waiting for the collector to finish. When finishing the collection is
on the critical path, it should be run on ‘big’ cores; otherwise, small cores are fine. They
also found that giving the collector threads longer scheduling quanta (a larger share of
processor time) compared to mutators helped when collection was on the critical path.

Cache management. There are several impacts of typical collection algorithms on caches
and the processor memory subsystem. Consider this common sequence of interaction.

   1. Some memory has been used, but becomes unreachable.
   2. Because the cache lines for that memory are dirty and have not been used in a long
      time, the cache writes them back to memory.
   3. Some time later, the allocator zeroes the memory when preparing it for a mutator to
      use.
    This pattern of memory use involves two unnecessary interactions with the memory.
First, writing the dirty line back is useless to the application since the value in the line will
never be looked at again. Second, zeroing the line causes those old contents to be fetched
from memory, whereupon they are immediately overwritten with zeroes. While the write
back may happen in the background, and thus will not always slow execution down, it
does waste energy. The fetch from memory is more likely to slow execution down, and
also wastes energy. Sartor et al. [2014] considered the possible benefits of providing special
cache operations to avoid these costs. They considered these operations.
clinvalidate: directly invalidate a given line at all levels of the cache;
clundirty: clear a given line’s dirty bit, making it appear clean, at all levels of the cache;
clclean: clear a given line’s dirty bit, making it appear clean, at all levels of the cache, and
      record it as least recently used (more likely to be dropped from the cache if other data
      are accessed); and
clzerok: zero a given line at level k of the cache.
    Note that what some processor descriptions call ‘clean’ is actually a request to write
back a dirty line, not what is desired here. They found that clinvalidate, clundirty and clclean
all reduced write backs to memory. When any of those operations are used along with
clzero2, then the memory reads for zeroing were also reduced. These reductions improved
both execution time and energy consumption. The reason that clzero2 stood out in their
experiments, versus clzero1 or clzero3, is that they zeroed 32 kilobytes at a time, which
better matched their L2 cache size. They further found that the best reductions happened
when the nursery size matched the cache size. While not all popular processors support
these operations, some do offer clinvalidate and clzero.
    Ismail and Suh [2018] considered a different hardware approach, where the applica-
tion can inform the hardware of ranges of virtual addresses whose data are not needed
(‘invalid’). Accesses to those addresses supply zero values and remove the addresses from
the range of ‘invalid’ ones. The expected benefits would be similar to those of Sartor et al..

20.1     Issues to consider
Garbage collection has a clear impact on energy consumption. To first approximation, a
collector that takes less time (at a given clock speed) does less work and thus tends to con-
sume less energy. Likewise, better locality tends to imply reduced energy consumption.
Garbage collection is often more memory bound and often has less available instruction-
level parallelism than mutator code. Thus its total energy, or its energy-delay product, may
be less at a lower clock speed. Likewise, it is less impacted by being run on a simpler ‘small’
processor core than on a more complex ‘big’ one, compared to mutator code. In concur-
rent collection, if the collector becomes the bottleneck, then reducing its resources may be
counter-productive to energy consumption or energy-delay product. Cache management
techniques, and careful choice of allocator and of heap sizing should also be considered
when tuning for better energy use.
http://taylorandfrancis.com
