Chapter 21

Persistence and garbage collection

Persistence is the ability of a heap and the objects it contains to outlive the execution of a
program.1 Persistence has a significant literature in programming languages, dating back
at least to the 1980s but was largely pushed aside by developments in databases such
as object-relational mapping that enabled continued reliance on trusted commercial rela-
tional database technologies for persistent storage of application data.2 The more recent
introduction of byte-addressable non-volatile memory has renewed interest in persistent pro-
gramming languages, and thus in collection of persistent heaps. Baldassin et al. [2021] offer
a useful survey of persistence, to which we are indebted in developing our discussion of
the topic. Our purpose here is to focus on issues of garbage collection, not on persistence
generally nor on persistent programming languages.

21.1       Persistence: concepts, issues and implementation
As with database management systems, a key challenge with persistence is maintaining
the integrity of the persistent heap in the face of various kinds of failures. We generally
want resistance to corruption of the heap caused by system failures (‘crashes’), which we
call resilience. As we discuss below, this requires careful updating of persistent memory.
    It is possible to implement resilience at the granularity of individual updates to the
persistent heap, though the overhead may be high. Therefore, many systems support per-
sistence either via occasional checkpoints (also called snapshots), likely at times chosen by
the application or user of the system, or else by grouping updates into larger batches that
achieve useful and logical changes to the heap, that is, transactions.3
    In addition to resilience to failures, it is helpful for a persistent heap to resist corruption
by software defects (‘bugs’). Transactions help with that as well, since a software failure
in the middle of a transaction can be arranged to cause a transaction abort. Our earlier
discussion of transactions concerned their atomicity in the face of concurrency, which we
call concurrency atomicity. Persistence demands durability: heap updates should outlive
program execution and survive system failures. Durability leads to the need for failure
atomicity, the requirement that a transaction’s set of changes to the persistent heap either
all occur, or none do. This concept applies equally to both checkpointing and transactional
   1 This is distinguished from another use of the term ‘persistent’ in computer science to refer to a data structure

that incorporates the history of operations performed on the data structure.
   2 Hence the previous edition of this book made the choice not to explore garbage collection in these languages

since they were no longer under much active use or development.
   3 See Section 13.9. While that discussion focuses on transactional memory, the transaction concepts here are

the same, with the addition of durability.

approaches. It is also important that changes to the persistent heap occur in an order
consistent with the order of commits of transactions that conflict with one another, that is,
they need to be ordered with respect to each other.
    Resilience is always with respect to a failure model and probability of unrecoverable failure.
Consideration of this topic in depth is beyond our scope here. However, a common failure
model is fail-stop. In this model, a failure cannot cause arbitrary behaviour. Rather, fail-
ure causes the system simply to stop, with its volatile state lost and its non-volatile state
surviving as is. Persistent systems are often built under this or similar assumptions. We ob-
serve that guaranteeing that non-volatile memory state will not be lost is often addressed
in hardware, using schemes such as error checking and correcting codes (ECC), spare units
of memory within the devices or, for block-oriented devices, redundancy such as mirrored
disks or redundant arrays (RAID). Software can apply similar techniques to decrease the
likelihood of unrecoverable failure even further. We assume the fail-stop model here and
consider the persistent memory to be perfectly reliable, that is, as reliable as the application
needs. We will mostly not get into the details, but after a failure a recovery procedure may
be needed to move the persistent heap to a good state, one in which there are no partial
effects of failed transactions or incomplete checkpoints.

Providing durability
The general principle involved in achieving durability is that, when trying to move for-
ward toward the next persistent state, at any moment we must be able either to go back
to the previous persistent state, forward to the next persistent state or both. This generally
requires maintaining some encoding of both the old and the new state at least until the
new state is installed.

Checkpointing. A simple technique for checkpointing is to write an entire new copy of the
persistent heap. This is typical of some single-user programming environments such as
Smalltalk. A more incremental approach is to consider the heap as a collection of disjoint
blocks or pages. As the system runs and modifies blocks, it preserves the original blocks,
replacing them by updated copies of blocks that are changed. This approach is called copy-
on-write, and the new mapping is sometimes called a shadow copy. This mechanism can
be built fairly transparently using page protections in virtual memory. A checkpoint then
just records the current mapping of addresses to page (block) contents. Once the updated
blocks and map have been recorded in persistent memory, the system writes a separate
record indicating that the new checkpoint is complete and thus captures the most recent
state of the system.
    A possible objection to copy-on-write is that new checkpoints have their pages scat-
tered around the actual persistent memory and addresses require mapping or translation
to the actual locations of the data. An alternative approach that avoids this is a redo log. In
this design, new block versions are written into alternate locations while the system runs,
and the updated map is saved, but then the new versions of blocks are copied to where
the old versions reside. This can be done in background. It avoids permanent scattering of
blocks in persistent memory, but still requires mapping.
    A third approach, undo logging, overcomes that objection. When a block is about to be
modified, the system saves a copy of its contents on the side, in the undo log, and then
allow changes to the original copy. This keeps data in their original locations, but requires
processing the undo log if there is a failure: the old copies of blocks need to be copied back
to the original location. This implies that undo log information must be recorded reliably
before the application can modify the original block.

Transactions. While checkpointing typically operates at page or block granularity, transac-
tions more often deal with smaller units, such as objects, memory words or granules more
the size of cache lines. Durability for transactions can be provided using any of the three
methods we enumerated for checkpointing: shadow copies, redo logs or undo logs. A
difference is that each running transaction will have its own shadow copy or log, whereas
checkpointing is a system-wide notion. In a single-threaded system, the two are very sim-
ilar in their mechanics, although the API offered to programmers is a little different.

Durable commits. An important detail we have glossed over so far is that part of a trans-
action commit (checkpoint) is ensuring that all necessary data have been recorded in per-
sistent memory before the transaction (checkpoint) is recorded as complete. When dealing
with block-oriented devices this involves not only writing the blocks, but waiting for con-
firmation from the device that it has accepted responsibility for the durability of the writes,
and only then writing the record of the commit. If the device can be told to order the writes,
then the system may avoid having to wait before sending the commit record.
    With byte-addressable non-volatile memory the situation is slightly trickier. Data be-
come durable once written back from the cache to the persistent main memory. Since cache
write backs can happen at any time, the system must be careful about the ordering of its
memory writes. Also, to guarantee that the contents of given memory words have been
made durable, the system may need to write back cache lines explicitly, using instructions
such as clflush, clflushopt, or clwb on Intel processors,4 and employing memory
fences to make sure those write backs have happened before performing any further writes
that depend on their durability.
    For readers interested in delving more deeply into methods of implementing transac-
tions with durability, Gray and Reuter [1993] remains a good resource.

Issues raised by persistence
Persistence adds a new dimension to programming languages, memory management and
heaps. Thus it brings a number of new issues. We now describe some of the more signifi-
cant issues, focusing on those most relevant to garbage collection.

What is persistent? Various systems might persist different parts of the overall system
state. Assuming the heap persists, then so do objects and sufficient metadata for using
those objects and performing memory management. A system might go further and in-
clude types, classes or even code, which may lead to a need to collect those as well. Going
even further, threads and stacks might persist. While some of these entities may require
special decoding to find references they hold, and perhaps need collection policies suited
to their life-times and behaviours, they do not otherwise present difficulty in collection.
    Some systems only allow objects of particular types, or specifically designated objects
to persist. Another approach is persistence by reachability. Usually in that approach certain
variables are designated as persistent roots, and objects reachable from them become per-
sistent. In either case, collection only demands the ability to enumerate roots and to find
and follow edges in the object graph.

Can a program connect to multiple persistent heaps? If a program can connect to more
than one persistent heap, then it may wish to create references that point from one heap to
another. These probably require special treatment, and imply that garbage collection either
   4 If the caches are part of the persistence domain, then write backs are not needed though a fence still is. Such

systems are becoming available as of this time of writing.

processes a whole set of interconnected heaps at once, or else applies methods similar to
distributed garbage collection, which lie beyond the scope of this handbook.

Is there also a non-persistent heap or region? If a system includes non-persistent regions
as well as persistent ones, then issues arise concerning references from one to the other.
What does it mean if there is a pointer from the persistent heap to a non-persistent object,
and a system failure then occurs? Under persistence by reachability, this should not be
allowed, except possibly during the middle of a transaction. Then such objects and the
transitive closure of non-persistent objects reachable from them should be moved to the
persistent heap, rather like generational copying collection or copying globally reachable
objects out of a thread-local heap. Thus a non-persistent region may function similarly
to a young generation. This may be helpful in avoiding moving short-lived objects to
durable storage. This approach leads to the possibility of barriers for tracking references
from persistent to non-persistents objects.

Addressing objects. In non-persistent heaps, objects are usually located either via a direct
pointer or by using an object table indexed by some form of object identifier. For a variety
of reasons, these simple methods for addressing objects may not meet the needs of a per-
sistent system. However, for purposes of supporting collection, all we need is some means
of tracing the object graph.

Persistence technology and means of access. There are two fundamentally different ways
in which systems provide access to durable (persistent) storage: transferring whole blocks
of data and direct access at the byte level. Block-oriented access was the only method
available until byte-addressable non-volatile memory came on the market. Block-oriented
systems may work directly with files in a file system. In that case, the system itself must
deal with the proper ordering of writes to durable storage and forcing writes from buffers
to the actual device(s). It must also support means of recovery, such as a write-ahead log.
An alternative is to store blocks of bytes in a database management system, or at least to
use its transaction processing and storage layer, which makes it easier to build the desired
functionality.
    Block-oriented persistence incurs some inherent slowdowns. One cause is that data
are necessarily copied between memory and durable storage. Depending on the operating
system interface, data may be copied twice, once between the device and operating system
buffers, and again between those buffers and user space. An interface that supports page
mapping avoids copying between user space and operating system buffers, but cannot
avoid the transfers to and from the device. There is also the overhead of operating system
calls. Further, devices that provide durable storage are often themselves slow to access
compared with typical computer memories.
    Byte-addressable non-volatile memory offers the advantage of fast access without in-
termediate copying or software layers. In fact, its speed approaches that of volatile memo-
ries such as dynamic RAM and tends to offer comparable bandwidth. Its strength of direct
access is also a weakness, however. Block-oriented access supports atomic updating of
whole blocks and also allows control over when data are written to durable storage. Non-
volatile memories and systems currently available guarantee atomic update of word-sized
units, but not necessarily anything larger. Also, since a cache between the processor and
the non-volatile memory can choose to write back modified data at any time, the only con-
trol a system has over such ordering is that it can use cache write-back instructions to force
particular data to be written back. Additionally, it can use memory fences to constrain
the relative order of writes to the cache, write-backs from the cache to the non-volatile

memory, and so on. Another challenge is that data still in the processor and its caches is
lost when power is removed.5

21.2       Impacts of persistence on garbage collection
There are several significant ways in which persistence impacts the design of a garbage
collector: the format of the heap and of the objects it contains, barriers, and interactions
with any transaction and crash recovery mechanisms. Additional factors that affect the
design include: persistent heaps may be large (possibly larger than a processor’s available
memory), system failures may occur during garbage collection, and various of the issues
mentioned above.

Heap design. Ways in which persistence affects the overall design of the heap include:

   • There is increased need for the heap to be self-describing. For example, a typical design
     would place a heap in a single file. When a mutator opens the file to connect to
     the heap, the mutator needs to be able to decode the overall structure of the heap,
     discover how to allocate new objects (structures describing free memory), how to
     interpret existing objects, and so on.

   • The heap must include one or more persistent roots, where a mutator can start in
     traversing the object graph. This might include a flat or hierarchical name space,
     similar to those of file systems.

   • The heap must also be interpretable after a crash, perhaps requiring an intervening
     recovery process by a special recovery tool, or else employing integrated crash recov-
     ery. The details depend on the transaction or checkpoint mechanisms, of course. Not
     only must mutator activity be cleanly recovered, but so must any collector activity.
     It is desirable that collection be able to complete eventually if crashes are far enough
     apart to allow some progress.

   • Supporting cross-heap references requires going beyond usual heap designs to allow
     means to describe which heap contains the target object of a cross-heap reference,
     and the specific target object. These might have semantics more like symbolic links
     (a name lookup) or more like ‘hard’ links (a specific address or object identifier).

Barriers and remembered sets. In addition to any read and write barriers required by the
collection algorithm, persistence may require load and store barriers to facilitate access to
objects in the persistent heap. A load barrier provides additional actions required to be
able to locate and access the target object of a reference. It may be combined with read
barrier actions where read barriers are necessary. Generally speaking, if load barriers are
needed, they are needed in more situations than read barriers are. A store barrier likewise
provides actions that help maintain addressability of persistent objects, such as converting
a reference from internal to external form before storing it into an object. Further, in order
to support transaction semantics, a persistent system may need to track updates to objects,
including to non-pointer fields. These are also store barriers, though of a slightly different
kind. These barriers do not tend to affect collection algorithms directly. Rather, they need
to be incorporated appropriately in collector code that manipulates objects and references.
   5 This particular problem can be overcome by providing enough reserve power for these data to be saved,

building that functionality into the processor or the operating system, triggered by a power-fail interrupt or
similar means. As previously noted, systems are becoming available that support this.

   We do note that the possibility of references from persistent to non-persistent objects
and vice versa may require additional write barriers, to maintain tables of such references
needed to implement persistence by reachability or to fix up references when persistent
objects are removed from the address space. Transaction semantics may require remem-
bering or logging objects read and written by a transaction, another case of what can be
considered barriers and remembered sets.

21.3     Barriers in support of persistence
We now delve deeper into how barriers support persistence, as useful background when
we discuss specific collectors of persistent heaps. As mentioned above, persistent heaps
may require load and store barriers to support persistence, apart from or combined with
read and write barriers that support collection. Even though these barriers are not intrin-
sic to collection, we briefly survey them here because they may require integration with
the memory manager. The two main approaches to implementing barriers are to exploit
hardware support or to use software only.

Software barriers
We begin by describing LOOM, the Large Object-Oriented Memory, a design for a Smalltalk
system whose heap size could exceed the memory available on its machine [Kaehler and
Krasner, 1983; Kaehler, 1986]. Although old, we find it useful to present LOOM because
it exemplifies in a clear way mechanisms and techniques for managing a heap of objects
larger than a machine’s address space (or at least larger than one chooses to load at once).
It is thus relevant to the implementation of persistent heaps that are not mapped or loaded
in their entirety.
     In LOOM, an object is always accessed via its object table entry, and is identified by its
address within the disk file containing the Smalltalk snapshot. When an object is resident,
references from other resident objects point to its object table entry. For resident objects
that point to non-resident ones, LOOM used two different techniques. One was to provide
a proxy for the non-resident object, called a leaf. The leaf is marked as such and contains
the object identifier to support fetching the object. Once the object is fetched, it replaces
the leaf in the object table. The other technique is a specially marked pointer which LOOM
calls a lambda (in the sense of a null pointer, not in the sense of a lambda expression). In
that case the object identifier resides in the disk version of the referring object and that
object must be fetched in order to locate the target object. Notice that LOOM supports
both specially marked nodes and specially marked edges in the object graph to support
object faulting. The conversion between the external form (object identifiers) and internal
form (pointers to object table entries) has come to be called pointer swizzling.
     It is fairly easy to see how the object graph can be faulted into memory incrementally.
However, LOOM can also shrink it incrementally. First, the system can write an object
back to disk and replace its object table pointer with a pointer to a leaf. Then it can replace
pointers to object table entries that refer to the leaf by lambdas, eventually reaching a state
where the object table entry can be reused for some other object. The latter step is facilitated
by maintaining a reference count on the object table entry. (Note that this is not the same as
a reference count on the object which would include references from non-resident objects.)
     LOOM also maintains ‘clean’ and ‘untouched’ bits in object table entries. These allow
the system to avoid writing back objects that have not been updated, and to detect which
objects have been accessed recently when selecting candidates for eviction. Maintaining
these bits is load and store barrier work.

    It identifies leaf objects via a designated bit in their object table entry, and lambdas
by their specific value (they are object number 0). These properties must be checked in
appropriate places, and LOOM uses a number of techniques to reduce the frequency of
these checks. Again, this is load and store barrier work.
    Another Smalltalk system that extended its heap beyond the computer memory was
Alltalk [Straw et al., 1989]. Alltalk avoided swizzling, always using the object identifier to
access each object, doing so through a hashed object table. In this case the load barrier is
the hashed lookup in the object table.
    Persistent Smalltalk [Hosking and Moss, 1993a] did not use an object table. It used an
analogue of LOOM’s leaf objects, called fault blocks. The difference is that an object table
based system always has a level of indirection to access an object. In Persistent Smalltalk,
such indirection occurred only in the case of fault blocks, and once the target object was
resident, the fault block (called an indirect block in this case) could be bypassed, a step that
can be pushed onto the collector. The converse — converting a regular object into a fault
block — was easily done since a fault block fits within the space needed by a regular object.
Persistent Smalltalk accomplished many of its object residency checks via Smalltalk’s mes-
sage dispatch (method call) mechanism. First, a marked edge, that is, a pointer tagged to
indicate that it points to a non-resident object, was detected during the check of low-order
tag bits. This check is already necessary since the target object could be a SmallInteger,
character, boolean or other type, which each have their own low-bit tags. Thus, marked
edges simply used a previously unused tag value. Second, a marked node, that is, a fault
block, has a ‘fake’ class arranged to cause an object fault and then forward the original
message (call) to the faulted-in target. The same can happen with indirect blocks, skipping
the faulting step. Persistent Smalltalk also employed additional techniques to try to bypass
indirect blocks more aggressively.
    These Smalltalk systems cover a substantial range of the main approaches to support-
ing persistence in a managed object-oriented language. Similar approaches have been de-
veloped for adding persistence to Modula-3 [Hosking and Chen, 1999] and Java [Daynès
and Atkinson, 1997; Printezis et al., 1997], among others. Our aim here is a brief intro-
duction to the techniques, so further consideration of persistent programming languages,
as opposed to garbage collection for such languages, lies beyond our scope. Likewise we
omit details of systems built on top of database managers. For an introduction to that
literature see, for example, White and Dewitt [1992] or Amsaleg et al. [1994, 1995].
    To sum up, barriers in support of persistence, as opposed to just for collection, have
mainly to do with expanding, shrinking and accessing a resident object graph. Software
barriers for persistence may exploit specially marked edges (pointers), nodes (objects) or
both in the object graph.

Hardware barriers
The Texas persistent object store [Singhal et al., 1992] exemplifies approaches that use stan-
dard page trap hardware for persistence barriers. Where LOOM uses software checks for
leaves or lambdas, Texas uses a fault handler invoked when protected pages are accessed.
Thus, a LOOM leaf object corresponds to a page of objects in Texas. The objects in a leaf
page contain references to other objects in an external form. When a leaf page is accessed,
the references it contains are swizzled, and updated to point to their resident targets (if the
targets are indeed resident) or to leaf pages for non-resident objects. Thus, Texas main-
tains a mapping table between internal and external forms of object references. It employs
techniques analogous to LOOM’s to grow and shrink the resident object graph. The virtue
of Texas’s hardware approach is that C/C++ code could work unmodified except for con-
necting to the store and accessing the first object.

    While Texas does not perform collection, Persistent Smalltalk [Hosking and Moss, 1993a]
and Persistent Modula-3 [Hosking and Chen, 1999], which support page faulting as an al-
ternative to software-only barriers, do, using barrier techniques similar to those of Texas.
Hardware approaches that use non-stock hardware are out of scope here.

Software versus hardware barriers
Do software or hardware barriers offer better performance? Hosking and Moss [1993a,b]
answered that question for the hardware and software of the time. They concluded, per-
haps contrary to intuition, that software barriers could outperform hardware ones. Much
has changed in both hardware and software since that time. The time required for an op-
erating system kernel to field a page trap and direct it to a process’s signal handler was
comparatively long; modern kernels may be faster. At the same time, modern out-of-order
processors may be able to perform software barrier work overlapped with other opera-
tions, particularly for store and write barriers, which are not on the critical path. Load
barrier latency may be harder to hide. This is an area that is technology-dependent, so the
best approach is to make careful measurements. It is clear, though, that software barri-
ers have the strong advantage of flexibility. Further, they are amenable to clever compiler
optimisations to eliminate them or simplify their code.

21.4     Overview of implemented collectors for persistent heaps
A reasonable question is whether persistent heaps lend themselves more to some collec-
tion algorithms than others or, put another way, whether any collection algorithms become
practically impossible in the presence of persistence. The answer is that there are imple-
mentations of persistent heaps across the full spectrum of collection algorithms. Rather
than discuss a large number of systems in detail — a survey that would rapidly become
dated — we enumerate various kinds of collectors and offer citations of representative sys-
tems. We discuss the collectors of some of these systems in more detail as an introduction
to some of the techniques developed to date. We only mention systems targeting non-
volatile memory, the focus of current, and likely most future, efforts. Again, the interested
reader may find the Baldassin et al. [2021] survey helpful in relation to the current state of
the art in persistence.
    In terms of the basic collection algorithms, reference counting [Coburn et al., 2011;
Denny et al., 2016; Memaripour and Swanson, 2018; Hoseinzadeh and Swanson, 2021],
mark-sweep [George et al., 2020; Krauter et al., 2021; Lee et al., 2020; Perez et al., 2020],
mark-compact [Perez et al., 2020] and copying collection [Krauter et al., 2021; Shull et al.,
2019a; Wu et al., 2018] are all represented. The full spectrum of concurrency is also repre-
sented, including stop-the-world, parallel and concurrent collection. Furthermore, there
are implementations of persistent heaps for a considerable range of programming lan-
guages, including C/C++ [Coburn et al., 2011; Denny et al., 2016; Krishnan et al., 2020; Lee
et al., 2020], with at least one system supporting persistence by reachability [Guerra et al.,
2012], Go [George et al., 2020], Haskell [Krauter et al., 2021], Java [Perez et al., 2020; Shull
et al., 2019a; Wu et al., 2018] and Rust [Hoseinzadeh and Swanson, 2021].

Persistent reference counting
Coburn et al. [2011] describe the reference counting implementation of their NV-heaps sys-
tem. NV-heaps offers transactions with durability using redo logs for low-level allocation
and reference count update operations, and undo logs for other changes to objects during

transactions. Each object has two reference counts, one for references from non-volatile
objects and one for references from volatile ones. To facilitate and simplify crash recovery,
each NV-heap maintains a generation number, the number of times the NV-heap has been
loaded into memory. The count of references from volatile objects also includes the gen-
eration number, and if it does not match the current generation number of the NV-heap,
then that count is treated as having value zero. In this way the volatile reference counts are
effectively cleared upon crash recovery without any additional work. The reference counts
have an associated lock to use when updating the counts. We observe that there are deep
similarities between this two-count approach and that of deferred reference counting and
biased reference counting, even though their purposes are somewhat different.
    Decrementing one reference count can cause a cascade of further decrements and re-
claiming of unreachable objects. To make this process more easily recoverable, NV-heaps
employs a novel technique whereby, during processing one logged decrement that results
in a reference count becoming zero, the system tracks the root object deletion and the cur-
rent non-root object being deleted. Since successful deletion clears the reference to the
deleted object, recovery can simply restart from the root and non-root objects. Coburn
et al. note that it is possible that some object destructors may be invoked more than once,
but say it is generally easy to program around that.
    NV-heaps supports weak references using proxy objects, similar to Java’s WeakRef-
erence class. The authors note that some technique for reclaiming cyclic garbage is nec-
essary, and offer weak references as their solution.
    NV-heaps was implemented before byte-addressable non-volatile memory was avail-
able, so their results relied on simulation. It is also worth noting that they assumed a hard-
ware mechanism called epoch barriers, devised by Condit et al. [2009], which has not been
implemented to our knowledge. However, alternative means for forcing durability could
certainly work with the NV-heaps design. NVL-C [Denny et al., 2016] took an approach
very similar to that of Coburn et al. [2011], so we omit details.
    Memaripour and Swanson [2018] describe the Breeze system, which also offers refer-
ence counting persistence over non-volatile memory. However, they handle persistent
reference count updates in an entirely deferred way. As a transaction commits, it records
what they call an activation record, which details the pointer updates performed by the
transaction. Breeze updates the actual reference counts in two phases. Phase 1 exam-
ines activation records and determines what the new reference count values should be. It
records these changes in a redo log. Phase 2 processes that redo log, making the actual
changes. In this way reference count updating is off the main path and performed in the
background. It is also recoverable/restartable. Breeze supports weak references.
    Hoseinzadeh and Swanson [2021] present Corundum, which is integrated with the Rust
programming language. Rust already supports reference counting, so extending that to
persistent objects is natural for Rust. There is no need to track references from volatile
to persistent objects because Rust can prevent their outliving the transaction that created
them. Corundum does, however, provide a version of weak references that can outlive
their creating transaction, but that become null if their referent is reclaimed. The authors
do not offer details on the durability mechanisms beyond mentioning journaling, probably
using an undo log. To facilitate reclamation of cyclic structures, they provide non-volatile
weak references as well as the volatile ones. The overall design seems well integrated with
Rust, following its design philosophy well.

Persistent mark-sweep and mark-compact
George et al. [2020] presented go-pmem, adding persistence to the Go programming lan-
guage. They employed a breadth-first mark-sweep collector. The system logs allocation

metadata, including information about where pointer fields lie within objects. In crash
recovery, that log is used to restore the metadata, which resides in volatile memory. Trans-
action processing uses an undo log. The collector extends the usual Go collector. When
tracing the persistent heap, it takes care to trace not only the current target of each pointer
in a persistent object, but also pointers in any pending undo log record of a pending trans-
action. Thus if a transaction replaces the last pointer to an object, that object will be re-
tained, which is necessary if the transaction aborts or the system crashes. Such objects will
generally be reclaimed at the following collection.
    JaphaVM [Perez et al., 2020] is a modification of JamVM [Lougher, 2014]. JaphaVM pro-
vides persistence by doing all allocations and updates using the libpmemobj library [libp-
memobj], which supports durability with an undo log. JaphaVM considers execution of
Java synchronized methods to be transactions, and also executes certain Java bytecodes
as transactions if they are executed outside of synchronized method. Garbage collec-
tion is also handled as a transaction, which can be subsumed inside an already running
transaction, or can be run asynchronously outside of mutator transactions. The JamVM
collector is stop-the-world and can be run in either mark-sweep or mark-compact modes.
    Krauter et al. [2021] present Persistent Software Transactional Memory (PSTM) for the
Haskell programming language, building on Haskell’s existing software transactional mem-
ory support. Access to the persistent heap works somewhat as in LOOM (Section 21.3),
except that rather than fetching one object at a time into volatile memory, PSTM fetches
the transitive closure of objects reachable from a PSTVar (persistent software transaction
variable) all at once. This simplifies object ‘faulting.’ Likewise, transitive closures are writ-
ten out at transaction commit. Unlike the usual Haskell collector, PSTM uses a modified
version of the Alligator collector [Gamari and Dietz, 2020] for the old generation, including
the persistent heap — a mark-sweep collector. Updates to the persistent heap are made
durable using a redo log.

Persistent copying
AutoPersist adds persistence by reachability to Java over byte-addressable non-volatile
memory [Shull et al., 2019a]. Its persistence by reachability mechanism works by leaving
behind a forwarding object for each object moved from volatile to non-volatile memory. This
technique requires dynamic forwarding checks. The system applies various techniques to
reduce the frequency of checks [Shull et al., 2019b], the details of which lie beyond our
scope. However, the collector fixes pointers to bypass such forwarding objects. Moving
objects to non-volatile memory occurs within transactions and is not part of the collector
itself, though the process of moving does trace a transitive closure of objects, similar to a
tracing collection.
    AutoPersist’s collector does stop-the-world copying collection. It first marks from
the persistent roots, to identify those objects that must remain in the persistent heap. It
then performs a copying collection, which generally moves reachable volatile objects to
volatile tospace and non-volatile objects to non-volatile tospace. However, if it encoun-
ters a volatile pointer to a non-volatile object that was not marked in the first, marking,
pass, it will copy that object to volatile tospace. This can be prevented by setting a special
‘requested non-volatile’ flag on the object.
    AutoPersist implements durability using an undo log and the cache line write-back
(clwb) and sfence instructions available on certain Intel processors.
    Wu et al. [2018] describe the Espresso system that also implements persistent Java using
byte-addressable non-volatile memory. They segregate persistent types and objects from
volatile ones, not offering persistence by reachability. On the theory that memory man-
agement policies for persistent objects should be analogous to those for old generations of
volatile heaps, Espresso only offers non-generational collection for the persistent space.

     Collection in Espresso proceeds in three phases: (i) mark from persistent roots, saving
the mark information in a bitmap; (ii) determine the new location for reachable objects; and
(iii) copy the reachable objects to their new locations, carefully. Here is what ‘carefully’
means. First, before starting to copy objects, save a snapshot of the mark bitmap and
the new location information. Second, after each object is copied, the current collection
number is written to the header of the old copy of the object. The combination of the
snapshot and the collection number timestamp makes copying restartable after a crash.
For performance, the persistent space is split into a number of separate regions, which can
be copied independently in parallel.
     Wu et al. [2020a] present a follow-on to Espresso called GCPersist. The aim of GCPersist
is to reduce the cost of saving objects persistently by doing the copying to durable storage
more in bulk, during a collection of the old generation. GCPersist can do this in a way that
maintains a single copy of each object, similar to Espresso, or it can maintain a copy also
in volatile memory, called snapshot mode. The goal of snapshot mode is to improve speed
even further when running using non-volatile memory whose read access time in their
system is noticeably slower than that of main memory DRAM. GCPersist does not intro-
duce a new collector implementation so much as put collection and persistence together
in a different way. An example application of GCPersist is the building of a read-only or
read-mostly collection of data that may take some time to build but will be more static
after initial construction.

21.5     Issues to consider
Collection of persistent heaps implemented on byte-addressable non-volatile memory is a
relatively new phenomenon. Undoubtedly, new and different ways of integrating durabil-
ity with automatic memory management will emerge. We offer the following somewhat
speculative thoughts.
    Overall durability is probably harder to provide and has a larger impact on perfor-
mance than does garbage collection, so careful design of durability mechanisms may out-
weigh efficiency of collection. This will likely remain true even if future hardware lowers
the cost of durability. Of course garbage collection must ‘play well’ with the persistence
mechanisms, suggesting that strong designs may have each rely on the strengths of the
other. Lastly, persistent heaps are likely to be large, suggesting more incrementality, both
to spread out collector work and to facilitate recovery after crashes during collection. Like-
wise, large heaps suggest investigating designs that can be parallelised.
http://taylorandfrancis.com
