
This entire volume is intended for system-software developers—programmers writing operating
systems, loaders, linkers, device drivers, or utilities that require access to system resources. These
system resources are generally available only to software running at the highest-privilege level
(CPL=0), also referred to as privileged software. Privilege levels and their interactions are fully
described in “Segment-Protection Overview” on page 105.
This chapter introduces the basic features and capabilities of the AMD64 architecture that are
available to system-software developers. The concepts include:
•   The supported address forms and how memory is organized.
•   How memory-management hardware makes use of the various address forms to access memory.
•   The processor operating modes, and how the memory-management hardware supports each of
    those modes.
•   The system-control registers used to manage system resources.
•   The interrupt and exception mechanism, and how it is used to interrupt program execution and to
    report errors.
•   Additional, miscellaneous features available to system software, including support for hardware
    multitasking, reporting machine-check exceptions, debugging software problems, and optimizing
    software performance.
Many of the legacy features and capabilities are enhanced by the AMD64 architecture to support 64-
bit operating systems and applications, while providing backward-compatibility with existing
software.

1.1          Memory Model
The AMD64 architecture memory model is designed to allow system software to manage application
software and associated data in a secure fashion. The memory model is backward-compatible with the
legacy memory model. Hardware-translation mechanisms are provided to map addresses between
virtual-memory space and physical-memory space. The translation mechanisms allow system
software to relocate applications and data transparently, either anywhere in physical-memory space, or
in areas on the system hard drive managed by the operating system.
In long mode, the AMD64 architecture implements a flat-memory model. In legacy mode, the
architecture implements all legacy memory models.

1.1.1 Memory Addressing
The AMD64 architecture supports address relocation. To do this, several types of addresses are needed
to completely describe memory organization. Specifically, four types of addresses are defined by the
AMD64 architecture:
•   Logical addresses
•   Effective addresses, or segment offsets, which are a portion of the logical address.
•   Linear (virtual) addresses
•   Physical addresses

Logical Addresses. A logical address is a reference into a segmented-address space. It is comprised
of the segment selector and the effective address. Notationally, a logical address is represented as
Logical Address = Segment Selector : Offset

The segment selector specifies an entry in either the global or local descriptor table. The specified
descriptor-table entry describes the segment location in virtual-address space, its size, and other
characteristics. The effective address is used as an offset into the segment specified by the selector.
Logical addresses are often referred to as far pointers. Far pointers are used in software addressing
when the segment reference must be explicit (i.e., a reference to a segment outside the current
segment).

Effective Addresses. The offset into a memory segment is referred to as an effective address (see
“Segmentation” on page 5 for a description of segmented memory). Effective addresses are formed by
adding together elements comprising a base value, a scaled-index value, and a displacement value.
The effective-address computation is represented by the equation
Effective Address = Base + (Scale x Index) + Displacement

The elements of an effective-address computation are defined as follows:
•   Base—A value stored in any general-purpose register.
•   Scale—A positive value of 1, 2, 4, or 8.
•   Index—A two’s-complement value stored in any general-purpose register.
•   Displacement—An 8-bit, 16-bit, or 32-bit two’s-complement value encoded as part of the
    instruction.
Effective addresses are often referred to as near pointers. A near pointer is used when the segment
selector is known implicitly or when the flat-memory model is used.
Long mode defines a 64-bit effective-address length. If a processor implementation does not support
the full 64-bit virtual-address space, the effective address must be in canonical form (see “Canonical
Address Form” on page 4).

Linear (Virtual) Addresses. The segment-selector portion of a logical address specifies a segment-
descriptor entry in either the global or local descriptor table. The specified segment-descriptor entry
contains the segment-base address, which is the starting location of the segment in linear-address
space. A linear address is formed by adding the segment-base address to the effective address
(segment offset), which creates a reference to any byte location within the supported linear-address
space. Linear addresses are often referred to as virtual addresses, and both terms are used
interchangeably throughout this document.
Linear Address = Segment Base Address + Effective Address

When the flat-memory model is used—as in 64-bit mode—a segment-base address is treated as 0. In
this case, the linear address is identical to the effective address. In long mode, linear addresses must be
in canonical address form, as described in “Canonical Address Form” on page 4.

Physical Addresses. A physical address is a reference into the physical-address space, typically
main memory. Physical addresses are translated from virtual addresses using page-translation
mechanisms. See “Paging” on page 7 for information on how the paging mechanism is used for
virtual-address to physical-address translation. When the paging mechanism is not enabled, the virtual
(linear) address is used as the physical address.

1.1.2 Memory Organization
The AMD64 architecture organizes memory into virtual memory and physical memory. Virtual-
memory and physical-memory spaces can be (and usually are) different in size. Generally, the virtual-
address space is much larger than physical-address memory. System software relocates applications
and data between physical memory and the system hard disk to make it appear that much more
memory is available than really exists. System software then uses the hardware memory-management
mechanisms to map the larger virtual-address space into the smaller physical-address space.

Virtual Memory. Software uses virtual addresses to access locations within the virtual-memory
space. System software is responsible for managing the relocation of applications and data in virtual-
memory space using segment-memory management. System software is also responsible for mapping
virtual memory to physical memory through the use of page translation. The AMD64 architecture
supports different virtual-memory sizes using the following address-translation modes:
•   Protected Mode—This mode supports 4 gigabytes of virtual-address space using 32-bit virtual
    addresses.
•   Long Mode—This mode supports 16 exabytes of virtual-address space using 64-bit virtual
    addresses. A given implementation may however support less than this, as reported by the CPUID
    feature identification facility.

Physical Memory. Physical addresses are used to directly access main memory. For a particular
computer system, the size of the available physical-address space is equal to the amount of main
memory installed in the system. The maximum amount of physical memory accessible depends on the
processor implementation and on the address-translation mode. The AMD64 architecture supports
varying physical-memory sizes using the following address-translation modes:
•   Real-Address Mode—This mode, also called real mode, supports 1 megabyte of physical-address
    space using 20-bit physical addresses. This address-translation mode is described in “Real
    Addressing” on page 10. Real mode is available only from legacy mode (see “Legacy Modes” on
    page 14).
•   Legacy Protected Mode—This mode supports several different address-space sizes, depending on
    the translation mechanism used and whether extensions to those mechanisms are enabled.
    Legacy protected mode supports 4 gigabytes of physical-address space using 32-bit physical
    addresses. Both segment translation (see “Segmentation” on page 5) and page translation (see
    “Paging” on page 7) can be used to access the physical address space, when the processor is
    running in legacy protected mode.
    When the physical-address size extensions are enabled (see “Physical-Address Extensions (PAE)
    Bit” on page 130), the page-translation mechanism can be extended to support 52-bit physical
    addresses. 52-bit physical addresses allow up to 4 petabytes of physical-address space to be
    supported. (Currently, the AMD64 architecture supports 40-bit addresses in this mode, allowing
    up to 1 terabyte of physical-address space to be supported.
•   Long Mode—This mode is unique to the AMD64 architecture. This mode supports up to 4
    petabytes of physical-address space using 52-bit physical addresses. Long mode requires the use of
    page-translation and the physical-address size extensions (PAE).

1.1.3 Canonical Address Form
Long mode defines 64 bits of virtual-address space, but processor implementations can support less.
Although some processor implementations do not use all 64 bits of the virtual address, they all check
bits 63 through the most-significant implemented bit to see if those bits are all zeros or all ones. An
address that complies with this property is in canonical address form. In most cases, a virtual-memory
reference that is not in canonical form (in either the linear or effective form of the address) causes a
general-protection exception (#GP) to occur. However, implied stack references where the stack
address is not in canonical form causes a stack exception (#SS) to occur. Implied stack references
include all push and pop instructions, and any instruction using RSP or RBP as a base register.
By checking canonical-address form, the AMD64 architecture prevents software from exploiting
unused high bits of pointers for other purposes. Software complying with canonical-address form on a
specific processor implementation can run unchanged on long-mode implementations supporting
larger virtual-address spaces.

1.2          Memory Management
Memory management consists of the methods by which addresses generated by software are translated
by segmentation and/or paging into addresses in physical memory. Memory management is not visible
to application software. It is handled by the system software and processor hardware.

1.2.1 Segmentation
Segmentation was originally created as a method by which system software could isolate software
processes (tasks), and the data used by those processes, from one another in an effort to increase the
reliability of systems running multiple processes simultaneously.
The AMD64 architecture is designed to support all forms of legacy segmentation. However, most
modern system software does not use the segmentation features available in the legacy x86
architecture. Instead, system software typically handles program and data isolation using page-level
protection. For this reason, the AMD64 architecture dispenses with multiple segments in 64-bit mode
and, instead, uses a flat-memory model. The elimination of segmentation allows new 64-bit system
software to be coded more simply, and it supports more efficient management of multi-processing than
is possible in the legacy x86 architecture.
Segmentation is, however, used in compatibility mode and legacy mode. Here, segmentation is a form
of base memory-addressing that allows software and data to be relocated in virtual-address space off
of an arbitrary base address. Software and data can be relocated in virtual-address space using one or
more variable-sized memory segments. The legacy x86 architecture provides several methods of
restricting access to segments from other segments so that software and data can be protected from
interfering with each other.
In compatibility and legacy modes, up to 16,383 unique segments can be defined. The base-address
value, segment size (called a limit), protection, and other attributes for each segment are contained in a
data structure called a segment descriptor. Collections of segment descriptors are held in descriptor
tables. Specific segment descriptors are referenced or selected from the descriptor table using a
segment selector register. Six segment-selector registers are available, providing access to as many as
six segments at a time.
Figure 1-1 on page 6 shows an example of segmented memory. Segmentation is described in
Chapter 4, “Segmented Virtual Memory.”

                                                                               Virtual Address
                                                                                    Space

        Effective Address

                                            Descriptor Table
              Selectors                                                        Virtual Address

                  CS                                    Limit
                  DS                             Base
                  ES

                  FS
                                                                            Segment
                 GS                                     Limit
                                                 Base
                  SS

                                                                           Segment

                                                                                            513-201.eps

Figure 1-1.    Segmented-Memory Model

Flat Segmentation. One special case of segmented memory is the flat-memory model. In the legacy
flat-memory model, all segment-base addresses have a value of 0, and the segment limits are fixed at
4 Gbytes. Segmentation cannot be disabled but use of the flat-memory model effectively disables
segment translation. The result is a virtual address that equals the effective address. Figure 1-2 on
page 7 shows an example of the flat-memory model.
Software running in 64-bit mode automatically uses the flat-memory model. In 64-bit mode, the
segment base is treated as if it were 0, and the segment limit is ignored. This allows an effective
addresses to access the full virtual-address space supported by the processor.

                                                         Virtual Address
                                                              Space

                           Effective Address              Virtual Address

                                                      Flat Segment

                                                                       513-202.eps

Figure 1-2. Flat Memory Model

1.2.2 Paging
Paging allows software and data to be relocated in physical-address space using fixed-size blocks
called physical pages. The legacy x86 architecture supports three different physical-page sizes of
4 Kbytes, 2 Mbytes, and 4 Mbytes. As with segment translation, access to physical pages by lesser-
privileged software can be restricted.
Page translation uses a hierarchical data structure called a page-translation table to translate virtual
pages into physical-pages. The number of levels in the translation-table hierarchy can be as few as one
or as many as four, depending on the physical-page size and processor operating mode. Translation
tables are aligned on 4-Kbyte boundaries. Physical pages must be aligned on 4-Kbyte, 2-Mbyte, or 4-
Mbyte boundaries, depending on the physical-page size.
Each table in the translation hierarchy is indexed by a portion of the virtual-address bits. The entry
referenced by the table index contains a pointer to the base address of the next-lower-level table in the
translation hierarchy. In the case of the lowest-level table, its entry points to the physical-page base
address. The physical page is then indexed by the least-significant bits of the virtual address to yield
the physical address.
Figure 1-3 on page 8 shows an example of paged memory with three levels in the translation-table
hierarchy. Paging is described in Chapter 5, “Page Translation and Protection.”

                                                                                Physical Address
                                        Virtual Address                              Space

                                                                                 Physical Address

Table 1                  Table 2                 Table 3

                            Page Translation Tables
                                                                               Physical Page

                              Page Table Base Address

                                                                                        513-203.eps

Figure 1-3.        Paged Memory Model

Software running in long mode is required to have page translation enabled.

1.2.3 Mixing Segmentation and Paging
Memory-management software can combine the use of segmented memory and paged memory.
Because segmentation cannot be disabled, paged-memory management requires some minimum
initialization of the segmentation resources. Paging can be completely disabled, so segmented-
memory management does not require initialization of the paging resources.
Segments can range in size from a single byte to 4 Gbytes in length. It is therefore possible to map
multiple segments to a single physical page and to map multiple physical pages to a single segment.
Alignment between segment and physical-page boundaries is not required, but memory-management
software is simplified when segment and physical-page boundaries are aligned.

The simplest, most efficient method of memory management is the flat-memory model. In the flat-
memory model, all segment base addresses have a value of 0 and the segment limits are fixed at 4
Gbytes. The segmentation mechanism is still used each time a memory reference is made, but because
virtual addresses are identical to effective addresses in this model, the segmentation mechanism is
effectively ignored. Translation of virtual (or effective) addresses to physical addresses takes place
using the paging mechanism only.
Because 64-bit mode disables segmentation, it uses a flat, paged-memory model for memory
management. The 4 Gbyte segment limit is ignored in 64-bit mode. Figure 1-4 shows an example of
this model.

                                       Virtual Address                                 Physical Address
                                            Space                                           Space

                                                                                        Physical Address
          Effective Address            Virtual Address

                                                          Page Translation Tables

                                                                                       Page Frame

                                      Flat Segment

                                                           Page Table Base Address
                                                                                                    513-204.eps

Figure 1-4.     64-Bit Flat, Paged-Memory Model

1.2.4 Real Addressing
Real addressing is a legacy-mode form of address translation used in real mode. This simplified form
of address translation is backward compatible with 8086-processor effective-to-physical address
translation. In this mode, 16-bit effective addresses are mapped to 20-bit physical addresses, providing
a 1-Mbyte physical-address space.
Segment selectors are used in real-address translation, but not as an index into a descriptor table.
Instead, the 16-bit segment-selector value is shifted left by 4 bits to form a 20-bit segment-base
address. The 16-bit effective address is added to this 20-bit segment base address to yield a 20-bit
physical address. If the sum of the segment base and effective address carries over into bit 20, that bit
can be optionally truncated to mimic the 20-bit address wrapping of the 8086 processor by using the
A20M# input signal to mask the A20 address bit.
A20 address bit masking should only be used in real mode (see next section for information on real
mode). Use in other modes may result in address translation errors.
Real-address translation supports a 1-Mbyte physical-address space using up to 64K segments aligned
on 16-byte boundaries. Each segment is exactly 64 Kbytes long. Figure 1-5 shows an example of real-
address translation.

                                                                                      Selectors
                                                                                           CS

                                                                                           DS

                                                                                           ES
              15                       0
                                                                                           FS
                   Effective Address
                                                                                           GS

                                                                                           SS

                      19                              0            19                      0

                           0000   Effective Address                      Selector   0000

                                                             +

                                             19                          0

                                                      Physical Address

                                                                                                    513-205.eps

Figure 1-5.             Real-Address Memory Model

1.3                Operating Modes
The legacy x86 architecture provides four operating modes or environments that support varying
forms of memory management, virtual-memory and physical-memory sizes, and protection:
•      Real Mode.
•      Protected Mode.
•      Virtual-8086 Mode.
•      System Management Mode.
The AMD64 architecture supports all these legacy modes, and it adds a new operating mode called
long mode. Table 1-1 shows the differences between long mode and legacy mode. Software can move
between all supported operating modes as shown in Figure 1-6 on page 12. Each operating mode is
described in the following sections.

Table 1-1.          Operating Modes
                                                                              Defaults1                            Maximum
                                       System        Application                                    Register
                                                                      Address       Operand                         GPR
                Mode                  Software       Recompile
                                      Required        Required          Size          Size         Extensions2      Width
                                                                       (bits)        (bits)                         (bits)

                64-Bit                                    yes            64                            yes              64
    Long        Mode                    New                                               32
    Mode3                             64-bit OS                          32
                Compatibility                             no                                           no               32
                Mode                                                     16               16
                                                                         32               32
                Protected Mode                                                                                          32
                                       Legacy                            16               16
    Legacy                            32-bit OS
                Virtual-8086                              no                                           no
    Mode        Mode
                                                                         16               16                            32
                                       Legacy
                Real Mode             16-bit OS
    Note:
       1. Defaults can be overridden in most modes using an instruction prefix or system control bit.
       2. Register extensions include access to the upper eight general-purpose and YMM/XMM registers, uniform access to lower 8
          bits of all GPRs, and access to the upper 32 bits of the GPRs.
       3. Long mode supports only x86 protected mode. It does not support x86 real mode or virtual-8086 mode.

                                               Long Mode

                                                     CS.L=1                                                     SMI#
                               64-bit                                  Compatibility
                               Mode                                      Mode                                   RSM
                                                     CS.L=0

                                               CS.L=0

                             EFER.LME=1, CR4.PAE=1          CR0.PG=0
                             then CR0.PG=1                  then EFER.LME=0
                                                                                         RSM             SMI#
                                         RSM                       SMI#
                                                                                                                        Reset
                                                                    EFLAGS.VM=0
                                                                                               Virtual
                                                 Protected
                                                                                               8086
                                                   Mode
                                                                                               Mode
                                                                    EFLAGS.VM=1

               SMI#    RSM
                                          CR0.PE=1          CR0.PE=0             Reset
                               Reset

                  System
                                                     Real                 SMI#
                Management
                                                     Mode                 RSM
                   Mode
                                 Reset                                                                    513-206.eps

Figure 1-6.            Operating Modes of the AMD64 Architecture

1.3.1 Long Mode
Long mode consists of two submodes: 64-bit mode and compatibility mode. 64-bit mode supports
several new features, including the ability to address 64-bit virtual-address space. Compatibility mode
provides binary compatibility with existing 16-bit and 32-bit applications when running on 64-bit
system software.
Throughout this document, references to long mode refer collectively to both 64-bit mode and
compatibility mode. If a function is specific to either 64-bit mode or compatibility mode, then those
specific names are used instead of the name long mode.
Before enabling and activating long mode, system software must first enable protected mode. The
process of enabling and activating long mode is described in Chapter 14, “Processor Initialization and

Long Mode Activation.” Long mode features are described throughout this document, where
applicable.

1.3.2 64-Bit Mode
64-bit mode, a submode of long mode, provides support for 64-bit system software and applications by
adding the following features:
•    64-bit virtual addresses (processor implementations can have fewer).
•    Access to General Purpose Register bits 63:32
•    Access to additional registers through the REX, VEX, and XOP instruction prefixes:
     - eight additional GPRs (R8–R15)
     - eight additional Streaming SIMD Extension (SSE) registers (YMM/XMM8–15)
•    64-bit instruction pointer (RIP).
•    New RIP-relative data-addressing mode.
•    Flat-segment address space with single code, data, and stack space.
The mode is enabled by the system software on an individual code-segment basis. Although code
segments are used to enable and disable 64-bit mode, the legacy segmentation mechanism is largely
disabled. Page translation is required for memory management purposes. Because 64-bit mode
supports a 64-bit virtual-address space, it requires 64-bit system software and development tools.
In 64-bit mode, the default address size is 64 bits, and the default operand size is 32 bits. The defaults
can be overridden on an instruction-by-instruction basis using instruction prefixes. A new REX prefix
is introduced for specifying a 64-bit operand size and the new registers.

1.3.3 Compatibility Mode
Compatibility mode, a submode of long mode, allows system software to implement binary
compatibility with existing 16-bit and 32-bit x86 applications. It allows these applications to run,
without recompilation, under 64-bit system software in long mode, as shown in Table 1-1 on page 11.
In compatibility mode, applications can only access the first 4 Gbytes of virtual-address space.
Standard x86 instruction prefixes toggle between 16-bit and 32-bit address and operand sizes.
Compatibility mode, like 64-bit mode, is enabled by system software on an individual code-segment
basis. Unlike 64-bit mode, however, segmentation functions the same as in the legacy-x86
architecture, using 16-bit or 32-bit protected-mode semantics. From an application viewpoint,
compatibility mode looks like a legacy protected-mode environment. From a system-software
viewpoint, the long-mode mechanisms are used for address translation, interrupt and exception
handling, and system data-structures.

1.3.4 Legacy Modes
Legacy mode consists of three submodes: real mode, protected mode, and virtual-8086 mode.
Protected mode can be either paged or unpaged. Legacy mode preserves binary compatibility not only
with existing x86 16-bit and 32-bit applications but also with existing x86 16-bit and 32-bit system
software.

Real Mode. In this mode, also called real-address mode, the processor supports a physical-memory
space of 1 Mbyte and operand sizes of 16 bits (default) or 32 bits (with instruction prefixes). Interrupt
handling and address generation are nearly identical to the 80286 processor's real mode. Paging is not
supported. All software runs at privilege level 0.
Real mode is entered after reset or processor power-up. The mode is not supported when the processor
is operating in long mode because long mode requires that paged protected mode be enabled.

Protected Mode. In this mode, the processor supports virtual-memory and physical-memory spaces
of 4 Gbytes and operand sizes of 16 or 32 bits. All segment translation, segment protection, and
hardware multitasking functions are available. System software can use segmentation to relocate
effective addresses in virtual-address space. If paging is not enabled, virtual addresses are equal to
physical addresses. Paging can be optionally enabled to allow translation of virtual addresses to
physical addresses and to use the page-based memory-protection mechanisms.
In protected mode, software runs at privilege levels 0, 1, 2, or 3. Typically, application software runs at
privilege level 3, the system software runs at privilege levels 0 and 1, and privilege level 2 is available
to system software for other uses. The 16-bit version of this mode was first introduced in the 80286
processor.

Virtual-8086 Mode. Virtual-8086 mode allows system software to run 16-bit real-mode software on a
virtualized-8086 processor. In this mode, software written for the 8086, 8088, 80186, or 80188
processor can run as a privilege-level-3 task under protected mode. The processor supports a virtual-
memory space of 1 Mbytes and operand sizes of 16 bits (default) or 32 bits (with instruction prefixes),
and it uses real-mode address translation.
Virtual-8086 mode is enabled by setting the virtual-machine bit in the EFLAGS register
(EFLAGS.VM). EFLAGS.VM can only be set or cleared when the EFLAGS register is loaded from
the TSS as a result of a task switch, or by executing an IRET instruction from privileged software. The
POPF instruction cannot be used to set or clear the EFLAGS.VM bit.
Virtual-8086 mode is not supported when the processor is operating in long mode. When long mode is
enabled, any attempt to enable virtual-8086 mode is silently ignored.

1.3.5 System Management Mode (SMM)
System management mode (SMM) is an operating mode designed for system-control activities that are
typically transparent to conventional system software. Power management is one popular use for
system management mode. SMM is primarily targeted for use by platform firmware and specialized
low-level device drivers. The code and data for SMM are stored in the SMM memory area, which is
isolated from main memory by the SMM output signal.
SMM is entered by way of a system management interrupt (SMI). Upon recognizing an SMI, the
processor enters SMM and switches to a separate address space where the SMM handler is located and
executes. In SMM, the processor supports real-mode addressing with 4 Gbyte segment limits and
default operand, address, and stack sizes of 16 bits (prefixes can be used to override these defaults).

1.4           System Registers
Figure 1-7 on page 16 shows the system registers defined for the AMD64 architecture. System
software uses these registers to, among other things, manage the processor operating environment,
define system resource characteristics, and to monitor software execution. With the exception of the
RFLAGS register, system registers can be read and written only from privileged software.
Except for the descriptor-table registers and task register, the AMD64 architecture defines all system
registers to be 64 bits wide. The descriptor table and task registers are defined by the AMD64
architecture to include 64-bit base-address fields, in addition to their other fields.
As shown in Figure 1-7 on page 16, the system registers include:
•    Control Registers—These registers are used to control system operation and some system features.
     See “System-Control Registers” on page 41 for details.
•    System-Flags Register—The RFLAGS register contains system-status flags and masks. It is also
     used to enable virtual-8086 mode and to control application access to I/O devices and interrupts.
     See “RFLAGS Register” on page 52 for details.
•    Descriptor-Table Registers—These registers contain the location and size of descriptor tables
     stored in memory. Descriptor tables hold segmentation data structures used in protected mode. See
     “Descriptor Tables” on page 83 for details.
•    Task Register—The task register contains the location and size in memory of the task-state
     segment. The hardware-multitasking mechanism uses the task-state segment to hold state
     information for a given task. The TSS also holds other data, such as the inner-level stack pointers
     used when changing to a higher privilege level. See “Task Register” on page 371 for details.
•    Debug Registers—Debug registers are used to control the software-debug mechanism, and to
     report information back to a debug utility or application. See “Debug Registers” on page 392 for
     details.

        Control Registers            Extended-Feature-Enable Register       Memory-Typing Registers
              CR0                                EFER                              MTRRcap
              CR2                                                                MTRRdefType
              CR3                     System-Configuration Register            MTRRphysBasen
              CR4                               SYSCFG                         MTRRphysMaskn
              CR8                                                                  MTRRfixn
                                        System-Linkage Registers                      PAT
                                                 STAR                              TOP_MEM
     System-Flags Register
                                                 LSTAR                            TOP_MEM2
            RFLAGS
                                                 CSTAR
                                                                         Performance-Monitoring Registers
                                                SFMASK
                                                FS.base                               TSC
        Debug Registers
                                                GS.base                           PerfEvtSeln
              DR0
                                                                                    PerfCtrn
              DR1                            KernelGSbase
              DR2                           SYSENTER_CS
              DR3                          SYSENTER_ESP                     Machine-Check Registers
              DR6                           SYSENTER_EIP                           MCG_CAP

              DR7                                                                 MCG_STAT

                                        Debug-Extension Registers                  MCG_CTL
                                                                                   MCi_CTL
                                                DebugCtl
    Descriptor-Table Registers                                                   MCi_STATUS
                                           LastBranchFromIP
             GDTR                                                                 MCi_ADDR
                                            LastBranchToIP
              IDTR                                                                 MCi_MISC
                                             LastIntFromIP
              LDTR
                                               LastIntToIP

          Task Register                                                      Model-Specific Registers
               TR
                                                                                       System_Registers_Diag.eps

Figure 1-7. System Registers

Also defined as system registers are a number of model-specific registers included in the AMD64
architectural definition, and shown in Figure 1-7:
•    Extended-Feature-Enable Register—The EFER register is used to enable and report status on
     special features not controlled by the CRn control registers. In particular, EFER is used to control
     activation of long mode. See “Extended Feature Enable Register (EFER)” on page 56 for more
     information.

•    System-Configuration Register—The SYSCFG register is used to enable and configure system-
     bus features. See “System Configuration Register (SYSCFG)” on page 61 for more information.
•    System-Linkage Registers—These registers are used by system-linkage instructions to specify
     operating-system entry points, stack locations, and pointers into system-data structures. See “Fast
     System Call and Return” on page 174 for details.
•    Memory-Typing Registers—Memory-typing registers can be used to characterize (type) system
     memory. Typing memory gives system software control over how instructions and data are cached,
     and how memory reads and writes are ordered. See “MTRRs” on page 219 for details.
•    Debug-Extension Registers—These registers control additional software-debug reporting features.
     See “Debug Registers” on page 392 for details.
•    Performance-Monitoring Registers—Performance-monitoring registers are used to count
     processor and system events, or the duration of events. See “Performance Monitoring Counters”
     on page 412 for more information.
•    Machine-Check Registers—The machine-check registers control the response of the processor to
     non-recoverable failures. They are also used to report information on such failures back to system
     utilities designed to respond to such failures. See “Machine Check Architecture MSRs” on
     page 302 for more information.

1.5           System-Data Structures
Figure 1-8 on page 18 shows the system-data structures defined for the AMD64 architecture. System-
data structures are created and maintained by system software for use by the processor when running
in protected mode. A processor running in protected mode uses these data structures to manage
memory and protection, and to store program-state information when an interrupt or task switch
occurs.

               Segment Descriptors (Contained in Descriptor Tables)                           Task-State Segment
                      Code                              Gate

                      Stack                      Task-State Segment

                       Data                     Local-Descriptor Table

       Descriptor Tables

             Global-Descriptor Table               Interrupt-Descriptor Table                Local-Descriptor Table
                     Descriptor                           Gate Descriptor                           Descriptor
                     Descriptor                           Gate Descriptor                           Descriptor
                        ...                                     ...                                    ...
                     Descriptor                           Gate Descriptor                           Descriptor

       Page-Translation Tables

           Page-Map Level-4            Page-Directory Pointer               Page Directory              Page Table

                                                                                                                      513-261.eps

Figure 1-8. System-Data Structures

As shown in Figure 1-8, the system-data structures include:
•   Descriptors—A descriptor provides information about a segment to the processor, such as its
    location, size and privilege level. A special type of descriptor, called a gate, is used to provide a
    code selector and entry point for a software routine. Any number of descriptors can be defined, but
    system software must at a minimum create a descriptor for the currently executing code segment
    and stack segment. See “Legacy Segment Descriptors” on page 89, and “Long-Mode Segment
    Descriptors” on page 98 for complete information on descriptors.
•   Descriptor Tables—As the name implies, descriptor tables hold descriptors. The global-descriptor
    table holds descriptors available to all programs, while a local-descriptor table holds descriptors
    used by a single program. The interrupt-descriptor table holds only gate descriptors used by

     interrupt handlers. System software must initialize the global-descriptor and interrupt-descriptor
     tables, while use of the local-descriptor table is optional. See “Descriptor Tables” on page 83 for
     more information.
•    Task-State Segment—The task-state segment is a special segment for holding processor-state
     information for a specific program, or task. It also contains the stack pointers used when switching
     to more-privileged programs. The hardware multitasking mechanism uses the state information in
     the segment when suspending and resuming a task. Calls and interrupts that switch stacks cause
     the stack pointers to be read from the task-state segment. System software must create at least one
     task-state segment, even if hardware multitasking is not used. See “Legacy Task-State Segment”
     on page 373, and “64-Bit Task State Segment” on page 377 for details.
•    Page-Translation Tables—Use of page translation is optional in protected mode, but it is required
     in long mode. A four-level page-translation data structure is provided to allow long-mode
     operating systems to translate a 64-bit virtual-address space into a 52-bit physical-address space.
     Legacy protected mode can use two- or three-level page-translation data structures. See “Page
     Translation Overview” on page 128 for more information on page translation.

1.6           Interrupts
The AMD64 architecture provides a mechanism for the processor to automatically suspend (interrupt)
software execution and transfer control to an interrupt handler when an interrupt or exception occurs.
An interrupt handler is privileged software designed to identify and respond to the cause of an
interrupt or exception, and return control back to the interrupted software. Interrupts can be caused
when system hardware signals an interrupt condition using one of the external-interrupt signals on the
processor. Interrupts can also be caused by software that executes an interrupt instruction. Exceptions
occur when the processor detects an abnormal condition as a result of executing an instruction. The
term “interrupts” as used throughout this volume includes both interrupts and exceptions when the
distinction is unnecessary.
System software not only sets up the interrupt handlers, but it must also create and initialize the data
structures the processor uses to execute an interrupt handler when an interrupt occurs. The data
structures include the code-segment descriptors for the interrupt-handler software and any data-
segment descriptors for data and stack accesses. Interrupt-gate descriptors must also be supplied.
Interrupt gates point to interrupt-handler code-segment descriptors, and the entry point in an interrupt
handler. Interrupt gates are stored in the interrupt-descriptor table. The code-segment and data-
segment descriptors are stored in the global-descriptor table and, optionally, the local-descriptor table.
When an interrupt occurs, the processor uses the interrupt vector to find the appropriate interrupt gate
in the interrupt-descriptor table. The gate points to the interrupt-handler code segment and entry point,
and the processor transfers control to that location. Before invoking the interrupt handler, the
processor saves information required to return to the interrupted program. For details on how the
processor transfers control to interrupt handlers, see “Legacy Protected-Mode Interrupt Control
Transfers” on page 271, and “Long-Mode Interrupt Control Transfers” on page 282.

Refer to “Vectors” on page 246 for a description of each interrupt, and a description of the interrupt
mechanism and exception.

1.7           Additional System-Programming Facilities
1.7.1 Hardware Multitasking
A task is any program that the processor can execute, suspend, and later resume executing at the point
of suspension. During the time a task is suspended, other tasks are allowed to execute. Each task has its
own execution space, consisting of a code segment, data segments, and a stack segment for each
privilege level. Tasks can also have their own virtual-memory environment managed by the page-
translation mechanism. The state information defining this execution space is stored in the task-state
segment (TSS) maintained for each task.
Support for hardware multitasking is provided by implementations of the AMD64 architecture when
software is running in legacy mode. Hardware multitasking provides automated mechanisms for
switching tasks, saving the execution state of the suspended task, and restoring the execution state of
the resumed task. When hardware multitasking is used to switch tasks, the processor takes the
following actions:
•   The processor automatically suspends execution of the task, allowing any executing instructions to
    complete and save their results.
•   The execution state of a task is saved in the task TSS.
•   The execution state of a new task is loaded into the processor from its TSS.
•   The processor begins executing the new task at the location specified in the new task TSS.
Use of hardware-multitasking features is optional in legacy mode. Generally, modern operating
systems do not use the hardware-multitasking features, and instead perform task management entirely
in software. Long mode does not support hardware multitasking at all.
Whether hardware multitasking is used or not, system software must create and initialize at least one
task-state segment data-structure. This requirement holds for both long-mode and legacy-mode
software. The single task-state segment holds critical pieces of the task execution environment and is
referenced during certain control transfers.
Detailed information on hardware multitasking is available in Chapter 12, “Task Management,” along
with a full description of the requirements that must be met in initializing a task-state segment when
hardware multitasking is not used.

1.7.2 Machine Check
Implementations of the AMD64 architecture support the machine-check exception. This exception is
useful in system applications with stringent requirements for reliability, availability, and serviceability.
The exception allows specialized system-software utilities to report hardware errors that are generally

severe and non-recoverable. Providing the capability to report such errors can allow complex system
problems to be pinpointed rapidly.
The machine-check exception is described in Chapter 9, “Machine Check Architecture.” Much of the
error-reporting capabilities is implementation dependent. For more information, developers of
machine-check error-reporting software should refer to the BIOS and Kernel Developer’s Guide
(BKDG) or Processor Programming Reference Manual (PPR) or applicable to your product.

1.7.3 Software Debugging
A software-debugging mechanism is provided in hardware to help software developers quickly isolate
programming errors. This capability can be used to debug system software and application software
alike. Only privileged software can access the debugging facilities. Generally, software-debug support
is provided by a privileged application program rather than by the operating system itself.
The facilities supported by the AMD64 architecture allow debugging software to perform the
following:
•    Set breakpoints on specific instructions within a program.
•    Set breakpoints on an instruction-address match.
•    Set breakpoints on a data-address match.
•    Set breakpoints on specific I/O-port addresses.
•    Set breakpoints to occur on task switches when hardware multitasking is used.
•    Single step an application instruction-by-instruction.
•    Single step only branches and interrupts.
•    Record a history of branches and interrupts taken by a program.
The debugging facilities are fully described in “Software-Debug Resources” on page 391. Some
processors provide additional, implementation-specific debug support. For more information, refer to
the BIOS and Kernel Developer’s Guide (BKDG) or Processor Programming Reference Manual
(PPR) applicable to your product.

1.7.4 Performance Monitoring
For many software developers, the ability to identify and eliminate performance bottlenecks from a
program is nearly as important as quickly isolating programming errors. Implementations of the
AMD64 architecture provide hardware performance-monitoring resources that can be used by special
software applications to identify such bottlenecks. Non-privileged software can access the
performance monitoring facilities, but only if privileged software grants that access.
The performance-monitoring facilities allow the counting of events, or the duration of events.
Performance-analysis software can use the data to calculate the frequency of certain events, or the time
spent performing specific activities. That information can be used to suggest areas for improvement
and the types of optimizations that are helpful.

The performance-monitoring facilities are fully described in “Performance Monitoring Counters” on
page 412. The specific events that can be monitored are generally implementation specific. For more
information, refer to the BIOS and Kernel Developer’s Guide (BKDG) or Processor Programming
Reference Manual (PPR) applicable to your product.

