
14           Processor Initialization and Long Mode
             Activation
This chapter describes the hardware actions taken following a processor reset and the steps that must
be taken to initialize processor resources and activate long mode. In some cases the actions required
are implementation-specific with references made to the appropriate implementation-specific
documentation.

14.1         Processor Initialization
System logic can initialize the processor in either of two ways. One method, called RESET, is usually
initiated by the assertion of an external signal (typically designated RESET#). The other method,
called INIT, is typically initiated by another processor by means of an INIT interprocessor interrupt
(IPI). See “Interprocessor Interrupts (IPI)” on page 664 for more information.
Both initialization techniques place the processor in real mode and initialize processor resources to a
known, consistent state from which software can begin execution. The processor begins execution
when the RESET# pin is deasserted or the INIT state is exited.
The RESET method places the processor in a known state and prepares it to begin execution in real
mode. The INIT method is similar except it does not modify the state of certain registers. See Section
14.1.3 on page 502 for a comparison of these initialization methods.
System logic ensures that the processor transitions through the RESET state whenever power is
reapplied after a planned or unplanned interruption. A RESET can also be performed when power is
stable. An INIT can be performed at any time after the processor is powered up.

14.1.1 Built-In Self Test (BIST)
An optional built-in self-test can be performed after the processor is reset. The mechanism for
triggering the BIST is implementation-specific, and can be found in the hardware documentation for
the implementation. The number of processor cycles BIST can consume before completing is also
implementation-specific but typically consumes several million cycles.
BIST can be used by system implementations to assist in verifying system integrity, thereby improving
system reliability, availability, and serviceability. The internal BIST hardware generally tests all
internal array structures for errors. These structures can include (but are not limited to):
•   All internal caches, including the tag arrays as well as the data arrays.
•   All TLBs.
•   Internal ROMs, such as the microcode ROM and floating-point constant ROM.
•   Branch-prediction structures.

EAX is loaded with zero if BIST completes without detecting errors. If any hardware faults are
detected during BIST, a non-zero value is loaded into EAX.

14.1.2 Clock Multiplier Selection
The internal processor clock runs at some multiple of the system clock. The processor-to-system clock
multiple does not have to be fixed by a processor implementation but instead can be programmable
through hardware or software, or some combination of the two. For information on selecting the
processor-clock multiplier, see the BIOS and Kernel Developer’s Guide (BKDG) or Processor
Programming Reference Manual (PPR) applicable to your product.

14.1.3 Processor Initialization State
Table 14-1 shows the initial processor state following either RESET or INIT. Except as indicated,
processor resources generally are set to the same value after either RESET or INIT.

Table 14-1. Initial Processor State
        Processor Resource                   Value After RESET                      Value After INIT
                                                                            CD and NW are unchanged
CR0                               0000_0000_6000_0010h                      Bit 4 (reserved) = 1
                                                                            All others = 0
CR2, CR3, CR4                     0
CR8                               0                                         0
RFLAGS                            0000_0000_0000_0002h
EFER                              0
RIP                               0000_0000_0000_FFF0h
                                  Selector = F000h
                                  Base = 0000_0000_FFFF_0000h
CS
                                  Limit = FFFFh
                                  Attributes = See Table 14-2 on page 504
                                  Selector = 0000h
                                  Base = 0
DS, ES, FS, GS, SS
                                  Limit = FFFFh
                                  Attributes = See Table 14-2 on page 504
                                  Base = 0
GDTR, IDTR
                                  Limit = FFFFh
                                  Selector = 0000h
                                  Base = 0
LDTR, TR
                                  Limit = FFFFh
                                  Attributes = See Table 14-2 on page 504
                                  0
RAX                                                                         0
                                  (non-zero if BIST is run and fails)

Table 14-1. Initial Processor State (continued)
        Processor Resource                 Value After RESET                       Value After INIT
                                   Family/Model/Stepping, including extended family and extended model—see
RDX
                                   “Processor Implementation Information” on page 505
RBX, RCX, RBP, RSP, RDI, RSI,
R8, R9, R10, R11, R12, R13, R14,   0
R15
                                   FPR0–FPR7 = 0
                                   Control Word = 0040h
                                   Status Word = 0000h
                                   Tag Word = 5555h
x87 Floating-Point State           Instruction CS = 0000h                Not modified
                                   Instruction Offset = 0
                                   x87 Instruction Opcode = 0
                                   Data-Operand DS = 0000h
                                   Data-Operand Offset = 0
64-Bit Media State                 MMX0–MMX7 = 0                         Not modified
                                   XMM0–XMM15 = 0
SSE State                                                                Not modified
                                   MXCSR = 1F80h
                                   See “Memory-Typing MSRs” on
Memory-Type Range Registers                                              Not modified
                                   page 752
                                   See “Machine-Check MSRs” on
Machine-Check Registers                                        Not modified
                                   page 754
DR0, DR1, DR2, DR3                 0
DR6                                0000_0000_FFFF_0FF0h
DR7                                0000_0000_0000_0400h
Time-Stamp Counter                 0                                     Not modified
                                   See “Performance-Monitoring
Performance-Monitor Resources                                            Not modified
                                   MSRs” on page 756
                                   See “MSR Cross-Reference” on
Other Model-Specific Registers                                  Not modified
                                   page 741
Instruction and Data Caches
                                   Invalidated                           Not modified
Instruction and Data TLBs
APIC                               Disabled, see Table 16-2 on page 654. Enabled, see Table 16-2 on page 654.
SMRAM Base Address (SMBASE)        0003_0000h                            Not modified
XCR0                               0000_0000_0000_0001h                  Not modified
PKRU                               0000_0000h                            Not modified

Table 14-2 on page 504 shows the initial state of the segment-register attributes (located in the hidden
portion of the segment registers) following either RESET or INIT.

Table 14-2.         Initial State of Segment-Register Attributes
                    Attribute           Value (Binary)                  Description
              G                        0                 Byte Granularity
              D/B                      0                 16-Bit Segment
              L (CS Only)              0                 Legacy-Mode Segment
              P                        1                 Segment is Present
              DPL                      00                Privilege-Level 0
                            Code       S=1
                                                         Executable/Readable Code Segment
                            Segment    Type = 1010
                            Data       S=1
                                                         Read/Write Data Segment
                            Segment    Type = 0010
              S and Type
                                       S=0
                            LDTR                         LDT
                                       Type = 0010
                                       S=0
                            TR                           Busy 16-Bit TSS
                                       Type = 0011

14.1.4 Multiple Processor Initialization
Following reset in multiprocessor configurations, the processors use a multiple-processor
initialization protocol to negotiate which processor becomes the bootstrap processor. This bootstrap
processor then executes the system initialization code while the remaining processors wait for
software initialization to complete. For further information, see the documentation for particular
implementations of the architecture.

14.1.5 Fetching the First Instruction
After a RESET or INIT, the processor is operating in 16-bit real mode. Normally within real mode, the
code-segment base-address is formed by shifting the CS-selector value left four bits. The base address
is then added to the value in EIP to form the physical address into memory. As a result, the processor
can only address the first 1 Mbyte of memory when in real mode.
However, immediately following RESET or INIT, the CS-selector register is loaded with F000h, but
the CS base-address is not formed by left-shifting the selector. Instead, the CS base-address is
initialized to FFFF_0000h. EIP is initialized to FFF0h. Therefore, the first instruction fetched from
memory is located at physical-address FFFF_FFF0h (FFFF_0000h + 0000_FFF0h).
The CS base-address remains at this initial value until the CS-selector register is loaded by software.
This can occur as a result of executing a far jump instruction or call instruction, for example. When CS
is loaded by software, the new base-address value is established as defined for real mode (by left
shifting the selector value four bits).

14.2         Hardware Configuration
14.2.1 Processor Implementation Information
Software can read processor-identification information from the EDX register immediately following
RESET or INIT. This information can be used to initialize software to perform processor-specific
functions. The information stored in EDX is defined as follows:
•   Stepping ID (bits 3:0)—This field identifies the processor-revision level.
•   Extended Model (bits 19:16) and Model (bits 7:4)—These fields combine to differentiate
    processor models within a instruction family. For example, two processors may share the same
    microarchitecture but differ in their feature set. Such processors are considered different models
    within the same instruction family. This is a split field, comprising an extended-model portion in
    bits 19:16 with a legacy portion in bits 7:4
•   Extended Family (bits 27:20) and Family (bits 11:8)—These fields combine to differentiate
    processors by their microarchitecture.
The CPUID instruction can be used to obtain the same information. This is done by executing CPUID
with either function 1 or function 8000_0001h. Additional information about the processor and the
features supported can be gathered using CPUID with other feature codes. See Section 3.3, “Processor
Feature Identification,” on page 72 for additional information.

14.2.2 Enabling Internal Caches
Following a RESET (but not an INIT), all instruction and data caches are disabled, and their contents
are invalidated (the MOESI state is set to the invalid state). Software can enable these caches by
clearing the cache-disable bit (CR0.CD) to zero (RESET sets this bit to 1). Software can further refine
caching based on individual pages and memory regions. Refer to “Cache Control Mechanisms” on
page 208 for more information on cache control.

Memory-Type Range Registers (MTRRs). Following a RESET (but not an INIT), the
MTRRdefType register is cleared to 0, which disables the MTRR mechanism. The variable-range and
fixed-range MTRR registers are not initialized and are therefore in an undefined state. Before enabling
the MTRR mechanism, the initialization software (usually platform firmware) must load these
registers with a known value to prevent unexpected results. Clearing these registers, for example, sets
memory to the uncacheable (UC) type.

14.2.3 Initializing Media and x87 Processor State
Some resources used by x87 floating-point instructions and media instructions must be initialized by
software before being used. Initialization software can use the CPUID instruction to determine
whether the processor supports these instructions, and then initialize their resources as appropriate.

x87 Floating-Point State Initialization. Table 14-3 on page 506 shows the differences between the
initial x87 floating-point state following a RESET and the state established by the FINIT/FNINIT
instruction. An INIT does not modify the x87 floating-point state. The initialization software can

execute an FINIT or FNINIT instruction to prepare the x87 floating-point unit for use by application
software. The FINIT and FNINIT instructions have no effect on the 64-bit media state.

             Table 14-3.       x87 Floating-Point State Initialization
                x87 Floating-Point                                       FINIT/FNINIT
                                                 RESET
                    Resource                                              Instructions
              FPR0–FPR7                0                           Not modified
                                       0040h                       037Fh
                                       • Round to nearest          • Round to nearest
              Control Word
                                       • Single precision          • Extended precision
                                       • Unmask all exceptions     • Mask all exceptions
              Status Word              0000h
              Tag Word                 5555h (FPRn contain zero)   FFFFh (FPRn are empty)
              Instruction CS           0000h
              Instruction Offset       0
              x87 Instruction Opcode   0
              Data-Operand DS          0000h
              Data-Operand Offset      0

Initialization software should also load the MP, EM, and NE bits in the CR0 register as appropriate for
the operating system. The recommended settings are:
•   MP=1—Setting MP to 1 causes a device-not-available exception (#NM) to occur when the
    FWAIT/WAIT instruction is executed and the task-switched bit (CR0.TS) is set to 1. This supports
    operating systems that perform lazy context-switching of x87 floating-point state.
•   EM=0—Clearing EM to 0 allows the x87 floating-point unit to execute instructions rather than
    causing a #NM exception (CR0.EM=1). System software sets EM to 1 only when software
    emulation of x87 instructions is desired.
•   NE=1—Setting NE to 1 causes x87 floating-point exceptions to be handled by the floating-point
    exception-pending exception (#MF) handler. Clearing this bit causes the processor to externally
    indicate the exception occurred, and an external device can then cause an external interrupt to
    occur in response.
Refer to “CR0 Register” on page 42 for additional information on these control bits.

64-Bit Media State Initialization. There are no special requirements placed on software to initialize
the processor state used by 64-bit media instructions. This state is initialized completely by the
processor following a RESET. System software should leave CR0.EM cleared to 0 to allow execution
of the 64-bit media instructions. If CR0.EM is set to 1, attempted execution of the 64-bit media
instructions causes an invalid-opcode exception (#UD).
The 64-bit media state is not modified by an INIT.

SSE State Initialization. Platform firmware or system software must also prepare the processor to
allow execution of SSE instructions. The required preparations include:
•   Leaving CR0.EM cleared to 0 to allow execution of the SSE instructions. If CR0.EM is set to 1,
    attempted execution of the SSE instructions except FXSAVE/FXRSTOR causes an invalid-opcode
    exception (#UD). An attempt to execute either of these instructions when CR0.EM is set results in
    a #NM exception.
•   Enabling the SSE instructions by setting CR4.OSFXSR to 1. Software cannot execute the SSE
    instructions unless this bit is set. Setting this bit also indicates that system software uses the
    FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions to save and restore, respectively, the SSE state. These
    instructions also save and restore the 64-bit media state and x87 floating-point state.
•   Indicating that system software uses the SIMD floating-point exception (#XF) for handling SSE
    floating-point exceptions. This is done by setting CR4.OSXMMEXCPT to 1.
•   Setting (optionally) the MXCSR mask bits to mask or unmask SSE floating-point exceptions as
    desired. Because this register can be read and written by application software, it is not absolutely
    necessary for system software to initialize it.
Refer to “CR4 Register” on page 47 for additional information on these CR4 control bits.

14.2.4 Model-Specific Initialization
Implementations of the AMD64 architecture can contain model-specific features and registers that are
not initialized by the processor and therefore require system-software initialization. System software
must use the CPUID instruction to determine which features are supported. Model-specific features
are generally configured using model-specific registers (MSRs), which can be read and written using
the RDMSR and WRMSR instructions, respectively.
Some of the model-specific features are pervasive across many processor implementations of the
AMD64 architecture and are therefore described within this volume. These include:
•   System-call extensions, which must be enabled in the EFER register before using the SYSCALL
    and SYSRET instructions. See “System-Call Extension (SCE) Bit” on page 57 for information on
    enabling these instructions.
•   Memory-typing MSRs. See “Memory-Type Range Registers (MTRRs)” on page 505 for
    information on initializing and using these registers.
•   The machine-check mechanism. See “Initializing the Machine-Check Mechanism” on page 320
    for information on enabling and using this capability.
•   Extensions to the debug mechanism. See “Software-Debug Resources” on page 391 for
    information on initializing and using these extensions.
•   The performance-monitoring resources. See “Performance Monitoring Counters” on page 412 for
    information on initializing and using these resources.
Initialization of other model-specific features used by the page-translation mechanism and long mode
are described throughout the remainder of this section.

Some model-specific features are not pervasive across processor implementations and are therefore
not described in this volume. For more information on these features and their initialization
requirements, see the BIOS and Kernel Developer’s Guide (BKDG) or Processor Programming
Reference Manual (PPR) applicable to your product.

14.3         Initializing Real Mode
A basic real-mode (real-address-mode) operating environment must be initialized so that system
software can initialize the protected-mode operating environment. This real-mode environment must
include:
•   A real-mode IDT for vectoring interrupts and exceptions to the appropriate handlers while in real
    mode. The IDT base-address value in the IDTR initialized by the processor can be used, or system
    software can relocate the IDT by loading a new base-address into the IDTR.
•   The real-mode interrupt and exception handlers. These must be loaded before enabling external
    interrupts.
    Because the processor can always accept a non-maskable interrupt (NMI), it is possible an NMI
    can occur before initializing the IDT or the NMI handler. System hardware must provide a
    mechanism for disabling NMIs to allow time for the IDT and NMI handler to be properly
    initialized. Alternatively, the IDT and NMI handler can be stored in non-volatile memory that is
    referenced by the initial values loaded into the IDTR.
    Maskable interrupts can be enabled by setting EFLAGS.IF after the real-mode IDT and interrupt
    handlers are initialized.
•   A valid stack pointer (SS:SP) to be used by the interrupt mechanism should interrupts or
    exceptions occur. The values of SS:SP initialized by the processor can be used.
•   One or more data-segment selectors for storing the protected-mode data structures that are created
    in real mode.
Once the real-mode environment is established, software can begin initializing the protected-mode
environment.

14.4         Initializing Protected Mode
Protected mode must be entered before activating long mode. A minimal protected-mode environment
must be established to allow long-mode initialization to take place. This environment must include the
following:
•   A protected-mode IDT for vectoring interrupts and exceptions to the appropriate handlers while in
    protected mode.
•   The protected-mode interrupt and exception handlers referenced by the IDT. Gate descriptors for
    each handler must be loaded in the IDT.

•   A GDT which contains:
    - A code descriptor for the code segment that is executed in protected mode.
    - A read/write data segment that can be used as a protected-mode stack. This stack can be used
       by the interrupt mechanism if interrupts or exceptions occur.
Software can optionally load the GDT with one or more data segment descriptors, a TSS descriptor,
and an LDT descriptor for use by long-mode initialization software.
After the protected-mode data structures are initialized, system software must load the IDTR and
GDTR with pointers to those data structures. Once these registers are initialized, protected mode can
be enabled by setting CR0.PE to 1.
If legacy paging is used during the long-mode initialization process, the page-translation tables must
be initialized before enabling paging. At a minimum, one page directory and one page table are
required to support page translation. The CR3 register must be loaded with the starting physical
address of the highest-level table supported in the page-translation hierarchy. After these structures are
initialized and protected mode is enabled, paging can be enabled by setting CR0.PG to 1.

14.5         Initializing Long Mode
From protected mode, system software can initialize the data structures required by long mode and
store them anywhere in the first 4 Gbytes of physical memory. These data structures can be relocated
above 4 Gbytes once long mode is activated. The data structures required by long mode include the
following:
•   An IDT with 64-bit interrupt-gate descriptors. Long-mode interrupts are always taken in 64-bit
    mode, and the 64-bit gate descriptors are used to transfer control to interrupt handlers running in
    64-bit mode. See “Long-Mode Interrupt Control Transfers” on page 282 for more information.
•   The 64-bit mode interrupt and exception handlers to be used in 64-bit mode. Gate descriptors for
    each handler must be loaded in the 64-bit IDT.
•   A GDT containing segment descriptors for software running in 64-bit mode and compatibility
    mode, including:
    - Any LDT descriptors required by the operating system or application software.
    - A TSS descriptor for the single 64-bit TSS required by long mode.
    - Code descriptors for the code segments that are executed in long mode. The code-segment
       descriptors are used to specify whether the processor is operating in 64-bit mode or
       compatibility mode. See “Code-Segment Descriptors” on page 98, “Long (L) Attribute Bit” on
       page 99, and “CS Register” on page 80 for more information.
    - Data-segment descriptors for software running in compatibility mode. The DS, ES, and SS
       segments are ignored in 64-bit mode. See “Data-Segment Descriptors” on page 99 for more
       information.

    -   FS and GS data-segment descriptors for 64-bit mode, if required by the operating system. If
        these segments are used in 64-bit mode, system software can also initialize the full 64-bit base
        addresses using the WRMSR instruction. See “FS and GS Registers in 64-Bit Mode” on
        page 81 for more information.
    The existing protected-mode GDT can be used to hold the long-mode descriptors described above.
•   A single 64-bit TSS for holding the privilege-level 0, 1, and 2 stack pointers, the interrupt-stack-
    table pointers, and the I/O-redirection-bitmap base address (if required). This is the only TSS
    required, because hardware task-switching is not supported in long mode. See “64-Bit Task State
    Segment” on page 377 for more information.
•   The 4-level page-translation tables required by long mode. Long mode also requires the use of
    physical-address extensions (PAE) to support physical-address sizes greater than 32 bits. See
    “Long-Mode Page Translation” on page 140 for more information.
If paging is enabled during the initialization process, it must be disabled before enabling long mode.
After the long-mode data structures are initialized, and paging is disabled, software can enable and
activate long mode.

14.6         Enabling and Activating Long Mode
Long mode is enabled by setting the long-mode enable control bit (EFER.LME) to 1. However, long
mode is not activated until software also enables paging. When software enables paging while long
mode is enabled, the processor activates long mode, which the processor indicates by setting the long-
mode-active status bit (EFER.LMA) to 1. The processor behaves as a 32-bit x86 processor in all
respects until long mode is activated, even if long mode is enabled. None of the new 64-bit data sizes,
addressing, or system aspects available in long mode can be used until EFER.LMA=1.
Table 14-4 shows the control-bit settings for enabling and activating the various operating modes of
the AMD64 architecture. The default address and data sizes are shown for each mode. For the methods
of overriding these default address and data sizes, see “Instruction Prefixes” in Volume 1.

Table 14-4.      Processor Operating Modes
                                                              Encoding
                                                                                               Default
                                                                                  Default

                                                  EFER.LMA1
                                                                                                Data
                           Mode                                                 Address Size
                                                                                                Size

                                                                         CS.D
                                                                CS.L
                                                                                  (bits)2
                                                                                               (bits)2

                          64-Bit                                 1        0          64          32
                          Mode
             Long Mode                              1
                          Compatibility                                   1          32          32
                                                                 0
                          Mode                                            0          16          16
                                                                          1          32          32
                       Legacy Mode                  0            x
                                                                          0          16          16
             Note:
                1. EFER.LMA is set by the processor when software sets EFER.LME and CR0.PG according
                   to the sequence described in “Activating Long Mode” on page 511.
                2. See “Instruction Prefixes” in Volume 1 for overrides to default sizes.

Long mode uses two code-segment-descriptor bits, CS.L and CS.D, to control the operating
submodes. If long mode is active, CS.L = 1, and CS.D = 0, the processor is running in 64-bit mode, as
shown in Table 14-4 on page 511. With this encoding (CS.L=1, CS.D=0), default operand size is 32
bits and default address size is 64 bits. Using instruction prefixes, the default operand size can be
overridden to 64 bits or 16 bits, and the default address size can be overridden to 32 bits.
The final encoding of CS.L and CS.D in long mode (CS.L=1, CS.D=1) is reserved for future use.
When long mode is active and CS.L is cleared to 0, the processor is in compatibility mode, as shown in
Table 14-4 on page 511. In compatibility mode, CS.D controls default operand and address sizes
exactly as it does in the legacy x86 architecture. Setting CS.D to 1 specifies default operand and
address sizes as 32 bits. Clearing CS.D to 0 specifies default operand and address sizes as 16 bits.

14.6.1 Activating Long Mode
Switching the processor to long mode requires several steps. In general, the sequence involves
disabling paging (CR0.PG=0), enabling physical-address extensions (CR4.PAE=1), loading CR3,
enabling long mode (EFER.LME=1), and finally enabling paging (CR0.PG=1).
Specifically, software must follow this sequence to activate long mode:
1. If starting from page-enabled protected mode, disable paging by clearing CR0.PG to 0. This
   requires that the MOV CR0 instruction used to disable paging be located in an identity-mapped
   page (virtual address equals physical address).

2. In any order:
   - Enable physical-address extensions by setting CR4.PAE to 1. Long mode requires the use of
       physical-address extensions (PAE) in order to support physical-address sizes greater than 32
       bits. Physical-address extensions must be enabled before enabling paging.
   - Load CR3 with the physical base-address of the level-4 page-map-table (PML4) or level-5
       page-map-table (PML5). See “Long-Mode Page Translation” on page 140 for details on
       creating the 4-level or 5-level page translation tables required by long mode.
   - Enable long mode by setting EFER.LME to 1.
3. Enable paging by setting CR0.PG to 1. This causes the processor to set the EFER.LMA bit to 1.
   The instruction following the MOV CR0 that enables paging must be a branch, and both the MOV
   CR0 and the following branch instruction must be located in an identity-mapped page.

14.6.2 Consistency Checks
The processor performs long-mode consistency checks whenever software attempts to modify any of
the control bits directly involved in activating long mode (EFER.LME, CR0.PG, and CR4.PAE). A
general-protection exception (#GP) occurs when a consistency check fails. Long-mode consistency
checks ensure that the processor does not enter an undefined mode or state that results in unpredictable
behavior.
Long-mode consistency checks cause a general-protection exception (#GP) to occur if:
•   An attempt is made to enable or disable long mode while paging is enabled.
•   Long mode is enabled, and an attempt is made to enable paging before enabling physical-address
    extensions (PAE).
•   Long mode is enabled, and an attempt is made to enable paging while CS.L=1.
•   Long mode is active and an attempt is made to disable physical-address extensions (PAE).
Table 14-5 summarizes the long-mode consistency checks made during control-bit transitions.

Table 14-5.      Long-Mode Consistency Checks
                Control Bit     Transition                       Check
                                  0®1        If (CR0.PG=1) then #GP(0)
                EFER.LME
                                  1®0        If (CR0.PG=1) then #GP(0)
                                             If ((EFER.LME=1) & (CR4.PAE=0) then #GP(0)
                 CR0.PG           0®1
                                             If ((EFER.LME=1) & (CS.L=1)) then #GP(0)
                 CR4.PAE          1®0        If (EFER.LMA=1) then #GP(0)

14.6.3 Updating System Descriptor Table References
Immediately after activating long mode, the system-descriptor-table registers (GDTR, LDTR, IDTR,
TR) continue to reference legacy descriptor tables. The tables referenced by these descriptors all reside
in the lower 4 Gbytes of virtual-address space. After activating long mode, 64-bit operating-system

software should use the LGDT, LLDT, LIDT, and LTR instructions to load the system descriptor-table
registers with references to the 64-bit versions of the descriptor tables. See “Descriptor Tables” on
page 83 for details on descriptor tables in long mode.
Long mode requires 64-bit interrupt-gate descriptors to be stored in the interrupt-descriptor table
(IDT). Software must not allow exceptions or interrupts to occur between the time long mode is
activated and the subsequent update of the interrupt-descriptor-table register (IDTR) that establishes a
reference to the 64-bit IDT. This is because the IDTR continues to reference a 32-bit IDT immediately
after long mode is activated. If an interrupt or exception occurred before updating the IDTR, a legacy
32-bit interrupt gate would be referenced and interpreted as a 64-bit interrupt gate, with unpredictable
results.
External interrupts can be disabled using the CLI instruction. Non-maskable interrupts (NMI) and
system-management interrupts (SMI) must be disabled using external hardware. See “Long-Mode
Interrupt Control Transfers” on page 282 for more information on long mode interrupts.

14.6.4 Relocating Page-Translation Tables
The long-mode page-translation tables must be located in the first 4 Gbytes of physical-address space
before activating long mode. This is necessary because the MOV CR3 instruction used to initialize the
page-map level-4 base address must be executed in legacy mode before activating long mode. Because
the MOV CR3 is executed in legacy mode, only the low 32 bits of the register are written, which limits
the location of the page-map level-4 translation table to the low 4 Gbytes of memory. Software can
relocate the page tables anywhere in physical memory, and re-initialize the CR3 register, after long
mode is activated.

14.7         Leaving Long Mode
To return from long mode to legacy protected mode with paging enabled, software must deactivate and
disable long mode using the following sequence:
1. Switch to compatibility mode and place the processor at the highest privilege level (CPL=0).
2. Deactivate long mode by clearing CR0.PG to 0. This causes the processor to clear the LMA bit to
   0. The MOV CR0 instruction used to disable paging must be located in an identity-mapped page.
   Once paging is disabled, the processor behaves as a standard 32-bit x86 processor.
3. Load CR3 with the physical base-address of the legacy page tables.
4. Disable long mode by clearing EFER.LME to 0.
5. Enable legacy page-translation by setting CR0.PG to 1. The instruction following the MOV CR0
   that enables paging must be a branch, and both the MOV CR0 and the following branch
   instruction must be located in an identity-mapped page.

14.8         Long-Mode Initialization Example
Following is sample code that outlines the steps required to place the processor in long mode.
mydata segment para
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
;
; This generic data-segment holds pseudo-descriptors used
; by the LGDT and LIDT instructions.
;
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
;
; Establish a temporary 32-bit GDT and IDT.
;
pGDT32 label    fword                   ; Used by LGDT.
                dw       gdt32_limit    ; GDT limit ...
                dd       gdt32_base     ; and 32-bit GDT base
pIDT32 label    fword                   ; Used by LIDT.
                dw       idt32_limit    ; IDT limit ...
                dd       idt32_base     ; and 32-bit IDT base
;
; Establish a 64-bit GDT and IDT (64-bit linear base-
; address)
;
pGDT64 label    tbyte                   ; Used by LGDT.
                dw       gdt64_limit    ; GDT limit ...
                dq       gdt64_base     ; and 64-bit GDT base
pIDT64 label    tbyte                   ; Used by LIDT.
                dw       idt64_limit    ; IDT limit ...
                dq       idt64_base     ; and 64-bit IDT base
mydata ends                 ; end of data segment
code16 segment para use16 ; 16-bit code segment
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
; 16-bit code, real mode
;
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
;
; Initialize DS to point to the data segment containing
; pGDT32 and PIDT32. Set up a real-mode stack pointer, SS:SP,
; in case of interrupts and exceptions.
;
   cli
   mov   ax, seg mydata
   mov   ds, ax
   mov   ax, seg mystack
   mov   ss, ax
   mov   sp, esp0

;
; Use CPUID to determine if the processor supports long mode. ;

   mov   eax, 80000000h ; Extended-function 8000000h.
   cpuid                ; Is largest extended function
   cmp   eax, 80000000h ; any function > 80000000h?
   jbe   no_long_mode   ; If not, no long mode.
   mov   eax, 80000001h ; Extended-function 8000001h.
   cpuid                ; Now EDX = extended-features flags.
   bt    edx, 29        ; Test if long mode is supported.
   jnc   no_long_mode   ; Exit if not supported.
;
; Load the 32-bit GDT before entering protected mode.
; This GDT must contain, at a minimum, the following
; descriptors:
; 1) a CPL=0 16-bit code descriptor for this code segment.
; 2) a CPL=0 32/64-bit code descriptor for the 64-bit code.
; 3) a CPL=0 read/write data segment, usable as a stack
; (referenced by SS).
;
; Load the 32-bit IDT, in case any interrupts or exceptions
; occur after entering protected mode, but before enabling
; long mode).
;
; Initialize the GDTR and IDTR to point to the temporary
; 32-bit GDT and IDT, respectively.
;
   lgdt ds:[pGDT32]
   lidt ds:[pIDT32]
;
; Enable protected mode (CR0.PE=1).
;
   mov   eax, 000000011h
   mov   cr0, eax
;
; Execute a far jump to turn protected mode on.
; code16_sel must point to the previously-established 16-bit
; code descriptor located in the GDT (for the code currently
; being executed).
;
   db    0eah              ;Far jump...
   dw    offset now_in_prot;to offset...
   dw    code16_sel        ;in current code segment.
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
; At this point we are in 16-bit protected mode, but long
; mode is still disabled.
;
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;

now_in_prot:
;
; Set up the protected-mode stack pointer, SS:ESP.
; Stack_sel must point to the previously-established stack
; descriptor (read/write data segment), located in the GDT.
; Skip setting DS/ES/FS/GS, because we are jumping right to
; 64-bit code.
;
   mov   ax, stack_sel
   mov   ss, ax
   mov   esp, esp0
;
; Enable the 64-bit page-translation-table entries by
; setting CR4.PAE=1 (this is _required_ before activating
; long mode). Paging is not enabled until after long mode
; is enabled.
;
   mov   eax, cr4
   bts   eax, 5
   mov   cr4, eax
;
; Create the long-mode page tables, and initialize the
; 64-bit CR3 (page-table base address) to point to the base
; of the PML4 page table. The PML4 page table must be located
; below 4 Gbytes because only 32 bits of CR3 are loaded when
; the processor is not in 64-bit mode.
;
   mov   eax, pml4_base ; Pointer to PML4 table (<4GB).
   mov   cr3, eax        ; Initialize CR3 with PML4 base.
;
; Enable long mode (set EFER.LME=1).
;
   mov   ecx, 0c0000080h    ; EFER MSR number.
   rdmsr                    ; Read EFER.
   bts   eax, 8             ; Set LME=1.
   wrmsr                    ; Write EFER.
;
; Enable paging to activate long mode (set CR0.PG=1)
;
   mov   eax, cr0           ; Read CR0.
   bts   eax, 31            ; Set PE=1.
   mov   cr0, eax           ; Write CR0.
;
; At this point, we are in 16-bit compatibility mode
; ( LMA=1, CS.L=0, CS.D=0 ).
; Now, jump to the 64-bit code segment. The offset must be
; equal to the linear address of the 64-bit entry point,
; because 64-bit code is in an unsegmented address space.
; The selector points to the 32/64-bit code selector in the
; current GDT.
;

    db    066h
    db    0eah
    dd    start64_linear
    dw    code64_sel
code16ends      ; End of the 16-bit code segment
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
;;
;;;     Start of 64-bit code
;;
;
;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;;
code64 para use64
start64:        ; At this point, we're using 64-bit code
;
; Point the 64-bit RSP register to the stack’s _linear_
; address. There is no need to set SS here, because the SS
; register is not used in 64-bit mode.
;
    mov   rsp, stack0_linear
;
; This LGDT is only needed if the long-mode GDT is to be
; located at a linear address above 4 Gbytes. If the long
; mode GDT is located at a 32-bit linear address, putting
; 64-bit descriptors in the GDT pointed to by [pGDT32] is
; just fine. pGDT64_linear is the _linear_ address of the
; 10-byte GDT pseudo-descriptor.
;
; The new GDT should have a valid CPL0 64-bit code segment
; descriptor at the entry-point corresponding to the current
; CS selector. Alternatively, a far transfer to a valid CPL0
; 64-bit code segment descriptor in the new GDT must be done
; before enabling interrupts.
;
    lgdt [pGDT64_linear]
;
; Load the 64-bit IDT. This is _required_, because the 64-bit
; IDT uses 64-bit interrupt descriptors, while the 32-bit
; IDT used 32-bit interrupt descriptors. pIDT64_linear is
; the _linear_ address of the 10-byte IDT pseudo-descriptor.
;
    lidt [pIDT64_linear]
;
; Set the current TSS. tss_sel should point to a 64-bit TSS
; descriptor in the current GDT. The TSS is used for
; inner-level stack pointers and the IO bit-map.
;
    mov   ax, tss_sel
    ltr   ax
;
; Set the current LDT. ldt_sel should point to a 64-bit LDT
; descriptor in the current GDT.

;
    mov    ax, ldt_sel
    lldt   ax
;
; Using fs: and gs: prefixes on memory accesses still uses
; the 32-bit fs.base and gs.base. Reload these 2 registers
; before using the fs: and gs: prefixes. FS and GS can be
; loaded from the GDT using a normal “mov fs,foo” type
; instructions, which loads a 32-bit base into FS or GS.
; Alternatively, use WRMSR to assign 64-bit base values to
; MSR_FS_base or MSR_GS_base.
;
   mov   ecx, MSR_FS_base
   mov   eax, FsbaseLow
   mov   edx, FsbaseHi
   wrmsr
;
; Reload CR3 if long-mode page tables are to be located above
; 4 Gbytes. Because the original CR3 load was done in 32-bit
; legacy mode, it could only load 32 bits into CR3. Thus, the
; current page tables are located in the lower 4 Gbytes of
; physical memory. This MOV to CR3 is only needed if the
; actual long-mode page tables should be located at a linear
; address above 4 Gbytes.
;
   mov   rax, final_pml4_base ; Point to PML4
   mov   cr3, rax              ; Load 64-bit CR3
;
; Enable interrupts.
;
   sti                         ; Enabled INTR
   <insert 64-bit code here>

