
The shadow stack mechanism facilitates protection against a common form of computer exploit
known as Return Oriented Programming (ROP). ROP exploits utilize intentionally corrupted stack
frames to divert normal processor control flow into short fragments of existing executable code, which
ultimately end with a RET instruction. These fragments are then chained together using return
addresses previously written to the stack by the attacker.
The shadow stack mechanism protects against ROP exploits by ensuring that return addresses read
from the stack by RET and IRET instructions originated from a CALL instruction or similar control
transfer.
In the following sections, the term ‘program stack’ is used to distinguish the stack pointed to by the SP
register and manipulated by instructions (such as PUSH, POP, ENTER, LEAVE) from the shadow
stack.

18.1         Shadow Stack Overview
A shadow stack is a separate, protected stack that is conceptually parallel to the program stack and
used only by control-transfer and return instructions. When shadow stacks are enabled, most control
transfers that save a return address (such as CALL, INTn, exceptions and interrupts) write the return
address to the shadow stack in addition to the program stack. Upon the subsequent RET or IRET
operation, the processor reads the return address from both stacks and checks that they match. A
control-protection exception (#CP) is raised if the return addresses do not match.
The shadow stack is implemented in regions of memory marked with the “shadow stack” attribute in
the page tables (see “Page-Protection Checks” on page 162). Pages with the shadow stack attribute are
writable only by control transfer operations that save a return address and by the shadow stack
management instructions. Shadow stack pages are not writeable by ordinary data-access instructions
and thus protected from tampering.

18.1.1 Detecting and Enabling Shadow Stack Support
Support for the shadow stack feature is indicated by CPUID Fn0000_0007_ECX_x0[CET_SS](bit
7)=1. This bit also indicates the shadow stack MSRs are present.
The shadow stack feature is enabled by setting CR4.CET (bit 23) = 1 (see “CR4 Register” on page 47).
The shadow stack feature is operational when in protected mode (CR0.PE=1) with paging enabled
(CR0.PG=1). Shadow stacks are disabled in virtual x86 mode (rFLAGS.VM=1).
Once the feature is enabled, shadow stack operation can be separately enabled in user mode and in
supervisor mode using control bits in the S_CET and U_CET MSRs (see “Shadow Stack MSRs” on
page 713).

18.2         The Shadow Stack Pointer
On processors implementing the shadow stack feature, the Shadow Stack Pointer (SSP) register
contains the address of the current top of the shadow stack. The width of the shadow stack is 64 bits in
64-bit mode and 32 bits in legacy and compatibility modes. The address size of SSP is 64 bits in 64-bit
mode and 32 bits in legacy and compatibility modes.
The SSP register cannot be encoded as a source or destination register by regular instructions and thus
is not directly accessible to software as a general operand, nor as an address operand. The SSP register
is directly accessible only by using the shadow stack management instructions (see “Shadow Stack
Management Instructions” on page 712).

18.3         Shadow Stack Operation for CALL (near) and RET
(near)
When shadow stacks are enabled, the CALL (near) instruction pushes the return address onto the
shadow stack, in addition to pushing it onto the program stack. On the subsequent near RET/RETn
instruction, the return addresses are read from both stacks and compared. If the return addresses do not
match, a control-protection (#CP) exception is generated.
A CALL (near) with a displacement of 0 (CALL +0) does not push the return address onto the shadow
stack since the “CALL +0” idiom does not actually branch to another code sequence, and is typically
not followed by a return instruction.
One form of the return instruction, RETn, pops ‘n’ additional parameters from the program stack
before returning to the caller. Since the shadow stack does not store any data items, RETn does not pop
additional parameters from the shadow stack.

18.4         Shadow Stack Operation for Far Transfers
The term ‘far transfer’ in the following discussion encompasses the following types of control
transfers:
•   Explicit CALL (far) to a procedure in another code segment
•   Exceptions and interrupts that transfer to a handler in another code segment
•   RET (far) and IRET instructions
A far transfer may also change the CPL. The exact operation of the shadow stack depends on the type
of far transfer involved, the associated CPL change (if any) and whether the shadow stack capability is
enabled for the target CPL. Shadow stack operations for far transfers are described in the following
sections and summarized in Table 18-1. (See AMD Architecture Programmers Manual Volume 3 for
detailed instruction algorithms for CALL (far), RET (far), IRET and INTn.)

Table 18-1. Shadow Stack Operations for Far Transfers
                                 New SSP loaded                                                RETF/IRET
     CALLF/int/excp  Stack                           CS, LIP saved to     SSP saved to and
                                  from: (where                                                checks returns
    From CPL To CPL switch?                         and restored from:     restored from:
                                  n=new CPL)                                                     address?
                                                    Current Shadow       Current Shadow
    0,1,2,3   Same      No       Uses current SSP                                            Yes
                                                    Stack                Stack
    3         0,1,2     Yes      PLn_SSP            <not saved/restored> PL3_SSP             No
    2         0,1       Yes      PLn_SSP            New shadow stack     New shadow stack    Yes
    1         0         Yes      PLn_SSP            New shadow stack     New shadow stack    Yes

18.5              Far Transfer to the Same Privilege Level
When shadow stacks are enabled, a far transfer to the same privilege level pushes the CS and LIP
(linear address of the return IP) onto the current shadow stack in addition to pushing the return IP onto
the program stack. Upon the subsequent RET (far) or IRET operation, the return addresses are popped
from both stacks and the linear forms of the two addresses are compared. If the return addresses do not
match, a control-protection (#CP) exception is generated.

18.6              Far Transfer to Different Privilege Level
In addition to changing code segments, far transfers can also be used to change to a different privilege
level (CPL). When changing the CPL, inter-privilege far transfers switch to a new program stack. In a
similar manner, inter-privilege far transfers also switch to a new shadow stack, providing that shadow
stacks are enabled for the new privilege level.

18.6.1 Shadow Stack Switching
When an inter-privilege far transfer switches to a new program stack, the new program stack pointer is
selected from the either the inner-level stack pointers in the TSS or the Interrupt Stack Table (IST),
depending on the type of far transfer. (See “Interrupt To Higher Privilege” on page 274). Similarly,
when shadow stacks are enabled, inter-privilege far transfers also switch to a new shadow stack. The
new shadow stack pointer is selected from shadow stack pointer MSRs (PLn_SSP) or the Interrupt
Shadow Stack Table (ISST) as described in the following sections.

18.6.1.1 Shadow Stack Switching for Inter-Privilege CALL (far)
When a CALL (far) changes privilege level, a shadow stack switch occurs to an inner-level shadow
stack. The new SSP is loaded from one of the following MSRs:
•       PL2_SSP for transitions to CPL 2.
•       PL1_SSP for transitions to CPL 1.
•       PL0_SSP for transitions to CPL 0.

When switching shadow stacks, the processor validates the new shadow stack using a special value
called a shadow stack token as described in Section 18.6.3 “Supervisor Shadow Stack Token” on
page 705.

18.6.1.2 Shadow Stack Switching for Interrupts and Exceptions
In long mode (EFER.LMA=1), the processor provides an additional mechanism, the Interrupt Stack
Table (IST) to switch program stacks for interrupts and exceptions. The IST mechanism uses the IST
field in the Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT) entry as an index into a table of inner-level program stack
pointers (see “Interrupt-Stack Table” on page 286). The shadow stack feature provides a similar
mechanism, the Interrupt Shadow Stack Table (ISST), for switching shadow stacks.
The ISST is an 8-entry table containing supervisor shadow stack pointers. The base of the ISST is
specified by the ISST_ADDR MSR. If the IST field in the IDT entry is non-zero, it is used as an index
into the ISST to select a new SSP as shown in Figure 18-1.
If the IST field is zero or if the processor is not in long mode, the ISST mechanism is not used and the
new inner-level SSP is selected from the PLn_SSP MSRs as previously described in Section 18.6.4
“Shadow Stack Switching for Inter-Privilege CALL (far)” on page 703.

Figure 18-1. Interrupt Shadow Stack Table (ISST)

18.6.2 Handling CS, LIP and SSP on Privilege Transistions
When changing to a new code segment, the shadow stack behavior for saving and restoring CS, LIP
and SSP depends on the CPL of the originating far transfer.
Transitions from CPL=3
Inter-privilege far transfers originating at CPL=3 save the current user-level SSP to PL3_SSP rather
than to the supervisor shadow stack. Upon the subsequent RETF/IRET back to CPL=3, the user-level
SSP is restored from PL3_SSP and the return CS and LIP are not verified.
Transitions from CPL=1 and CPL=2
Far transfers originating at CPL=1 or CPL=2 to an inner (more privileged) level save the current CS,
LIP and SSP to the inner level shadow stack after switching shadow stacks as described in section
Section 18.6.1, “Shadow Stack Switching,” on page 703. Upon the subsequent RET(far)/IRET, the
SSP is restored (Section 18.6.1, “Shadow Stack Switching,” on page 703) from the inner-level shadow
stack and the CS and LIP popped from the shadow stack are verified against the values read from the
program stack. If the return addresses do not match, a control-protection (#CP) exception is generated.

18.6.3 Supervisor Shadow Stack Token
When switching shadow stacks, the processor validates the new shadow stack by checking a
supervisor shadow stack token located at the base of the stack.
When initially creating a shadow stack for use at privilege levels 0, 1 and 2, system software must
place a supervisor shadow stack token at the base of each stack. System software must also store a
pointer to each shadow stack in the appropriate shadow stack base register, PLn_SSP (n=0,1,2,3) using
the WRMSR instruction.
The relationship of the shadow stacks, supervisor shadow stack tokens, and the PLn_SSP registers are
shown in Figure 18.6.3 “Shadow Stacks and Supervisor Shadow Stack Tokens” on page 706. The
three supervisor shadow stacks (PL0, PL1 and PL2) have shadow stack tokens stored at the base of the
stack. Tokens are not used for PL3 shadow stacks.

Figure 18-2. Shadow Stacks and Supervisor Shadow Stack Tokens

The supervisor shadow stack token is a 64-bit value and is formatted as shown in Figure 18-3:
         63                                                                       3    2   1    0

                                         Linear Address                                Rsvd    Busy

Figure 18-3. Supervisor Shadow Stack Token

The supervisor shadow stack token fields are defined as follows:
Linear Address. Bits 63:3 of the linear address of this token. The linear address is required to be 8-
byte aligned.
Rsvd. Reserved, must be zero.
Busy Bit. If 0, this indicates this supervisor shadow stack is not in use by any logical processor. If 1, it
indicates this supervisor shadow stack is currently in use by one of the logical processors. The
processor sets the busy bit when switching to a supervisor shadow stack and clears it when switching
away from that stack.

18.6.4 Shadow Stack Token Validation for Inter-privilege CALL (far) and
Interrupts/Exceptions
Before switching shadow stacks, a CALL (far) or an interrupt/exception that changes to a more
privileged level validates the supervisor shadow stack token located at the base of the new stack. If the
validation checks pass, the supervisor shadow stack token is marked busy. The following steps are
performed to validate the supervisor shadow stack token and set the busy bit:

1. Check that the incoming SSP is 8-byte aligned, otherwise a #GP exception is generated. The
   incoming SSP is located in PLn_SSP (where ‘n’ is the new privilege level: 0, 1, 2), or the ISST
   for interrupts/exceptions (see Section 18.6.1, “Shadow Stack Switching,” on page 703).
   - If the far transfer also saves current CS, LIP and current SSP onto the shadow stack, the check
       also requires that the supervisor shadow stack token and additional information saved on the
       stack are fully contained within a 32-byte region that is aligned to 32-bytes. If not, a #GP
       exception is generated.
<Steps 2-6 are performed atomically.>
2. Fetch the 8-byte shadow stack token using the address specified by the incoming SSP (using a
   locked load with shadow stack access rights).
3. Check that the shadow stack token reserved bits and the busy bit are 0.
4. Check that the address specified in the shadow stack token matches the incoming SSP.
5. If checks 3 and 4 pass, set the supervisor shadow stack token busy bit (using a store, unlock).
6. If checks 3 or 4 fail, the shadow stack token is not modified and a #GP exception is generated.

18.6.5 Shadow Stack Token Validation for Inter-privilege RET and IRET
RET (far) and IRET to lower privilege levels validate the shadow stack token located on the current
supervisor shadow stack before switching shadow stacks. If the token is valid, the token’s busy bit is
cleared. The processor performs the following steps to validate the token:
1. Check that the return SSP (located on the current shadow stack) is 4-byte aligned, else a #CP
   exception is generated.
<Steps 2-7 are performed atomically.>
2. Fetch the 8-byte shadow stack token from the current shadow stack at SSP+24 (using a locked
   load with shadow stack access rights).
3. Check that the busy bit is 1.
4. Check that the reserved bits are 0.
5. Check that the address specified in the shadow stack token matches the SSP.
6. If checks 3 through 5 pass, the shadow stack token busy bit is cleared.
7. If any of checks 3 through 5 fail, the shadow stack token is not modified. A fault is not generated.

18.7         Shadow Stack Operation for SYSCALL and SYSRET
SYSCALL and SYSRET are low-latency system call and return instructions designed for use by
system and application software implementing a flat-memory model. These instructions do not use the
program stack to store return addresses, and therefore do not use the shadow stack to validate return
addresses. However, SYSCALL and SYSRET modify SSP as described below. The Shadow stack

operations described for SYSCALL and SYSRET also apply to SYSENTER and SYSEXIT
respectively, although the latter are available only in legacy mode.
The SYSCALL instruction is used by application software executing at CPL=3. When shadow stacks
are enabled at CPL=3, SYSCALL saves the current SSP to PL3_SSP. SYSCALL changes to CPL=0
before entering the operating system and if shadow stacks are enabled at CPL=0, then SSP is cleared to
0.
Unlike other inter-privilege far transfers, SYSCALL does not automatically perform a switch to a
supervisor shadow stack. If shadow stacks are enabled at CPL=0, prior to executing a CALL
instruction or similar transfer of control that pushes a return address to the shadow stack, software at
the OS entry point must ensure that a supervisor shadow stack is available for use. System software
can use SETSSBSY to set up a supervisor shadow stack.
The operating system uses the SYSRET instruction to return to the application running at CPL=3. If
shadow stacks are enabled at CPL=3, SYSRET restores SSP from PL3_SSP. Prior to using SYSRET
to return to the application, system software can use the CLRSSBSY to tear down the supervisor
shadow stack. Because CLRSSYBSY clears the SSP to 0, system software must ensure that any
subsequent interrupt or exception that may occur in CPL=0 prior to the SYSRET is configured to use
the ISST stack-switching mechanism. Otherwise taking an interrupt or exception with SSP=0 will
likely result in a fault due to SSP wrap-around.

18.8         Shadow Stack Operation for Task Switches
The legacy x86 task-switch mechanism transfers program control to a new task when any of the
following control transfers occur:
•   A CALL or JMP instruction references a task gate or TSS descriptor.
•   A software-interrupt instruction (INTn), exception or external interrupt references a task gate.
•   An IRET is executed when the EFLAGS.NT bit is set to 1.
Shadow stack operations for legacy x86 task switches are summarized in this section. Because the x86
task management feature is supported by the AMD64 architecture only in legacy mode
(EFER.LMA=0), the shadow stack operations described below only apply to legacy mode. (See
“Switching Tasks” on page 381 for more information on task switching).
When switching to a new task with shadow stacks enabled, the new task must use a 32-bit TSS. The
SSP for the new task is located at TSS offset 104. Since the SSP is 4 bytes in legacy mode, the TSS
must be at least 108 bytes in size. The SSP must be aligned to an 8-byte boundary and point to a
supervisor shadow stack token.
If the task switch is initiated by a CALL/JMP/INTn instruction, or an interrupt or exception:
•   For task switches originating at CPL=3, and if shadow stacks are enabled at that CPL, the current
    SSP is saved to PL3_SSP. Otherwise, for task switches originating at supervisor-level (CPL=0,1,2)
    the current SSP is saved onto the new shadow stack along with current CS and LIP. If shadow

    stacks are enabled at the CPL of the new task, the busy bit is set in the supervisor shadow stack
    token pointed to by the SSP of the incoming task.
If the task switch is initiated by an IRET instruction:
•   For task switches originating at supervisor-level (CPL=0,1,2) and returning to CPL=3, the SSP is
    restored from PL3_SSP, otherwise the SSP is restored from the current shadow stack. The return
    CS and LIP are read from the current shadow stack and compared to the CS and linear form of the
    EIP in the TSS of the incoming task. A control-protection (#CP) exception is generated if the
    return addresses do not match.

18.9         Restricting Speculative Execution of RET targets
When shadow stacks are enabled, the processor will not speculatively execute instructions from a RET
address on the program stack unless the address matches the corresponding address on the shadow
stack, or the target of the RET is predicted by a return address branch prediction mechanism.

18.10        Shadow Stack Switching Using RSTORSSP
As previously described in Section 18.6.1, “Shadow Stack Switching,” on page 703, the processor
automatically switches shadow stacks as part of the inter-privilege far transfer mechanism. In order to
allow programs to switch stacks at other times (when performing operations such as initializing a
shadow stack or recovering from a #CP fault) the RSTORSSP and SAVEPREVSSP instructions are
provided.
The RSTORSSP instruction is used to switch shadow stacks. The instruction expects to find a shadow
stack restore token at the top of the proposed new shadow stack. Upon validating this token,
RSTORSSP points the SSP to the top of the new shadow stack and sets the token’s busy bit, making
the new shadow stack ready for use.
Upon successful completion, the RSTORSSP instruction modifies the restore token by saving the old
SSP into the token’s SSP Restore Value field in order to facilitate a later return to the old shadow stack.
The shadow stack restore token used by RSTORSSP is formatted as follows:

               63                                                      2     1         0

                              SSP Restore Value / Token Address             Busy     Mode

Figure 18-4. Shadow Stack Restore Token

The shadow stack restore token fields are defined as follows:
SSP Restore value. Bits 63:2 of the linear address of this token. Replaced by the previous SSP upon
successful completion of the RSTORSSP instruction.

Busy. Initially must be 0. Set to 1 upon successful completion of the RSTORSSP instruction.
Mode. If 0, this indicates the shadow stack restore token is for use in legacy or compatibility mode. If
1, this indicates the restore token is for use in 64-bit mode.
After RSTORSSP switches to the new stack the modified shadow stack token is at the top of the new
in-use shadow stack. If a return to the old stack is not required, the modified token (to which the
previous SSP has been saved) can be popped from the stack using the INCSSP instruction.
If a return to the old stack is desired, the SAVEPREVSSP instruction can be used to copy the token
back to the previous stack for later use by an RSTORSSP instruction. The SAVEPREVSSP expects to
find a previous SSP token on the top of the current shadow stack. After moving this token to the
previous stack, SAVEPREVSSP pops it off the new stack by incrementing SSP.
The previous SSP token used by SAVEPREVSSP is formatted as follows:

               63                                                     2     1        0

                                      Previous SSP                         Busy     Mode

Figure 18-5.      Previous SSP Token

The previous SSP token fields are defined as follows:
Previous SSP. Bits 63:2 of the previous SSP. Upon successful completion, the SAVEPREVSSP
instruction copies the token to this address.
Busy. Must be set to 1 initially. Cleared to 0 upon successful completion of the SAVEPREVSSP
instruction.
Mode. If 0, this indicates the previous SSP token is for use in legacy or compatibility mode. If 1, this
indicates the token is for use in 64-bit mode.
Figure 18-6 “RSTORSSP and SAVEPREVSSP Operation” on page 711 illustrates the operation of the
RSTORSSP instruction when switching to a new shadow stack, followed by a SAVEPREVSSP
instruction to save a previous token back to the original stack.

Figure 18-6. RSTORSSP and SAVEPREVSSP Operation

In this example (Figure 18-6 “RSTORSSP and SAVEPREVSSP Operation” on page 711),
RSTORSSP is used to switch from shadow stack A to shadow stack B. Subsequently, a
SAVEPREVSSP instruction is used to save a shadow stack restore token.
Initially, shadow stack A is in-use, and the proposed shadow stack B contains a shadow stack restore
token at address B - 8. An RSTORSSP instruction is then executed with the operand pointing to the
restore token.
The RSTORSSP instruction checks the restore token for validity, copies the previous SSP to the token,
sets bit 1 of the token and sets the new value of SSP to address B. Shadow stack B is now ready for use.
Next, a SAVEPREVSSP instruction is executed to facilitate a later return to shadow stack A (using a
subsequent RSTORSSP instruction, not shown). The SAVEPREVSSP instruction copies the token to
address A - 8 and clears token bit 1, then pops the old token from shadow stack B.
For detailed RSTORSSP and SAVEPREVSSP algorithms refer to the instruction descriptions in APM
Volume 3.

18.11        Shadow Stack Management Instructions
When shadow stacks are enabled, the following instructions are available to software for use in
managing shadow stacks. Except for RDSSP, attempting to execute these instructions when shadow
stacks are disabled results in a #UD exception. RDSSP is treated as a NOP when shadow stacks are
disabled. For more information refer to the detailed instruction descriptions in APM volume 3.

Table 18-2. Shadow Stack Management Instructions
        Mnemonic              Name                                      Description
                        Clear Shadow Stack   Validates a shadow stack token and clears its busy bit. This is a
    CLRSSBSY
                        Busy                 privileged instruction.
                        Increment Shadow     Increment SSP by ‘n’ stack frames. Used to pop unneeded items
    INCSSP
                        Stack Pointer        from a shadow stack.
                        Read Shadow Stack    Read the SSP into a GPR. Treated as a NOP if shadow stacks are
    RDSSP
                        Pointer              disabled.
                                             Used to switch shadow stacks. Expects a ‘shadow stack restore
                        Restore Shadow       token’ at the top of the new shadow stack. Upon validating this
    RSTORSSP
                        Stack Pointer        token, sets the token’s busy bit and sets SSP to the top of the new
                                             shadow stack.
                        Save Previous        Copies a ‘previous SSP token’ from the current shadow stack
    SAVEPREVSSP         Shadow Stack         back to the previous stack for later use by an RSTORSSP
                        Pointer              instruction.

Table 18-2. Shadow Stack Management Instructions (continued)
         Mnemonic            Name                                     Description
                                            Validates the shadow stack token pointed to by the PL0_SSP
                       Set Shadow Stack
      SETSSBSY                              MSR. If valid, clears the busy bit and sets SSP = PL0_SSP. This
                       Busy
                                            is a privileged instruction.
                                            Writes the source operand to a shadow stack. This instruction has
      WRSS             Write Shadow Stack
                                            associated enable bits in the U_CET and S_CET MSRs
                       Write User Shadow    Writes the source operand to a user shadow stack. This is a
      WRUSS
                       Stack                privileged instruction.

18.12         Shadow Stack MSRs
The following MSRs are defined if the shadow stack feature is supported as indicated by CPUID Fn
0000_0007_0 ECX[CET_SS] (bit 7) = 1:
U_CET. MSR 0x6A0. Specifies the user mode shadow stack controls. The individual fields are as
follows:
•   Bit 0 - SH_STK_EN. When set to 1, enables the shadow stacks in user mode.
•   Bit 1 - WR_SHSTK_EN. When set to 1, enables the WRSS instruction is user mode.
•   Bits 63:2 – reserved, MBZ
S_CET. MSR 0x6A2. Specifies the supervisor mode shadow stack controls.
•   Bit 0 - SH_STK_EN. When set to 1, enables the shadow stacks in supervisor mode.
•   Bit 1 - WR_SHSTK_EN. When set to 1, enables the WRSS instruction is supervisor mode.
•   Bits 63:2 – reserved, MBZ
PL0_SSP. MSR 0x6A4. Specifies the linear address to be loaded into SSP on the next transition to
CPL=0. The linear address must be in canonical format and aligned to 4 bytes when initializing this
register.
PL1_SSP. MSR 0x6A5. Specifies the linear address to be loaded into SSP on the next transition to
CPL=1. The linear address must be in canonical format and aligned to 4 bytes when initializing this
register.
PL2_SSP. MSR 0x6A6. Specifies the linear address to be loaded into SSP on the next transition to
CPL=2. The linear address must be in canonical format and aligned to 4 bytes when initializing this
register.
PL3_SSP. MSR 0x6A7. The user mode SSP is saved to and restored from this register. The linear
address must be in canonical format and aligned to 4 bytes when initializing this register.
ISST_ADDR. MSR 0x6A8. This register specifies the linear address of the Interrupt Shadow Stack
Table (ISST). The linear address must be in canonical format.

18.13       XSAVES/XRSTORS
The XSAVES/XRSTORS instructions can be used to manage the shadow stack registers as processor
extended state components 11 (CET_U state) and 12 (CET_S state) as described below:
•   CET_U state. The shadow stack user controls are identified as state component 11 in XSS MSR
    and consist of the two 64-bit MSRs U_CET and PL3_SSP. Bytes 7:0 in the XSAVE area are used
    for U_CET and bytes 15:8 are used for PL3_SSP. The XSAVE area size and offset for the CET_U
    state are available using CPUID Fn0000_000D_ECX_x0B (ECX=11).
•   CET_S state. The shadow stack supervisor controls are identified as state component 12 in XSS
    MSR and consist of the three 64-bit MSRs PL0_SSP, PL1_SSP and PL2_SSP. Bytes 7:0 in the
    XSAVE area are used for PL0_SSP, bytes 15:8 are used for PL2_SSP and bytes 23:16 are used for
    PL3_SSP. The XSAVE area size and offset for the CET_S state are available using CPUID
    Fn0000_000D_ECX_x0C (ECX=12).
When restoring CET_U and CET_S state, XRSTORS checks for reserved bits and canonicality as
described in Section 18.11 “Shadow Stack Management Instructions” on page 712.

