Foreword to the Second Edition

At some point during nearly every interview I give, as well as in question periods after
talks, I get asked some variant of the same question: ‘‘Did you expect Unix to last for so
long?’’ And of course the answer is always the same: No, we didn’t quite anticipate
what has happened. Even the observation that the system, in some form, has been
around for well more than half the lifetime of the commercial computing industry is
now dated.
     The course of developments has been turbulent and complicated. Computer
technology has changed greatly since the early 1970s, most notably in universal
networking, ubiquitous graphics, and readily available personal computing, but the
system has somehow managed to accommodate all of these phenomena. The
commercial environment, although today dominated on the desktop by Microsoft and
Intel, has in some ways moved from single-supplier to multiple sources and, in recent
years, to increasing reliance on public standards and on freely available source.
     Fortunately, Unix, considered as a phenomenon and not just a brand, has been able
to move with and even lead this wave. AT&T in the 1970s and 1980s was protective of
the actual Unix source code, but encouraged standardization efforts based on the
system’s interfaces and languages. For example, the SVID—the System V Interface
Definition — was published by AT&T, and it became the basis for the POSIX work and
its follow-ons. As it happened, Unix was able to adapt rather gracefully to a networked
environment and, perhaps less elegantly, but still adequately, to a graphical one. And as
it also happened, the basic Unix kernel interface and many of its characteristic user-level
tools were incorporated into the technological foundations of the open-source
movement.
     It is important that papers and writings about the Unix system were always
encouraged, even while the software of the system itself was proprietary, for example
Maurice Bach’s book, The Design of the Unix Operating System. In fact, I would claim that

                                                                                        xix
xx   Foreword to the Second Edition

      a central reason for the system’s longevity has been that it has attracted remarkably
      talented writers to explain its beauties and mysteries. Brian Kernighan is one of these;
      Rich Stevens is certainly another. The first edition of this book, along with his series of
      books about networking, are rightfully regarded as remarkably well-crafted works of
      exposition, and became hugely popular.
          However, the first edition of this book was published before Linux and the several
      open-source renditions of the Unix interface that stemmed from the Berkeley CSRG
      became widespread, and also at a time when many people’s networking consisted of a
      serial modem. Steve Rago has carefully updated this book to account for the technology
      changes, as well as developments in various ISO and IEEE standards since its first
      publication. Thus his examples are fresh, and freshly tested.
          It’s a most worthy second edition of a classic.

      Murray Hill, New Jersey                                                    Dennis Ritchie
      March 2005
