       Preface

Introduction

       It’s been almost eight years since I first updated Advanced Programming in the UNIX
       Environment, and already so much has changed.
           • Before the second edition was published, The Open Group created a 2004
             edition of the Single UNIX Specification, folding in the changes from two sets of
             corrigenda. In 2008, The Open Group created a new version of the Single UNIX
             Specification, updating the base definitions, adding new interfaces, and
             removing obsolete ones. This was called the 2008 version of POSIX.1, which
             included version 7 of the Base Specification and was published in 2009. In 2010,
             this was bundled with an updated curses interface and reissued as version 4 of
             the Single UNIX Specification.
           • Versions 10.5, 10.6, and 10.8 of the Mac OS X operating system, running on Intel
             processors, have been certified to be UNIX® systems by The Open Group.
           • Apple Computer discontinued development of Mac OS X for the PowerPC
             platform. From Release 10.6 (Snow Leopard) onward, new operating system
             versions are released for the x86 platform only.
           • The Solaris operating system was released in open source form to try to compete
             with the popularity of the open source model followed by FreeBSD, Linux, and
             Mac OS X. After Oracle Corporation bought Sun Microsystems in 2010, it
             discontinued the development of OpenSolaris. Instead, the Solaris community
             formed the Illumos project to continue open source development based on
             OpenSolaris. For more information, see http://www.illumos.org.

                                                                                           xxi
xxii   Preface

            • In 2011, the C standard was updated, but because systems haven’t caught up yet
              with the changes, we still refer to the 1999 version in this text.
       Most notably, the platforms used in the second edition have become out-of-date. In this
       book, the third edition, I cover the following platforms:
            1. FreeBSD 8.0, a descendant of the 4.4BSD release from the Computer Systems
               Research Group at the University of California at Berkeley, running on a 32-bit
               Intel Pentium processor.
            2. Linux 3.2.0 (the Ubuntu 12.04 distribution), a free UNIX-like operating system,
               running on a 64-bit Intel Core i5 processor.
            3. Apple Mac OS X, version 10.6.8 (Darwin 10.8.0) on a 64-bit Intel Core 2 Duo
               processor. (Darwin is based on FreeBSD and Mach.) I chose to switch to an
               Intel platform instead of continuing with one based on the PowerPC, because
               the latest versions of Mac OS X are no longer being ported to the PowerPC
               platform. The drawback to this choice is that the processors covered are now
               slanted in favor of Intel. When discussing issues of heterogeneity, it is helpful to
               have processors with different characteristics, such as byte ordering and integer
               size.
            4. Solaris 10, a derivative of System V Release 4 from Sun Microsystems (now
               Oracle), running on a 64-bit UltraSPARC IIi processor.

Changes from the Second Edition

       One of the biggest changes to the Single UNIX Specification in POSIX.1-2008 is the
       demotion of the STREAMS-related interfaces to obsolescent status. This is the first step
       before these interfaces are removed entirely in a future version of the standard. Because
       of this, I have reluctantly removed the STREAMS content from this edition of the book.
       This is an unfortunate change, because the STREAMS interfaces provided a nice
       contrast to the socket interfaces, and in many ways were more flexible. Admittedly, I
       am not entirely unbiased when it comes to the STREAMS mechanism, but there is no
       debating the reduced role it is playing in current systems:
            • Linux doesn’t include STREAMS in its base system, although packages (LiS and
              OpenSS7) are available to add this functionality.
            • Although Solaris 10 includes STREAMS, Solaris 11 uses a socket implementation
              that is not built on top of STREAMS.
            • Mac OS X doesn’t include support for STREAMS.
            • FreeBSD doesn’t include support for STREAMS (and never did).
       So with the removal of the STREAMS-related material, an opportunity exists to replace
       it with new topics, such as POSIX asynchronous I/O.
           In the second edition, the Linux version covered was based on the 2.4 version of the
       source. In this edition, I have updated the version of Linux to 3.2. One of the largest
                                                                                Preface   xxiii

      area of differences between these two versions is the threads subsystem. Between Linux
      2.4 and Linux 2.6, the threads implementation was changed to the Native POSIX Thread
      Library (NPTL). NPTL makes threads on Linux behave more like threads on the other
      systems.
           In total, this edition includes more than 70 new interfaces, including interfaces to
      handle asynchronous I/O, spin locks, barriers, and POSIX semaphores. Most obsolete
      interfaces are removed, except for a few ubiquitous ones.

Acknowledgments

      Many readers have e-mailed comments and bug reports on the second edition. My
      thanks to them for improving the accuracy of the information presented. The following
      people were the first to make a particular suggestion or point out a specific error: Seth
      Arnold, Luke Bakken, Rick Ballard, Johannes Bittner, David Bronder, Vlad Buslov, Peter
      Butler, Yuching Chen, Mike Cheng, Jim Collins, Bob Cousins, Will Dennis, Thomas
      Dickey, Loïc Domaigné, Igor Fuksman, Alex Gezerlis, M. Scott Gordon, Timothy Goya,
      Tony Graham, Michael Hobgood, Michael Kerrisk, Youngho Kwon, Richard Li, Xueke
      Liu, Yun Long, Dan McGregor, Dylan McNamee, Greg Miller, Simon Morgan, Harry
      Newton, Jim Oldfield, Scott Parish, Zvezdan Petkovic, David Reiss, Konstantinos
      Sakoutis, David Smoot, David Somers, Andriy Tkachuk, Nathan Weeks, Florian
      Weimer, Qingyang Xu, and Michael Zalokar.
          The technical reviewers improved the accuracy of the information presented.
      Thanks to Steve Albert, Bogdan Barbu, and Robert Day. Special thanks to Geoff Clare
      and Andrew Josey for providing insights into the Single UNIX Specification and
      helping to improve the accuracy of Chapter 2. Also, thanks to Ken Thompson for
      answering history questions.
          Once again, the staff at Addison-Wesley was great to work with. Thanks to Kim
      Boedigheimer, Romny French, John Fuller, Jessica Goldstein, Julie Nahil, and Debra
      Williams-Cauley. In addition, thanks to Jill Hobbs for providing her copyediting
      expertise this time around.
          Finally, thanks to my family for their understanding while I spent so much time
      working on this updated edition.
          As before, the source code presented here is available at www.apuebook.com. I
      welcome e-mail from any readers with comments, suggestions, or bug fixes.

      Warren, New Jersey                                                     Stephen A. Rago
      January 2013                                                       sar@apuebook.com
This page intentionally left blank
