       Preface to the Second Edition

Introduction

       Rich Stevens and I first met through an e-mail exchange when I reported a
       typographical error in his first book, UNIX Network Programming. He used to kid me
       about being the person to send him his first errata notice for the book. Until his death in
       1999, we exchanged e-mail irregularly, usually when one of us had a question we
       thought the other might be able to answer. We met for dinner at USENIX conferences
       and when Rich was teaching in the area.
           Rich Stevens was a friend who always conducted himself as a gentleman. When I
       wrote UNIX System V Network Programming in 1993, I intended it to be a System V
       version of Rich’s UNIX Network Programming. As was his nature, Rich gladly reviewed
       chapters for me, and treated me not as a competitor, but as a colleague. We often talked
       about collaborating on a STREAMS version of his TCP/IP Illustrated book. Had events
       been different, we might have actually done it, but since Rich is no longer with us,
       revising Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment is the closest I’ll ever get to
       writing a book with him.
           When the editors at Addison-Wesley told me that they wanted to update Rich’s
       book, I thought that there wouldn’t be too much to change. Even after 13 years, Rich’s
       work still holds up well. But the UNIX industry is vastly different today from what it
       was when the book was first published.
           • The System V variants are slowly being replaced by Linux. The major system
             vendors that ship their hardware with their own versions of the UNIX System
             have either made Linux ports available or announced support for Linux. Solaris
             is perhaps the last descendant of UNIX System V Release 4 with any appreciable
             market share.

                                                                                              xxv
xxvi   Preface to the Second Edition

           • After 4.4BSD was released, the Computing Science Research Group (CSRG) from
             the University of California at Berkeley decided to put an end to its
             development of the UNIX operating system, but several different groups of
             volunteers still maintain publicly available versions.
           • The introduction of Linux, supported by thousands of volunteers, has made it
             possible for anyone with a computer to run an operating system similar to the
             UNIX System, with freely available source code for the newest hardware
             devices. The success of Linux is something of a curiosity, given that several free
             BSD alternatives are readily available.
           • Continuing its trend as an innovative company, Apple Computer abandoned its
             old Mac operating system and replaced it with one based on Mach and FreeBSD.
       Thus, I’ve tried to update the information presented in this book to reflect these four
       platforms.
           After Rich wrote Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment in 1992, I got rid of
       most of my UNIX programmer ’s manuals. To this day, the two books I keep closest to
       my desk are a dictionary and a copy of Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment.
       I hope you find this revision equally useful.

Changes from the First Edition

       Rich’s work holds up well. I’ve tried not to change his original vision for this book, but
       a lot has happened in 13 years. This is especially true with the standards that affect the
       UNIX programming interface.
            Throughout the book, I’ve updated interfaces that have changed from the ongoing
       efforts in standards organizations. This is most noticeable in Chapter 2, since its
       primary topic is standards. The 2001 version of the POSIX.1 standard, which we use in
       this revision, is much more comprehensive than the 1990 version on which the first
       edition of this book was based. The 1990 ISO C standard was updated in 1999, and
       some changes affect the interfaces in the POSIX.1 standard.
            A lot more interfaces are now covered by the POSIX.1 specification. The base
       specifications of the Single UNIX Specification (published by The Open Group, formerly
       X/Open) have been merged with POSIX.1. POSIX.1 now includes several 1003.1
       standards and draft standards that were formerly published separately.
            Accordingly, I’ve added chapters to cover some new topics. Threads and
       multithreaded programming are important concepts because they present a cleaner way
       for programmers to deal with concurrency and asynchrony.
            The socket interface is now part of POSIX.1. It provides a single interface to
       interprocess communication (IPC), regardless of the location of the process, and is a
       natural extension of the IPC chapters.
            I’ve omitted most of the real-time interfaces that appear in POSIX.1. These are best
       treated in a text devoted to real-time programming. One such book appears in the
       bibliography.
            I’ve updated the case studies in the last chapters to cover more relevant real-world
       examples. For example, few systems these days are connected to a PostScript printer
                                                         Preface to the Second Edition    xxvii

      via a serial or parallel port. Most PostScript printers today are accessed via a network,
      so I’ve changed the case study that deals with PostScript printer communication to take
      this into account.
           The chapter on modem communication is less relevant these days. So that the
      original material is not lost, however, it is available on the book’s Web site in two
      formats: PostScript (http://www.apuebook.com/lostchapter/modem.ps) and
      PDF (http://www.apuebook.com/lostchapter/modem.pdf).
           The source code for the examples shown in this book is also available at
      www.apuebook.com. Most of the examples have been run on four platforms:
          1. FreeBSD 5.2.1, a derivative of the 4.4BSD release from the Computer Systems
             Research Group at the University of California at Berkeley, running on an Intel
             Pentium processor
          2. Linux 2.4.22 (the Mandrake 9.2 distribution), a free UNIX-like operating system,
             running on Intel Pentium processors
          3. Solaris 9, a derivative of System V Release 4 from Sun Microsystems, running on
             a 64-bit UltraSPARC IIi processor
          4. Darwin 7.4.0, an operating environment based on FreeBSD and Mach,
             supported by Apple Mac OS X, version 10.3, on a PowerPC processor

Acknowledgments

      Rich Stevens wrote the first edition of this book on his own, and it became an instant
      classic.
          I couldn’t have updated this book without the support of my family. They put up
      with piles of papers scattered about the house (well, more so than usual), my
      monopolizing most of the computers in the house, and lots of hours with my face
      buried behind a computer terminal. My wife, Jeanne, even helped out by installing
      Linux for me on one of the test machines.
          The technical reviewers suggested many improvements and helped make sure that
      the content was accurate. Many thanks to David Bausum, David Boreham, Keith Bostic,
      Mark Ellis, Phil Howard, Andrew Josey, Mukesh Kacker, Brian Kernighan, Bengt
      Kleberg, Ben Kuperman, Eric Raymond, and Andy Rudoff.
          I’d also like to thank Andy Rudoff for answering questions about Solaris and
      Dennis Ritchie for digging up old papers and answering history questions. Once again,
      the staff at Addison-Wesley was great to work with. Thanks to Tyrrell Albaugh, Mary
      Franz, John Fuller, Karen Gettman, Jessica Goldstein, Noreen Regina, and John Wait.
      My thanks to Evelyn Pyle for the fine job of copyediting.
          As Rich did, I also welcome electronic mail from any readers with comments,
      suggestions, or bug fixes.

      Warren, New Jersey                                                     Stephen A. Rago
      April 2005                                                         sar@apuebook.com
This page intentionally left blank
