       Preface to the First Edition

Introduction

       This book describes the programming interface to the Unix system—the system call
       interface and many of the functions provided in the standard C library. It is intended
       for anyone writing programs that run under Unix.
            Like most operating systems, Unix provides numerous services to the programs
       that are running — open a file, read a file, start a new program, allocate a region of
       memory, get the current time-of-day, and so on. This has been termed the system call
       interface. Additionally, the standard C library provides numerous functions that are
       used by almost every C program (format a variable’s value for output, compare two
       strings, etc.).
            The system call interface and the library routines have traditionally been described
       in Sections 2 and 3 of the Unix Programmer ’s Manual. This book is not a duplication of
       these sections. Examples and rationale are missing from the Unix Programmer ’s Manual,
       and that’s what this book provides.

Unix Standards

       The proliferation of different versions of Unix during the 1980s has been tempered by
       the various international standards that were started during the late 1980s. These
       include the ANSI standard for the C programming language, the IEEE POSIX family
       (still being developed), and the X/Open portability guide.
            This book also describes these standards. But instead of just describing the
       standards by themselves, we describe them in relation to popular implementations of
       the standards — System V Release 4 and the forthcoming 4.4BSD. This provides a real-
       world description, which is often lacking from the standard itself and from books that
       describe only the standard.

xxx   Preface to the First Edition

Organization of the Book

       This book is divided into six parts:

           1. An overview and introduction to basic Unix programming concepts and
              terminology (Chapter 1), with a discussion of the various Unix standardization
              efforts and different Unix implementations (Chapter 2).
           2. I/O—unbuffered I/O (Chapter 3), properties of files and directories
              (Chapter 4), the standard I/O library (Chapter 5), and the standard system data
              files (Chapter 6).
           3. Processes — the environment of a Unix process (Chapter 7), process control
              (Chapter 8), the relationships between different processes (Chapter 9), and
              signals (Chapter 10).
           4. More I/O — terminal I/O (Chapter 11), advanced I/O (Chapter 12), and daemon
              processes (Chapter 13).
           5. IPC—Interprocess communication (Chapters 14 and 15).
           6. Examples—a database library (Chapter 16), communicating with a PostScript
              printer (Chapter 17), a modem dialing program (Chapter 18), and using pseudo
              terminals (Chapter 19).

           A reading familiarity with C would be beneficial as would some experience using
       Unix. No prior programming experience with Unix is assumed. This text is intended
       for programmers familiar with Unix and programmers familiar with some other
       operating system who wish to learn the details of the services provided by most Unix
       systems.

Examples in the Text

       This book contains many examples—approximately 10,000 lines of source code. All the
       examples are in the C programming language. Furthermore, these examples are in
       ANSI C. You should have a copy of the Unix Programmer ’s Manual for your system
       handy while reading this book, since reference is made to it for some of the more
       esoteric and implementation-dependent features.
           Almost every function and system call is demonstrated with a small, complete
       program. This lets us see the arguments and return values and is often easier to
       comprehend than the use of the function in a much larger program. But since some of
       the small programs are contrived examples, a few bigger examples are also included
       (Chapters 16, 17, 18, and 19). These larger examples demonstrate the programming
       techniques in larger, real-world examples.
           All the examples have been included in the text directly from their source files. A
       machine-readable copy of all the examples is available via anonymous FTP from the
       Internet host ftp.uu.net in the file published/books/stevens.advprog.tar.Z.
       Obtaining the source code allows you to modify the programs from this text and
       experiment with them on your system.
                                                                           Preface to the First Edition        xxxi

Systems Used to Test the Examples

      Unfortunately all operating systems are moving targets. Unix is no exception. The
      following diagram shows the recent evolution of the various versions of System V and
      4.xBSD.
                                                                                                    4.3+BSD
         4.3BSD                      4.3BSD Tahoe                         4.3BSD Reno                   4.4BSD ?
                                                        BSD Net 1                       BSD Net 2

            1986           1987           1988            1989             1990           1991          1992

           SVR3.0        SVR3.1          SVR3.2                           SVR4
                                                 XPG3            ANSI C        POSIX.1

      4.xBSD are the various systems from the Computer Systems Research Group at the
      University of California at Berkeley. This group also distributes the BSD Net 1 and BSD
      Net 2 releases — publicly available source code from the 4.xBSD systems. SVRx refers to
      System V Release x from AT&T. XPG3 is the X/Open Portability Guide, Issue 3, and
      ANSI C is the ANSI standard for the C programming language. POSIX.1 is the IEEE
      and ISO standard for the interface to a Unix-like system. We’ll have more to say about
      these different standards and the various versions of Unix in Sections 2.2 and 2.3.

                    In this text we use the term 4.3+BSD to refer to the Unix system from
                    Berkeley that is somewhere between the BSD Net 2 release and 4.4BSD.

                    At the time of this writing, 4.4BSD was not released, so the system could not be called 4.4BSD.
                    Nevertheless a simple name was needed to refer to this system and 4.3+BSD is used
                    throughout the text.

      Most of the examples in this text have been run on four different versions of Unix:

          1. Unix System V/386 Release 4.0 Version 2.0 (‘‘vanilla SVR4’’) from U.H. Corp.
             (UHC), on an Intel 80386 processor.
          2. 4.3+BSD at the Computer Systems Research Group, Computer Science Division,
             University of California at Berkeley, on a Hewlett Packard workstation.
          3. BSD/386 (a derivative of the BSD Net 2 release) from Berkeley Software Design,
             Inc., on an Intel 80386 processor. This system is almost identical to what we call
             4.3+BSD.
          4. SunOS 4.1.1 and 4.1.2 (systems with a strong Berkeley heritage but many
             System V features) from Sun Microsystems, on a SPARCstation SLC.

      Numerous timing tests are provided in the text and the systems used for the test are
      identified.
xxxii   Preface to the First Edition

Acknowledgments

        Once again I am indebted to my family for their love, support, and many lost weekends
        over the past year and a half. Writing a book is, in many ways, a family affair. Thank
        you Sally, Bill, Ellen, and David.
             I am especially grateful to Brian Kernighan for his help in the book. His numerous
        thorough reviews of the entire manuscript and his gentle prodding for better prose
        hopefully show in the final result. Steve Rago was also a great resource, both in
        reviewing the entire manuscript and answering many questions about the details and
        history of System V. My thanks to the other technical reviewers used by Addison-
        Wesley, who provided valuable comments on various portions of the manuscript:
        Maury Bach, Mark Ellis, Jeff Gitlin, Peter Honeyman, John Linderman, Doug McIlroy,
        Evi Nemeth, Craig Partridge, Dave Presotto, Gary Wilson, and Gary Wright.
             Keith Bostic and Kirk McKusick at the U.C. Berkeley CSRG provided an account
        that was used to test the examples on the latest BSD system. (Many thanks to Peter
        Salus too.) Sam Nataros and Joachim Sacksen at UHC provided the copy of SVR4 used
        to test the examples. Trent Hein helped obtain the alpha and beta copies of BSD/386.
             Other friends have helped in many small, but significant ways over the past few
        years: Paul Lucchina, Joe Godsil, Jim Hogue, Ed Tankus, and Gary Wright. My editor at
        Addison-Wesley, John Wait, has been a great friend through it all. He never complained
        when the due date slipped and the page count kept increasing. A special thanks to the
        National Optical Astronomy Observatories (NOAO), especially Sidney Wolff, Richard
        Wolff, and Steve Grandi, for providing computer time.
             Real Unix books are written using troff and this book follows that time-honored
        tradition. Camera-ready copy of the book was produced by the author using the groff
        package written by James Clark. Many thanks to James Clark for providing this
        excellent system and for his rapid response to bug fixes. Perhaps someday I will really
        understand troff footer traps.
             I welcome electronic mail from any readers with comments, suggestions, or bug
        fixes.

        Tucson, Arizona                                               W. Richard Stevens
        April 1992                                               rstevens@kohala.com
                                                     http://www.kohala.com/˜rstevens
