Synthesis Lectures on
Computer Architecture

Michael L. Scott
Trevor Brown

Shared-Memory
Synchronization
Second Edition
Synthesis Lectures on Computer
Architecture

Series Editor
Natalie Enright Jerger, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
This series covers topics pertaining to the science and art of designing, analyzing,
selecting and interconnecting hardware components to create computers that meet func-
tional, performance and cost goals. The scope will largely follow the purview of premier
computer architecture conferences, such as ISCA, HPCA, MICRO, and ASPLOS.
Michael L. Scott · Trevor Brown

Shared-Memory
Synchronization
Second Edition
Michael L. Scott                                                 Trevor Brown
University of Rochester                                          University of Waterloo
Rochester, NY, USA                                               Waterloo, ON, Canada

ISSN 1935-3235                     ISSN 1935-3243 (electronic)
Synthesis Lectures on Computer Architecture
ISBN 978-3-031-38683-1             ISBN 978-3-031-38684-8 (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8

1st edition: © Morgan & Claypool, 2013
2nd edition: © The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature
Switzerland AG 2024

This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether the whole
or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information storage
and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or
hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication does
not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective
laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book are
believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the editors give
a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that
may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional affiliations.

This Springer imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
To Kelly and Britt
