Architectural Background
                                                                                                 2

The correctness and performance of synchronization algorithms depend crucially on archi-
tectural details of multicore and multiprocessor machines. This chapter provides an overview
of these details. It can be skimmed by those already familiar with the subject, but should
probably not be skipped in its entirety: the implications of store buffers and directory-based
coherence on synchronization algorithms, for example, may not be immediately obvious,
and the semantics of synchronizing instructions (ordered accesses, memory fences, and
read-modify-write instructions) may not be universally familiar.
   The chapter is divided into three main sections. In the first, we consider the implica-
tions for parallel programs of caching and coherence protocols. In the second, we consider
consistency—the degree to which accesses to different memory locations can or cannot be
assumed to occur in any particular order. In the third, we survey the various read-modify-
write instructions—test_and_set and its cousins—that underlie most implementations of
atomicity.

2.1      Cores and Caches: Basic Shared-Memory Architecture

Figures 2.1 and 2.2 depict two of the many possible configurations of processors, cores,
caches, and memories in a modern parallel machine. In a so-called symmetric machine,
all memory banks are equally distant from every processor core. Symmetric machines are
sometimes said to have a uniform memory access (UMA) architecture. More common today
are nonuniform memory access (NUMA) machines, in which each memory bank is associ-
ated with a processor (or in some cases with a multi-processor node), and can be accessed
by cores of the local processor more quickly than by cores of other processors.
    As feature sizes continue to shrink, the number of cores per processor can be expected
to increase. As of this writing, the typical desk-side machine has 1–4 processors with 2–16

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024            11
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_2

           Processor 1                                        Processor n
            Core 1                       Core k
                     ...           ...                                 ...            ...

              L1

                           ...
                                                     ...                     ...
                     L2

                           L3

                                              Global Interconnect

                Memory Bank 1                                                 Memory Bank m

                                                     ...
Figure 2.1 Typical symmetric (uniform memory access—UMA) machine. Numbers of components
of various kinds, and degree of sharing at various levels, differs across manufacturers and models.

           Processor 1                                        Processor n
            Core 1                       Core k
                     ...           ...                                 ...            ...

              L1

                           ...
                                                     ...                     ...
                     L2

                                              Global Interconnect

                           L3

                Memory Bank 1                                                 Memory Bank n

                                                     ...
Figure 2.2 Typical nonuniform memory access (NUMA) machine. Again, numbers of components
of various kinds, and degree of sharing at various levels, differs across manufacturers and models.

cores each. Server-class machines are architecturally similar, but with the potential for many
more processors and cores. Small machines often employ a symmetric architecture for the
sake of simplicity. The physical distances in larger machines often motivate a switch to
NUMA architecture, so that memory accesses can be somewhat faster when they happen to
be local.
   On some machines, each core may be multithreaded—capable of executing instructions
from more than one thread at a time (current per-core thread counts range from 1 to 8). Each
core typically has a private level-1 (L1) cache, and shares a level-2 cache with other cores
in its local cluster. Clusters on the same processor of a symmetric machine then share a
common L3 cache. Each cache holds a temporary copy of data currently in active use by
cores above it in the hierarchy, allowing those data to be accessed more quickly than they
could be if kept in memory. On a NUMA machine in which the L2 connects directly to the
global interconnect, the L3 may sometimes be thought of as “belonging” to the memory.
   In a machine with more than one processor, the global interconnect may have vari-
ous topologies. On small machines, broadcast buses and crossbars are common; on large
machines, a network of point-to-point links is more common. For synchronization purposes,
broadcast has the side effect of imposing a total order on all inter-processor messages; we
shall see in Sec. 2.2 that this simplifies the design of concurrent algorithms—synchronization
algorithms in particular. Ordering is sufficiently helpful, in fact, that some large machines
(notably those sold by Oracle) employ two different global networks: one for data requests,
which are small, and benefit from ordering, and the other for replies, which require signifi-
cantly more aggregate bandwidth, but do not need to be ordered.
   As the number of cores per processor increases, on-chip interconnects—the connections
among the L2 and L3 caches in particular—can be expected to take on the complexity of
current global interconnects. Other forms of increased complexity are also likely, includ-
ing, perhaps, additional levels of caching, non-hierarchical topologies, and heterogeneous
implementations or even instruction sets among cores.1
   The diversity of current and potential future architectures notwithstanding, multilevel
caching has several important consequences for programs on almost any modern machine;
we explore these in the following subsections.

2.1.1    Temporal and Spatial Locality

In both sequential and parallel programs, performance can usually be expected to correlate
with the temporal and spatial locality of memory references. If a given location l is accessed
more than once by the same thread (or perhaps by different threads on the same core or
cluster), performance is likely to be better if the two references are close together in time

1 The most obvious example of heterogeneity is the now-ubiquitous programmable GPU. Recent
GPU architectures pose intriguing challenges for synchronization but are beyond the scope of this
monograph.

(temporal locality). The benefit stems from the fact that l is likely still to be in cache, and
the second reference will be a hit instead of a miss. Similarly, if a thread accesses location l2
shortly after l1 , performance is likely to be better if the two locations have nearby addresses
(spatial locality). Here the benefit stems from the fact that l1 and l2 are likely to lie in the
same cache line, so l2 will have been loaded into cache as a side effect of loading l1 .
   On current machines, cache line sizes typically vary between 32 and 512 bytes. There has
been a gradual trend toward larger sizes over time. Different levels of the cache hierarchy
may also use different sizes, with lines at lower levels typically being larger.
   To improve temporal locality, the programmer must generally restructure algorithms, to
change the order of computations. Spatial locality is often easier to improve—for example,
by changing the layout of data in memory to co-locate items that are frequently accessed
together, or by changing the order of traversal in multidimensional arrays. These sorts of
optimizations have long been an active topic of research, even for sequential programs—
see, for example, the texts of Muchnick (1997, Chapter 20) or Allen and Kennedy (2002,
Chapter 9).

2.1.2    Cache Coherence

On a single-core machine, there is a single cache at each level, and while a given block of
memory may be present in more than one level of the memory hierarchy, one can always
be sure that the version closest to the top contains up-to-date values. (With a write-through
cache, values in lower levels of the hierarchy will never be out of date by more than some
bounded amount of time. With a write-back cache, values in lower levels may be arbitrarily
stale—but harmless, because they are hidden by copies at higher levels.)
   On a shared-memory parallel system, by contrast—unless we do something special—
data in upper levels of the memory hierarchy may no longer be up-to-date if they have been
modified by some thread on another core. Suppose, for example, that threads on Cores 1
and k in Figure 2.1 have both been reading variable x, and each has retained a copy in its L1
cache. If the thread on Core 1 then modifies x, even if it writes its value through (or back)
to memory, how do we prevent the thread on Core k from continuing to read the stale copy?
   A cache-coherent parallel system is one in which (1) changes to data, even when cached,
are guaranteed to become visible to all threads, on all cores, within a bounded (and typically
small) amount of time; and (2) changes to the same location are seen in the same order
by all threads. On almost all modern machines, coherence is achieved by means of an
invalidation-based cache coherence protocol. Such a protocol, operating across the system’s
cache controllers, maintains the invariant that there is at most one writable copy of any given
cache line anywhere in the system—and, if the number is one and not zero, there are no
read-only copies.
   Algorithms to maintain cache coherence are a complex topic, and the subject of ongoing
research (for an overview, see the monograph of Sorin et al. (2019), or the more extensive [if

dated] coverage of Culler and Singh (1998, Chaps. 5, 6, & 8)). Most protocols in use today
descend from the four-state protocol of Goodman (1983). In this protocol (using modern
names for the states), each line in each cache is either invalid (empty) or holds a block that is
shared (read-only, and possibly present in more than one cache), exclusive (present in only
one cache, and up-to-date in memory), or modified (present in only one cache, and in need
of write-back).
   To maintain the at-most-one-writable-copy invariant, the coherence protocol arranges,
on any write to an invalid or shared line, to invalidate (evict) any copies of the block in all
other caches in the system. In a system with a broadcast-based interconnect, invalidation is
straightforward. In a system with point-to-point connections, the coherence protocol typi-
cally maintains some sort of directory information that allows it to find all other copies of a
block.

2.1.3     Processor (Core) Locality

On a single-core machine, misses occur on an initial access (a “cold miss”) and as a result of
limited cache capacity or associativity (a “conflict miss”).2 On a cache-coherent machine,
misses may also occur because of the need to maintain coherence. Specifically, a read or
write may miss because a previously cached block has been written by some other core,
and has reverted to invalid state; a write may also miss because a previously exclusive or
modified block has been read by some other core, and has reverted to shared state.
   Absent program restructuring, coherence misses are inevitable if threads on different
cores access the same datum (and at least one of them writes it) at roughly the same point

No-remote-caching Multiprocessors
Most of this monograph assumes a shared-memory multiprocessor with global (distributed) cache
coherence, which we have contrasted with machines in which message passing provides the only
means of interprocessor communication. There is an intermediate option. Some NUMA machines
(notably many of the offerings from Cray, Inc.) support a single global address space, in which
any processor can access any memory location, but remote locations cannot be cached. We may
refer to such a machine as a no-remote-caching (NRC-NUMA) multiprocessor. (Globally cache
coherent NUMA machines are sometimes known as CC-NUMA.) Any access to a location in some
other processor’s memory will traverse the interconnect of an NRC-NUMA machine. Assuming the
hardware implements cache coherence within each node—in particular, between the local processor(s)
and the network interface—memory will still be globally coherent. For the sake of performance,
however, system and application programmers will need to employ algorithms that minimize the
number of remote references.

2 A cache is said to be k-way associative if its indexing structure permits a given block to be cached
in any of k distinct locations. If k is 1, the cache is said to be direct mapped. If a block may be held
in any line, the cache is said to be fully associative.

in time. In addition to temporal and spatial locality, it is therefore important for parallel
programs to exhibit good thread locality: as much possible, a given datum should be accessed
by only one thread at a time.
   Coherence misses may sometimes occur when threads are accessing different data, if those
data happen to lie in the same cache block. This false sharing can often be eliminated—
yielding a major speed improvement—if data structures are padded and aligned to occupy an
integral number of cache lines. For busy-wait synchronization algorithms, it is particularly
important to minimize the extent to which different threads may spin on the same location—
or locations in the same cache block. Spinning with a write on a shared location—as we
did in the test_and_set lock of Sec. 1.3, is particularly deadly: each such write leads to
interconnect traffic proportional to the number of other spinning threads. We will consider
these issues further in Chapter 4.

2.2      Memory Consistency

On a single-core machine, it is relatively straightforward to ensure that instructions appear
to complete in execution order. Ideally, one might hope that a similar guarantee would apply
to parallel machines—that memory accesses, system-wide, would appear to constitute an
interleaving (in execution order) of the accesses of the various cores. For several reasons,
this sort of sequential consistency (Lamport 1979) imposes nontrivial constraints on perfor-
mance. Most real machines implement a more relaxed (i.e., potentially inconsistent) memory
model, in which accesses by different threads, or to different locations by the same thread,
may appear to occur “out of order” from the perspective of threads on other cores. When
consistency is required, programmers (or compilers) must employ special synchronizing
instructions that are more strongly ordered than other, “ordinary” instructions, forcing the
local core to wait for various classes of potentially in-flight events. Synchronizing instruc-
tions are an essential part of synchronization algorithms on any non-sequentially consistent
machine.

2.2.1    Sources of Inconsistency

Inconsistency is a natural result of common architectural features. In an out-of-order pro-
cessor, for example—one that can execute instructions in any order consistent with (thread-
local) data dependences—a write must be held in the reorder buffer until all instructions that
precede it in program order have completed. Likewise, since almost any modern processor
can generate a burst of store instructions faster than the underlying memory system can
absorb them, even writes that are logically ready to commit may need to be buffered for
many cycles. The structure that holds these writes is known as a store buffer.

                 // initially x = y = 0
                 thread 1:                                        thread 2:
                 1:   x := 1                                      1:   y := 1
                 2:                                               2:
                                               ?
                      i := y                                           j := x

                 // finally i = j = 0

Figure 2.3 An apparent ordering loop.

    When executing a load instruction, a core checks the contents of its reorder and store
buffers before forwarding a request to the memory system. This check ensures that the core
always sees its own recent writes, even if they have not yet made their way to cache or
memory. At the same time, a load that accesses a location that has not been written recently
may make its way to memory before logically previous instructions that wrote to other
locations. This fact is harmless on a uniprocessor, but consider the implications on a parallel
machine, as shown in Figure 2.3. If the write to x is delayed in thread 1’s store buffer, and
the write to y is similarly delayed in thread 2’s store buffer, then both threads may read a
zero at line 2, suggesting that line 2 of thread 1 executes before line 1 of thread 2, and line 2
of thread 2 executes before line 1 of thread 1. When combined with program order (line 1
in each thread should execute before line 2 in the same thread), this gives us an apparent
“ordering loop,” which “should” be logically impossible.
    Similar problems can occur deeper in the memory hierarchy. A modern machine can
require several hundred cycles to service a miss that goes all the way to memory. At each
step along the way (core to L1, …, L3 to bus, …) pending requests may be buffered in a
queue. If multiple requests may be active simultaneously (as is common, at least, on the
global interconnect), and if some requests may complete more quickly than others, then
memory accesses may appear to be reordered. So long as accesses to the same location (by
the same thread) are forced to occur in order, single-threaded code will run correctly. On a
multiprocessor, however, sequential consistency may again be violated.
    On a NUMA machine, or a machine with a topologically complex interconnect, differing
distances among locations provide additional sources of circular ordering. If variable x in
Figure 2.3 is close to thread 2 but far from thread 1, and y is close to thread 1 but far
from thread 2, the reads on line 2 can easily complete before the writes on line 1, even if
all accesses are inserted into the memory system in program order. With a topologically
complex interconnect, the cache coherence protocol itself may introduce variable delays—
e.g., to dispatch invalidation requests to the various locations that may need to change the
state of a local cache line, and to collect acknowledgments. Again, these differing delays
may allow line 2 of the example—in both threads—to complete before line 1.
    In all the explanations of Figure 2.3, the ordering loop results from reads bypassing
writes—executing in-order (write-then-read) from the perspective of the issuing core, but
out of order (read-then-write) from the perspective of the memory system—or of threads on

// initially x = y = 0

thread 1:                thread 2:                           thread 3:                  thread 4:
1:   x := 1              1:   x2 := x                        1:   y3 := y               1:   y := 1
                         2:   y2 := y             ?          2:   x3 := x

// finally y2 = x3 = 0 and x2 = y3 = 1

Figure 2.4 Independent reads of independent writes (IRIW). If the writes of threads 1 and 4 propagate
to different places at different speeds, we can see a ordering loop even if instructions from the same
thread never bypass one another.

other cores. On NUMA or topologically complex machines, it may also be possible for reads
to bypass reads, writes to bypass reads, or writes to bypass writes. Worse, circularity may
arise even without bypassing—i.e., even when every thread executes its own instructions
in strict program order. Consider the “independent reads of independent writes” (IRIW)
example shown in Figure 2.4. If thread 1 is close to thread 2 but far from thread 3, and
thread 4 is close to thread 3 but far from thread 2, the reads on line 1 in threads 2 and 3 may
see the new values of x and y, while the reads on line 2 see the old. Here the problem is
not bypassing, but a lack of write atomicity—one thread sees the value written by a store
and another thread subsequently sees the value prior to the store. Many other examples of
unintuitive behavior permitted by modern hardware can be found in the literature (Adve and
Gharachorloo 1996; Adve et al. 1999; Manson et al. 2005; Boehm and Adve 2008).

2.2.2     Special Instructions to Order Memory Access

If left unaddressed, memory inconsistency can easily derail attempts at synchronization.
Consider the flag-based programming idiom illustrated in Figure 2.5. If foo can never return

Compilers Also Reorder Instructions
While this chapter focuses on architectural issues, it should be noted that compilers also routinely
reorder instructions. In any program not written in machine code, compilers perform a variety of opti-
mizations in an attempt to improve performance. Simple examples include reordering computations to
expose and eliminate redundancies, hoisting invariants out of loops, and “scheduling” instructions to
minimize processor pipeline bubbles. Such optimizations are legal so long as they respect control and
data dependences within a single thread. Like the hardware optimizations discussed in this section,
compiler optimizations can lead to inconsistent behavior when more than one thread is involved. As
we shall see in Sec. 3.3, a language designed for concurrent programming must provide a memory
model that explains allowable behavior, and some set of primitives—typically special synchroniza-
tion operations or reads and writes of special atomic variables—that serve to order accesses at the
language level.

                         // initially x = f = 0
                         thread 1:                           thread 2:
                              x := foo()                          while !f
                              f := true                                // spin
                                                                  y := 1/x

Figure 2.5 A simple example of flag-based synchronization. To avoid a spurious error, the update
to x must be visible to thread 2 before the update to f.

zero, a programmer might naively expect that thread 2 will never see a divide-by-zero error
at line 3. If the write at line 2 in thread 1 can bypass the write in line 1, however, thread 2
may read x too early, and see a value of zero. Similarly, if the read of x at line 3 in thread 2
can bypass the read of f in line 1, a divide-by-zero may again occur, even if the writes in
thread 1 complete in order. (While thread 2’s read of x is separated from the read of f by
a conditional test, the second read may still issue before the first completes, if the branch
predictor guesses that the loop will never iterate.)
    Any machine that is not sequentially consistent will provide special instructions that allow
the programmer to force consistent ordering in situations in which it matters, but in which
the hardware might not otherwise guarantee it. Perhaps the simplest such instruction is a
synchronizing access (typically a special load or store) that is guaranteed to be both locally
and globally ordered. Here “locally ordered” means that the synchronizing access will appear
to occur after any preceding (ordinary or synchronizing) accesses in its own thread, and
before any subsequent (ordinary or synchronizing) accesses in its thread, from the perspective
of all threads. “Globally ordered” means that the synchronizing access will appear to occur
in some consistent, total order with respect to all other synchronizing instructions in the
program, from the perspective of all threads. (These orders overlap, in that both require
synchronizing accesses by the same thread appear to occur in program order, from the
perspective of all threads.)
    To avoid the spurious error in Figure 2.5, it is sufficient (though not necessary) to use fully
(locally and globally) ordered accesses to f in both threads, thereby ensuring that thread 1’s
update of x happens before its update of f, and thread 2’s read of x happens after it sees

Barriers Everywhere
Fences are sometimes known as memory barriers. Sadly, the word barrier is heavily overloaded.
As noted in Sec. 1.2 (and explored in more detail in Sec. 5.2), it is the name of a synchronization
mechanism used to separate program phases. In the programming language community, it refers to
code that must be executed when changing a pointer, in order to maintain bookkeeping information
for the garbage collector. In a similar vein, it sometimes refers to code that must be executed when
reading or writing a shared variable inside an atomic transaction, in order to detect and recover from
speculation failures (we discuss this code in Chapter 9, but without referring to it as a “barrier”). The
intended meaning is usually clear from context, but may be confusing to readers who are familiar
with only some of the definitions.

the change to f. Alternatively, ordering could be ensured by inserting a full fence instruction
between lines 1 and 2 in thread 1, and between lines 2 and 3 in thread 2. A full fence doesn’t
read or write memory itself, but it ensures that all preceding memory accesses in its thread
appear to occur before all subsequent memory accesses in its thread, from the perspective
of all threads.
   Write atomicity guarantees that stores will be seen in the same order by all threads; it is
a necessary condition for global ordering, and is usually available—at least as an option—
for synchronizing stores (even if not for ordinary stores). At the hardware level, the cache
coherence protocol can ensure write atomicity by preventing a load from returning the value
written by a given store until it verifies that no load elsewhere in the machine can ever again
return the previous value.
   In Figure 2.3, circularity could be avoided by using fully ordered stores for the line-1
writes (in both threads) or by using fully ordered loads for the line-2 reads (in both threads).
Alternatively, we could insert full fences between lines 1 and 2 in both threads. Interestingly,
write atomicity has no impact, since each thread reads only one variable. In Figure 2.4, by
contrast, write atomicity is really all that matters; to ensure it, we must use write-atomic
synchronizing stores in both thread 1 and thread 4. Synchronizing loads in threads 2 and 3—
or fences between the loads—will not address the problem: absent write atomicity, it is
possible for thread 1’s write to appear to happen before the entire set of reads—and thread 4’s
write after—from the perspective of thread 2, and vice versa for thread 3.
   On many machines, fully ordered synchronizing instructions turn out to be quite expen-
sive—tens or even hundreds of cycles. Moreover, in many cases—including those described
above—full ordering is more than we need for correct behavior. Architects therefore often
provide a variety of weaker synchronizing instructions. These may or may not be globally
ordered, and may prevent some, but not all, local bypassing. As we shall see in Sec. 2.2.3, the
details vary greatly from one machine architecture to another. Moreover, behavior is often
defined not in terms of the orderings an instruction guarantees among memory accesses,
but in terms of the reorderings it inhibits in the processor core, the cache subsystem, or the
interconnect.
   Unfortunately, there is no obvious, succinct way to specify minimal ordering requirements
in parallel programs. Neither synchronizing accesses nor fences, for example, allow us to
order two individual accesses with respect to one another (and not with respect to anything
else), if that is all that is really required. In an attempt to balance simplicity and clarity,
subsequent examples in this monograph use a notation inspired by (but simpler than) the
atomic operations of C++’11 and its successors. Using this notation, we will indicate
opportunities to employ less-than-fully-ordered synchronizing accesses in many (though
not all) algorithms.
   A summary of our notation, and of the memory model behind it, can be found in Table 2.1.
To specify local ordering, each synchronizing instruction admits an optional annotation of
the form P ∥ S, indicating that the instruction is ordered with respect to preceding (P) and/or
subsequent (S) read and write accesses in its thread (P, S ⊂ {R, W}). Note that atomic

Table 2.1 Understanding the pseudocode.
 Throughout the remainder of this monograph, pseudocode will be set in sans serif font
 (code in real programming languages will be set in typewriter font). We will use the
 term synchronizing access to refer to explicit loads and stores, fences, and atomic read-
 modify-write (fetch_and_Φ) operations (listed in Table 2.4). Other memory accesses will
 be referred to as “ordinary.” We will assume the following:
 coherence (per-location)
    For any given location, all accesses (ordinary and synchronizing) to that location
    appear in some global total order.
 global order (for synchronizing accesses)
    There is a global, total order on synchronizing accesses (to all locations, by all
    threads).
 program order (per-thread)
    All accesses by a given thread occur (from that thread’s perspective) in the order
    specified by programming language semantics. Note that this order does not
    necessarily correspond to physical reality in the implementation: both the com-
    piler and the hardware may reorder assembly-level instructions if they are able
    to prove that a sequential program cannot tell the difference. Moreover, since
    ordinary accesses of different threads are ordered only transitively via local order
    (below), a thread is generally unable to observe the program order of its peers.
 local order
    Within a given thread, each synchronizing access is ordered with respect to pre-
    vious and subsequent accesses (both ordinary and synchronizing) as specified
    by (implicit or explicit) {R,W}∥{R,W} annotations. For fully ordered (RW∥RW)
    synchronizing instructions, global and program order are consistent.
 values read
    A read instruction may return the value written by the most recent write (to the
    same location) that is ordered before the read. It may also, in some cases, return
    the value written by an unordered write. More detail on memory models can be
    found in Sec. 3.3.

read-modify-write instructions, such as those described below in Sec. 2.3, count as both
reads and writes in such annotations. So, for example, f.store(1, W∥) might be used in Figure
2.5 at line 2 of thread 1 to order the (synchronizing) store to f after the (ordinary) write
to x, and f.load(∥RW) might be used at line 1 of thread 2 to order the (synchronizing)
load of f before both the (ordinary) read of x and any other subsequent reads and writes.
Similarly, fence(RW∥RW) would indicate a full fence, ordered globally with respect to all
other synchronizing instructions and locally with respect to all preceding and subsequent
ordinary accesses in its thread. For simplicity, we will assume that synchronizing stores and
fetch_and_Φ operations are always write atomic.
   As a general rule, we will use an explicit load or store instruction for any access that may
race with a conflicting access in another thread (more on the notion of races in Sec. 3.4.2). In

the absence of annotations, we assume RW ∥ RW ordering for synchronizing instructions.3 To
indicate a synchronizing instruction with no ordering constraints, we use the annotation ∥.
The main difference between an ordinary access and a synchronizing access annotated with
∥ is that the former can participate in a data race, and the latter cannot. We will assume that
the annotation on a synchronizing instruction (including the default RW ∥ RW of an unlabeled
instruction) inhibits reordering not only by the hardware (processor, cache, or interconnect),
but also by the compiler or interpreter. Compiler writers or assembly language programmers
interested in porting our pseudocode to some concrete machine will need to restrict their code
improvement algorithms accordingly, and issue appropriate synchronizing instructions for
the hardware at hand. Beginning guidance can be found in Doug Lea’s on-line “Cookbook
for Compiler Writers” (Lea 2001) or in the on-line compendium hosted at the University of
Cambridge (Sewell 2014).
   To determine the need for synchronizing instructions in the code of a given synchroniza-
tion algorithm, we shall need to consider both the correctness of the algorithm itself and
the semantics it is intended to provide to the rest of the program. The acquire operation
of Peterson’s two-thread spin lock (Peterson 1981), for example, employs synchronizing
stores to arbitrate between competing threads, but this ordering is not enough to prevent a
thread from reading or writing shared data before the lock has actually been acquired—or
after it has been released. For that, one needs accesses or fences with local ∥ RW and RW ∥
ordering (code in Sec. 4.1).

Order Proactively, not Defensively
In the absence of appropriate memory ordering annotations, processors and compilers can introduce
a surprising amount of reordering. It is not uncommon, for example, for parts of a subroutine to
be executed before the routine is called—either because the processor is executing out of order or
because the compiler has expanded the subroutine in-line and intermixed its instructions with those
of the caller.
Intuition can often be misleading. Consider, for example, the code s := x; if (s) t := y. Given the
conditional test, it is tempting to assume that the read of x must be ordered before the read of y.
However, the processor can guess that x is non-zero, read y, then complete the read of x, verify that
it is non-zero, and use the value of y (i.e., t) that was read before x. In multithreaded code, this may
leave the reader with mutually incompatible versions of s and t, if y was written before x in another
thread.
Rather than imagining all of the ways in which optimizations can violate expectations, authors of
synchronization mechanisms and concurrent data structures are advised to determine the order in
which steps must occur for correctness, and then insert appropriate instructions to guarantee that
ordering.

3 These conventions are similar to C/C++, in which an unannotated synchronizing instruction (or
equivalently, one with argument memory_order_seq_cst) has RW ∥ RW semantics by default.
Note, however, that certain annotated loads and stores in C/C++ may not be globally ordered.

    Fortunately for most programmers, memory ordering details are generally of concern only
to the authors of synchronization algorithms and low-level concurrent data structures, which
may need to be re-written (or at least re-tuned) for each target architecture. Programmers who
use these algorithms correctly are then typically assured that their programs will behave as if
the hardware were sequentially consistent (more on this in Sec. 3.3), and will port correctly
across machines.
    Identifying a minimal set of ordering instructions to ensure the correctness of a given
algorithm on a given machine is a difficult and error-prone task.4 In fact, the minimal fencing
problem has been shown to be NP hard even for straightline programs when there are only
two types of fences (Taheri et al. 2019). Fencing has traditionally been performed by hand,
though there has been promising recent work aimed at verifying the correctness of a given
set of fences or even inferring them directly (Burckhardt et al. 2007; Kuperstein et al. 2010;
Oberhauser et al. 2021). We have made a good-faith effort—especially in Chapters 4 through
6—to explicitly specify near-minimal ordering constraints. For more complex algorithms—
including most of those presented in Chapter 8—we revert to unlabeled load and store
instructions, which are fully ordered by default.
    To clarify the memory model further, we give several examples in Table 2.2 that illustrate
when instruction reordering can and cannot occur. In Table 2.3, we demonstrate the interplay
between ordering constraints on synchronizing instructions and communication between
threads.

2.2.3     Example Architectures

A few multiprocessors (notably, those built around the c. 1996 MIPS R10000 processor
(Yeager 1996)) have been defined to be sequentially consistent. A few others (notably, the HP
PA-RISC and some IBM z machines) have been implemented with sequential consistency,
even though the documentation permitted something more relaxed. Hill (1998) has argued
that the overhead of sequential consistency need not be onerous, particularly in comparison
to its conceptual benefits. Most machines today, however, fall into two broad classes of
more relaxed alternatives. On the SPARC, x86 (both 32- and 64-bit), and IBM z Series,
reads are allowed to bypass writes, but R ∥ R, R ∥W, and W ∥W orderings are all guaranteed to
be respected by the hardware, and writes are always globally ordered (write atomic). Special
instructions—synchronizing accesses or fences—are required only when the programmer
must ensure that a write and a subsequent read complete in program order. On Arm, Power,
and IA-64 (Itanium) machines, all four combinations of local bypassing are possible: special
instructions must be used whenever ordering is required. Moreover, on Arm v8 and Power,
ordinary writes are not guaranteed to be write atomic.

4 The first edition of this monograph contained numerous such errors, and some almost certainly
remain.

Table 2.2 Illustrative examples of possible reorderings under the memory model employed herein.
In these examples, x, y, z, and w are assumed to be atomic variables, and b is not. L is a lock.
 ordered load-store
   x.load(∥)        // cannot be reordered after the store
               ∥
   y.store(1, R )

 unordered load-store
   x.load(∥R)       // can be reordered after the store
               ∥
   y.store(1, W RW)

 fence ordered load
    x.load(∥)       // cannot be reordered after the fence
    fence(R∥)

 unidirectional ordering
   x.store(1, ∥)     // can be reordered freely
   y.load(∥RW)       // cannot be reordered after z.store
   z.store(2, ∥)     // cannot be reordered before y.load

 implicit ordering
   x.store(1, ∥)       // cannot be reordered after y.load,
   y.load()            // as this load has implicit RW∥RW ordering

 conditional load reordering
   if x.load(∥)        // even if the compiler does not reorder these instructions,
         y.store(1, ∥) // the processor can

 reordering into a critical section
    x.load(∥)         // can be reordered into the critical section
    x.store(1, ∥)     // can be reordered into the critical section
    L.acquire()       // lock implementation will ensure ∥RW ordering
           ∥
    y.load( )         // can be reordered with z.store, but
    z.store(2, ∥)     // both must remain within the critical section
    L.release()       // lock implementation will ensure RW∥ ordering
    w.store(3, )∥     // can be reordered into the critical section
    w.load(∥)         // can be reordered into the critical section

 ordering ordinary and synchronizing accesses
   x.store(1, ∥W)   // cannot be reordered after the store to b because of ∥W
   b := 1

Table 2.3 Illustrative examples of ordering and inter-thread communication.
 delaying loads until stores have occurred in another thread
      atomic<int> x, y := 0, 0
      atomic<bool> flag := false
      thread 1:
          repeat                         // busy wait on flag
              done := flag.load(∥R)      // cannot be reordered after x.load or y.load
          until done
          x.load(∥)                      // must return 1
          y.load(∥)                      // must return 2

      thread 2:
          x.store(1, ∥)                  // cannot be reordered after flag.store
          y.store(2, ∥)                  // cannot be reordered after flag.store
          flag.store(true, W∥)

 arguing that stores were not observed by another thread
      atomic<int> x, y := 0, 0
      atomic<bool> flag := false
      thread 1:
          x.load(∥)                      // cannot be reordered after flag.store
          y.load(∥)                      // cannot be reordered after flag.store
          flag.store(true, R∥)

      thread 2:
          flag.load(∥W)                  // cannot be reordered after x.store or y.store,
          x.store(1, ∥)                  // so if thread 2 sees flag = true,
          y.store(2, ∥)                  // then thread 1 must have seen x = 0 and y = 0

   We will refer to hardware-level memory models in the SPARC/x86/z camp using the
SPARC term TSO (Total Store Order). We will refer to the other machines as “more relaxed.”
On TSO machines, W ∥ R orderings (W ∥ on a load, ∥ R on a store, or a W ∥ R fence) should
be enforced with appropriate machine instructions; other annotations can be elided from our
code. On more relaxed machines, all annotations (explicit and implicit) must be enforced
with appropriate machine instructions. It should be emphasized that there are significant
differences among machines within a given camp—in the default ordering, the available
synchronizing instructions, and the details of corner cases. A full explanation is well beyond
what we can cover here. For a taste of the complexities involved, see the Ph.D. theses of Adve

(1993), Gharachorloo (1995), or Lustig (2015), or Sewell et al.’s attempt (2010) to formalize
the behavior specified informally in Intel’s architecture manual (Intel 2023, Vol. 3, Sec. 9.2).
    A few instruction sets—notably the IA64 (Itanium) and AArch64 (Arm v8 and v9, but
not v7)—provide explicit synchronizing loads and stores. Other machines typically pro-
vide separate fence instructions, which do not, themselves, modify memory. Though less
common, synchronizing accesses have two principal advantages. First, they can be designed
to ensure write atomicity, even on a machine that does not otherwise provide it, thereby
precluding the sort of circularity shown in Figure 2.4. Second, they can allow an individ-
ual access (the load or store itself) to be ordered with respect to preceding or subsequent
accesses. A fence, by contrast, must order all preceding and subsequent accesses of the
specified kind.
    One particular form of local ordering is worthy of special mention. As noted in Sec. 2.2.2,
a lock acquire operation must ensure that a thread cannot read or write shared data until
it has actually acquired the lock. The appropriate guarantee will typically be provided by a
∥ RW load or a load that is followed by a R ∥ RW fence. In a similar vein, a lock release must
ensure that all reads and writes within the critical section have completed before the lock is
actually released. The appropriate guarantee will typically be provided by a RW ∥ store or
a store that is preceded by a RW ∥W fence. These combinations are common enough that
they are sometimes referred to as acquire and release orderings. They are used not only
for mutual exclusion, but for most forms of condition synchronization as well. The IA-64
(Itanium), AArch64, and several research machines—notably the Stanford Dash (Lenoski
et al. 1992)—support acquire and release orderings directly in hardware. In the mutual
exclusion case, particularly when using synchronizing accesses rather than fences, acquire
and release orderings allow work to “migrate” into a critical section both from above (prior
to the lock acquire) and from below (after the lock release). They do not allow work to
migrate out of a critical section in either direction.

Speculation in Compilers and in Hardware
When reasoning about ordering, it is tempting to assume that compilers and processors will always
respect control and data dependences—that they won’t, for example, access shared memory on the
far side of a not-yet-resolved conditional test, or guess the address from which to read a value. Such
assumptions are a recipe for disaster: modern compilers and processors can be surprisingly aggressive,
and programmers who assume otherwise are likely to write code that doesn’t work. In this monograph,
we assume only that no reasonable compiler or processor will speculate the address or value of a write.
In a similar vein, we assume that a reasonable compiler and processor will eventually (in finite time)
verify speculated values. So, for example, in the code if (x.load(∥)) while (true) { }, if x is speculated
to be true but its value is really false, it should not be possible for a thread to spin forever in the while
loop. Likewise, in the code repeat a := x.load() until a, where x is an atomic variable, the compiler
should never optimize away the spin loop by hoisting a single load of x outside. (We shall have more
to say about spinning when we consider the subject of fairness in Sec. 3.2.2.)

   Note that work migrating into a critical section cannot create correctness or progress
issues. If work was safe to perform outside of a critical section, it remains safe to perform
inside the critical section. Progress could potentially be threatened if the work that migrates
into the critical section involves acquiring additional locks. However, the ordering constraints
on lock acquire and release operations prevent this. At worst, work migrating into a critical
section may decrease the potential for parallel execution, leading to lower performance.

2.3      Atomic Primitives

To facilitate the construction of synchronization algorithms and concurrent data structures,
most modern architectures provide instructions capable of updating (i.e., reading and writ-
ing) a memory location as a single atomic operation. We saw a simple example—the
test_and_set instruction (TAS)—in Sec. 1.3. A longer list of common instructions appears
in Table 2.4. Note that for each of these, when it appears in our pseudocode, we per-
mit an optional, final argument that indicates local ordering constraints. The instruction
a.CAS(old, new, W∥), for example, indicates a CAS that is ordered after all preceding write
accesses in its thread.
   Originally introduced on mainframes of the 1960s, TAS and swap are still available on
several modern machines, including the x86. FAA and FAI were introduced for “combining
network” machines of the 1980s (Kruskal et al. 1988); the former is still supported today
on the x86. The semantics of TAS, swap, FAI, and FAA should all be self-explanatory. Note
that they all return the value of the target location before any change was made.
    CAS and LL / SC are universal primitives, in a sense we will define formally in Sec. 3.3.
In practical terms, we can use them to emulate essentially arbitrary (single-word) read-
modify-write (fetch_and_Φ) operations (including all the other operations in Table 2.4).
CAS was originally introduced in the 1973 version of the IBM 370 architecture (IBM 1975;
Gifford et al. 1987; Brown and Smith 1975). It was also provided by IA-64 (Itanium) and
SPARC processors, and is still available on x86 and certain recent Arm machines. LL / SC
was originally proposed for the S-1 AAP Multiprocessor at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory (Jensen et al. 1987). It was also provided by Alpha processors, and is found on
modern Power, MIPS, and Arm machines. Interestingly, Arm’s AArch64 (v8/9) architecture
introduced CAS in addition to LL / SC, though in at least some implementations the latter
remains significantly faster (Jesus and Weiland 2023).
    CAS takes three arguments: a memory location, an old value that is expected to occupy
that location, and a new value that should be placed in the location if indeed the old value is
currently there. The instruction returns a Boolean value indicating whether the replacement
occurred successfully.

Table 2.4 Common atomic (read-modify-write) instructions. For notational consistency with load
and store, we have written these as methods of an atomic word of type bool, int, or simply “word”
(when type is immaterial). In the literature they are also commonly written as stand-alone functions
that take a pointer to the to-be-accessed word as an additional first operand. As described in the text,
we also permit an optional final operand that specifies non-default local ordering.
 test_and_set
     bool (atomic<bool> a).TAS(): atomic { bool t := a.load(); a.store(true); return t }

 swap
     word (atomic<word> a).swap(word w): atomic { word t := a.load(); a.store(w); return t }

 fetch_and_increment
     int (atomic<int> a).FAI(): atomic { int t := a.load(); a.store(t + 1); return t }

 fetch_and_add
     int (atomic<int> a).FAA(int n): atomic { int t := a.load(); a.store(t + n); return t }

 compare_and_swap
     bool (atomic<word> a).CAS(word old, word new):
        atomic { bool t := (a.load() = old); if (t) a.store(new); return t }

 load_linked / store_conditional
     word (atomic<word> a).LL(): atomic { remember a; return a.load() }
     bool (atomic<word> a).SC(word w):
        atomic { t := (a is remembered, and has not been evicted since LL)
               if (t) a.store(w); return t }

Fetch-and-Φ from CAS Given CAS, fetch_and_i can be written as follows, for any given
function Φ:
     1:   word fetch_and_Φ(function Φ, atomic<word> *w):
     2:       word old, new
     3:       repeat
     4:            old := w→load(∥)
     5:            new := Φ(old)
     6:       until w→CAS(old, new, ∥)
     7:       return old

In effect, this code computes Φ(*w) speculatively and then updates w atomically if its value
has not changed since the speculation began. The only way the CAS can fail to perform its
update (and return false at line 6) is if some other thread has recently modified w. If several
threads attempt to perform a fetch_and_i on w simultaneously, one of them is guaranteed
to succeed, and the system as a whole will make forward progress. This guarantee impliesthat

fetch_and_Φ operations implemented with CAS are nonblocking (more specifically, lock
free), a property we will consider in more detail in Sec. 3.2.

Fetch-and-Φ from LL / SC One problem with CAS, from an architectural point of view, is
that it combines a load and a store into a single instruction, which complicates the implemen-
tation of pipelined processors. LL / SC was designed to address this problem. In the fetch_
and_Φ idiom above, it replaces the load at line 4 with a special instruction that has the
side effect of “tagging” the associated cache line so that the processor will “notice” any
subsequent eviction of the line. A subsequent SC will then succeed only if the line is still
present in the cache:
      word fetch_and_Φ(function Φ, atomic<word> *w):
          word old, new
          repeat
               old := w→LL(∥)
               new := Φ(old)
          until w→SC(new, R∥)
          return old

    Here any argument for forward progress requires an understanding of why SC might
fail. Details vary from machine to machine. In all cases, SC is guaranteed to fail if another
thread has modified *w (the location pointed at by w) since the LL was performed. On most
machines, SC will also fail if a hardware interrupt happens to arrive in the post-LL window.
On some machines, it will fail if the cache suffers a capacity or conflict miss, or if the
processor mispredicts a branch. To avoid deterministic, spurious failure, the programmer
may need to limit (perhaps severely) the types of instructions executed between the LL and
SC. If unsafe instructions are required in order to compute the function Φ, one may need a
hybrid approach:

Emulating CAS
Note that while LL / SC can be used to emulate CAS, the emulation requires a loop to deal with spurious
SC failures. This issue was recognized explicitly by the designers of the C++’11 atomic types and
operations, who introduced two variants of CAS. The atomic_compare_exchange_strong
operation has the semantics of hardware CAS: it fails only if the expected value was not found. On
an LL / SC machine, it is implemented with a loop. The atomic_compare_exchange_weak
operation admits the possibility of spurious failure: it has the interface of CAS, but is implemented
without a loop on an LL / SC machine. For algorithms that already require a source-level loop (e.g., to
implement fetch_and_Φ), atomic_compare_exchange_weak may result in more terse and
efficient assembly code.

     1:   word fetch_and_Φ(function Φ, atomic<word> *w):
     2:       word old, new
     3:       repeat
     4:            old := w→load(∥)
     5:            new := Φ(old)
     6:       until w→LL(∥) = old and w→SC(new, R∥)
     7:       return old

In effect, this code uses LL and SC at line 6 to emulate CAS. Note that unlike the imple-
mentation from CAS, in the implementations from LL/SC, we have used explicit ordering
annotations to prevent the SC from being reordered before the preceding LL. Such reordering
could prevent forward progress, as an SC performed before an LL should fail.

2.3.1      The ABA Problem

While both CAS and LL / SC appear in algorithms in the literature, the former is quite a bit
more common—perhaps because its semantics are self-contained, and do not depend on the
implementation-oriented side effect of cache-line tagging. That said, CAS has one significant
disadvantage from the programmer’s point of view—a disadvantage that LL / SC avoids.

Ordering Constraints for Fetch-and-Φ from CAS or LL / SC
At first glance, it might seem surprising that there are no memory ordering constraints specified for
fetch-and-Φ from CAS. The reader might wonder: What if Φ(old) is hoisted before the load? Since
the load would not have occurred yet, the value of argument old would need to be speculated by
the processor. If the speculated value does not match the contents of w, then the subsequent CAS
will fail and no harm will be done. However, one could imagine that the speculated value is actually
correct and the CAS succeeds. In this case, too, no harm is done, since the result is the same as it
would be if the load and Φ were performed in program order. A similar argument can be made in the
event that the CAS is hoisted before the load.
In fetch-and-Φ from LL / SC, however, we add ordering constraints to prevent the SC from being
hoisted before the LL. Unlike CAS(old, ...), SC does not verify that w contains the appropriate old
value, so the above argument fails.
It is also worth mentioning that implementations of synchronization primitives like fetch_and_Φ
are used in the context of a larger program, where one must think about whether additional ordering
constraints, beyond those needed to simply implement fetch_and_Φ, are needed to implement the
desired program semantics. Just as we allow ordering constraints to be specified for synchronizing
instructions, it may be helpful to allow them to be specified for fetch_and_Φ. One might then, for
example, write fetch_and_Φ(Φ, x, RW ∥). To facilitate this usage, an implementation of fetch_and_Φ
would need to incorporate the desired ordering constraints. In the case of RW ∥ RW, the ordering
constraint could be added to the atomic load instruction, but then the associated overhead would be
incurred on every iteration of the loop. Arguably better is to begin and end the routine with appropriate
fences.

                                   top
                            (a)                A     C

                            (b)                A     B          C

                            (c)                B     C

Figure 2.6 The ABA problem in a linked-list stack.

   Because it chooses whether to perform its update based on the value in the target location,
CAS may succeed in situations where the value has changed (say from A to B) and then
changed back again (from B to A) (IBM 1975; IBM 1983; Treiber 1986). In some algorithms,
such a change and restoration is harmless: it is still acceptable for the CAS to succeed. In
other algorithms, incorrect behavior may result. This possible incorrectness, often referred
to as the ABA problem, is particularly worrisome in pointer-based algorithms. Consider the
following (buggy!) code to manipulate a linked-list stack:

      class node { atomic<node*> next, ... }             1: node* pop(atomic<node*> *top):
      1: void push(atomic<node*> *top, node* new):       2: node* old, new
      2: node* old                                       3: repeat
      3: repeat                                          4:     old := top→load(∥)
      4:        old := top→load(∥)                       5:     if old = null return null
      5:        new→next→store(old, Φ)                   6:     new := old→next→load(∥)
      6: until top→CAS(old, new, W∥)                     7: until top→CAS(old, new, ∥)
                                                         8: return old

    Note the explicit ordering annotation on the CAS in push. This annotation is necessary
to prevent the hardware (or compiler) from reordering the CAS before the preceding store.
Such reordering would allow a node to become visible to other threads before its next pointer
is set, causing a segmentation fault or data corruption. We have omitted explicit ordering on
the CAS in pop, on the assumption that neither the compiler nor the hardware will speculate
a value for the load of new at line 6.
    Despite the ordering annotation, this code has many problem scenarios, one of which is
shown in Figure 2.6. In (a), our stack contains the elements A and C. Suppose that thread 1
begins to execute pop(&top), and has completed line 6, but has yet to reach line 7. If
thread 2 now executes a (complete) pop(&top) operation, followed by push(&top, &B) and
then push(&top, &A), it will leave the stack as shown in (b). If thread 1 now continues, its
CAS will succeed, leaving the stack in the broken state shown in (c).
    The problem here is that top changed between thread 1’s load and the subsequent CAS.
If these two instructions were replaced with LL and SC, the latter would fail—as indeed it
should—causing thread 1 to try again.
    On machines with CAS, programmers must consider whether the ABA problem can arise
in the algorithm at hand and, if so, take measures to avoid it. The simplest and most common

class stack { atomic<⟨node*, int⟩> top }
                                                          node* stack.pop():
class node { atomic<node*> next, ... }
                                                              repeat
void stack.push(node* n):                                           ⟨o, c⟩ := top.load(∥)
     repeat                                                         if o = null return null
           ⟨o, c⟩ := top.load(∥)                                    n := o→next→load(∥)
           n→next→store(o, ∥)                                 until top.CAS(⟨o, c⟩, ⟨n, c+1⟩, R∥)
     until top.CAS(⟨o, c⟩, ⟨n, c⟩, W∥)                        return o

Figure 2.7 The lock-free “Treiber stack,” with a counted top-of-stack pointer to solve the ABA
problem. It suffices to modify the count in pop only; if CAS is available in multiple widths, it may
be applied to only the pointer in push.

technique is to devote part of each to-be-CASed word to a sequence number that is updated
in pop on a successful CAS. Using this counted pointer technique, we can convert our stack
code to the (now safe) version shown in Figure 2.7.5
    The sequence number solution to the ABA problem requires that there be enough bits
available for the number that wrap-around cannot occur in any reasonable program execution.
Some machines (in particular, the x86/64 via cmpxchg8b and cmpxchg16b for 32-bit
and 64-bit processors, respectively) provide a double-width CAS that is ideal for this purpose.
If the maximum word width is required for “real” data, however, another approach may be
required.
    In many programs, the programmer can reason that a given pointer will reappear in a given
data structure only as a result of memory deallocation and reallocation. Note that this is not
the case in the Treiber stack as presented here. It would be the case if we re-wrote the code
to pass push a value, and had the method allocate a new node to hold it. Symmetrically,
pop would deallocate the node and return the value it contained. In a garbage-collected
language, deallocation will not occur so long as any thread retains a reference, so all is
well. In a language with manual storage management, various safe memory reclamation
(SMR) strategies can be used to delay deallocation until all concurrent uses of a datum have
completed. In the general case (where a pointer can recur without its memory having been
recycled), safe CASing may require an extra level of pointer indirection (Michael 2004c;
Jayanti and Petrovic 2003). Further discussion of SMR—including safe versions of the
Treiber stack—appears in Sec. 8.7.

5 While Treiber’s technical report (Treiber 1986) is the standard reference for the nonblocking stack
algorithm, the ABA problem is mentioned as early as the 1975 edition of the System 370 manual
(IBM 1975, p. 125), and a version of the stack appears in the 1983 edition (IBM 1983, App. A).
Treiber’s personal contribution was to observe that counted pointers are required only in the pop
operation; push can safely perform a single-width CAS on the pointer alone (Michael 2013).

2.3.2    The Value of FAA

While both CAS and LL / SC can be used to implement fetch_and_Φ, the emulation may
not be as efficient as we might hope. Suppose, for example, that n threads, running on
n cores, attempt to increment a counter more or less concurrently, using the speculative
implementation defined above. In the worst case, all n threads will compute a new value,
all will execute CAS or SC, and exactly one will succeed. If the remaining n − 1 try again
concurrently, n − 2 may fail and try again, then n − 3, and so on. In the end, the hardware
may be forced to serialize O(n 2 ) atomic accesses to the counter in order to complete n
updates.
    Consider, on the other hand, what happens with FAA or FAI. The hardware still serializes
atomic accesses to the counter, but each access succeeds: no speculation is involved, and all
n updates can complete in O(n) time, worst case. For data structures with high contention,
the difference in performance can be quite dramatic, and clearly justifies the continued
inclusion of FAA in the x86 instruction set. While similar arguments could in principle be
made for other functions Φ, the specific case of add has proven most useful in practice.
A particularly compelling application to queues can be found in the work of Morrison and
Afek (2013).

2.3.3     Other Synchronization Hardware

Several historical machines have provided special locking instructions. The QOLB (queue on
lock bit) instruction, originally designed for the Wisconsin Multicube (Goodman et al. 1989),
and later adopted for the IEEE Scalable Coherent Interface (SCI) standard (Aboulenein et al.
1994), leverages a coherence protocol that maintains, in hardware, a linked list of copies
of a given cache line. When multiple processors attempt to lock the same line at the same
time, the hardware arranges to grant the requests in linked-list order. The Kendall Square
KSR-1 machine (KSR 1992) provided a similar mechanism based not on an explicit linked
list, but on the implicit ordering of nodes in a ring-based network topology. As we shall see
in Chapter 4, similar strategies can be emulated in software. The principal argument for the
hardware approach is the ability to avoid a costly cache miss when passing the lock (and
perhaps its associated data) from one processor to the next (Woest and Goodman 1991).
    The x86 allows many memory-update instructions (including increment and add) to
be prefixed with a special LOCK code, rendering them atomic (Intel 2023, Vol. 2, Sec. 3.3;
Vol. 3, Sec. 9.1). The benefit to the programmer is limited, however, by the fact that most
update instructions do not return the previous value from the modified location. Two threads
executing concurrent FAI instructions can use the resulting return values to tell which update
happened first. Two threads executing concurrent LOCKed increments can be sure that both
updates will happen, but will be unable to determine their order.

   Several supercomputer-class machines have provided special network hardware (gener-
ally accessed via memory-mapped I/O) for near-constant-time barrier and “Eureka” oper-
ations. These amount to cross-machine AND (all processors are ready) and OR (some pro-
cessor is ready) computations. We will mention them again in Secs. 5.2 and 5.3.3.
   In 1991, Stone et al. proposed a multi-word variant of LL / SC, which they called “Okla-
homa Update” (Stone et al. 1993) (in reference to the song “All Er Nuthin’ ” from the Rodgers
and Hammerstein musical). Concurrently and independently, Herlihy and Moss proposed
a similar mechanism for Transactional Memory (TM) 1993. Neither proposal was imple-
mented at the time, but TM enjoyed a rebirth of interest about a decade later. Like queued
locks, it can be implemented in software using CAS or LL / SC, but hardware implementations
enjoy a substantial performance advantage (Harris et al. 2010). As of 2023, hardware TM
has been implemented on the Azul Systems Vega 2 and 3 (Click 2019); the experimental
Sun/Oracle Rock processor (Dice et al. 2009); the IBM Blue Gene/Q (Wang et al. 2012);
IBM’s zEC12 mainframe (Jacobi et al. 2012) and its successors; IBM’s Power 8 and 9 pro-
cessors; Intel’s x86 processors starting with the “Haswell” generation; and Arm processors
that implement the v9-A instruction set. We will discuss TM in Chapter 9.
