Essential Theory
                                                                                             3

Concurrent algorithms and synchronization techniques have a long and very rich history of
formalization—far too much to even survey adequately here. Arguably the most accessible
resource for practitioners is the text of Herlihy et al. (2021). Deeper, more mathematical
coverage can be found in the text of Schneider (1997). On the broader topic of distributed
computing (which as noted in the box on Chapter 1 is viewed by theoreticians as a superset
of shared-memory concurrency), interested readers may wish to consult the classic text of
Lynch (1996).
    For the purposes of the current monograph, we provide a brief introduction here to
safety, liveness, the consensus hierarchy, and formal memory models. Safety and liveness
were mentioned briefly in Sec. 1.4. The former says that bad things never happen; the
latter says that good things eventually do. The consensus hierarchy explains the relative
expressive power of hardware primitives like test_and_set (TAS) and compare_and_swap
(CAS). Memory models explain which writes may be seen by which reads under which
circumstances; they help to regularize the “out of order” memory references mentioned in
Sec. 2.2.

3.1      Safety

Most concurrent data structures (“objects”) are adaptations of sequential data structures.
Each of these, in turn, has its own sequential semantics, typically specified as a set of
preconditions and postconditions for each of the methods that operate on the structure,
together with invariants that all the methods must preserve. The sequential implementation
of an object is considered safe if each method, called when its preconditions are true,
terminates after a finite number of steps, having ensured the postconditions and preserved
the invariants.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024        35
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_3

    When designing a concurrent object, we typically wish to allow concurrent method calls
(“operations”), each of which should appear to occur atomically. This goal in turn leads to
at least three safety issues:

1. In a sequential program, an attempt to call a method whose precondition does not hold
   can often be considered an error: the program’s single thread has complete control over
   the order in which methods are called, and can either reason that a given call is valid or
   else check the precondition first, explicitly, without worrying about changes between the
   check and the call (if (¬Q.empty()) e := Q.dequeue()). In a parallel program, the potential
   for concurrent operation in other threads generally requires either that a method be total
   (i.e., that its precondition simply be true, allowing it to run under any circumstances),
   or that it use condition synchronization to wait until the precondition holds. The former
   option is trivial if we are willing to return an indication that the operation is not currently
   valid (Q.dequeue(), for example, might return a special ⊥ value when the queue is
   empty). The latter option is explored in Chapter 5.
2. Because threads may wait for one another due to locking or condition synchronization,
   we must address the possibility of deadlock, in which some set of threads are permanently
   waiting for each other. We consider lock-based deadlock in Sec. 3.1.1. Deadlocks due
   to condition synchronization are a matter of application-level semantics, and must be
   addressed on a program-by-program basis.
3. The notion of atomicity requires clarification. If operations do not actually execute one
   at a time in mutual exclusion, we must somehow specify the order(s) in which they are
   permitted to appear to execute. We consider several popular notions of ordering, and the
   differences among them, in Sec. 3.1.2.

3.1.1    Deadlock Freedom

As noted in Sec. 1.4, deadlock freedom is a safety property: it requires that there be no
reachable state of the system in which some set of threads are all “waiting for one another.”
As originally observed by Coffman et al. (1971), deadlock requires four simultaneous con-
ditions:

exclusive use – threads require access to some sort of non-sharable “resources”
hold and wait – threads wait for unavailable resources while continuing to hold resources
   they have already acquired
irrevocability – resources cannot forcibly be taken from threads that hold them
circularity – there exists a circular chain of threads in which each is holding a resource
   needed by the next

   In shared-memory parallel programs, “non-sharable resources” often correspond to por-
tions of a data structure, with access protected by mutual exclusion (“mutex”) locks. Given
that exclusive use is fundamental, deadlock can then be addressed by breaking any one of
the remaining three conditions. For example:

1. We can break the hold-and-wait condition by requiring a thread that wishes to perform a
   given operation to request all of its locks at once. This approach is impractical in modular
   software, or in situations where the identities of some of the locks depend on conditions
   that cannot be evaluated without holding other locks (suppose, for example, that we wish
   to move an element atomically from set A to set f (v), where v is the value of the element
   drawn from set A).
2. We can break the irrevocability condition by requiring a thread to release any locks it
   already holds when it tries to acquire a lock that is held by another thread. This approach is
   commonly employed (automatically) in transactional memory systems, which are able to
   “back a thread out” and retry an operation (transaction) that encounters a locking conflict.
   It can also be used (more manually) in any system capable of dynamic deadlock detection
   (see, for example, the work of Koskinen and Herlihy (2008)). Retrying is complicated
   by the possibility that an operation may already have generated externally-visible side
   effects, which must be “rolled back” without compromising global invariants. We will
   consider rollback further in Chapter 9.
3. We can break the circularity condition by imposing a static order on locks, and requiring
   that every operation acquire its locks according to that static order. This approach is
   slightly less onerous than requiring a thread to request all its locks at once, but still far
   from general. It does not, for example, provide an acceptable solution to the “move from
   A to f (v)” example in strategy 1 above.

   Strategy 3 is widely used in practice. It appears, for example, in every major operating sys-
tem kernel. The lack of generality, however, and the burden of defining—and respecting—a
static order on locks, makes strategy 2 quite appealing, particularly when it can be auto-
mated, as it typically is in transactional memory. An intermediate alternative, sometimes
used for applications whose synchronization behavior is well understood, is to consider,
at each individual lock request, whether there is a feasible order in which currently active
operations might complete (under worst-case assumptions about the future resources they
might need in order to do so), even if the current lock is granted. The best known strategy of
this sort is the Banker’s algorithm of Dijkstra (1982, early 1960s), originally developed for
the THE operating system (Dijkstra 1968a). Where strategies 1 and 3 may be said to prevent
deadlock by design, the Banker’s algorithm is often described as deadlock avoidance, and
strategy 2 as deadlock recovery.

3.1.2    Atomicity

In Sec. 2.2 we introduced the notion of sequential consistency, which requires that low-level
memory accesses appear to occur in some global total order—i.e., “one at a time”—with
each core’s accesses appearing in program order (the order specified by the core’s sequen-
tial program). When considering the order of high-level operations on a concurrent object,
it is tempting to ask whether sequential consistency can help. In one sense, the answer is
clearly no: correct sequential code will typically not work correctly when executed (with-
out synchronization) by multiple threads concurrently—even on a system with sequentially
consistent memory. Conversely, as we shall see in Sec. 3.3, one can (with appropriate syn-
chronization) build correct high-level objects on top of a system whose memory is more
relaxed.
    At the same time, the notion of sequential consistency suggests a way in which we might
define atomicity for a concurrent object, allowing us to infer what it means for code to be
properly synchronized. After all, the memory system is a complex concurrent object from
the perspective of a memory architect, who must implement load and store instructions via
messages across a distributed cache-cache interconnect. Just as the designer of a sequentially
consistent memory system might seek to achieve the appearance of a total order on memory
accesses, consistent with per-core program order, so too might the designer of a concurrent
object seek to achieve the appearance of a total order on high-level operations, consistent
with the order of each thread’s sequential program. In any execution that appeared to exhibit
such a total order, each operation could be said to have executed atomically.

Sequential Consistency for High-Level Objects
The implementation of a concurrent object O is said to be sequentially consistent if, in every
possible execution, the operations on O appear to occur in (have the same arguments and
return values that they would have had in) some total order that is consistent with program
order in each thread. Unfortunately, there is a problem with sequential consistency that limits
its usefulness for high-level concurrent objects: lack of composable orders.
    A multiprocessor memory system is, in effect, a single concurrent object, designed at one
time by one architectural team. Its methods are the memory access instructions. A high-level
concurrent object, by contrast, may be designed in isolation, and then used with other such
objects in a single program. Suppose we have implemented object A, and have proved that
in any given program, operations performed on A will appear to occur in some total order
consistent with program order in each thread. Suppose we have a similar guarantee for object
B. We should like to be able to guarantee that in any given program that uses both A and B,
operations on those objects will appear to occur in some single total order consistent with
program order in each thread. That is, we should like the implementations of A and B to
compose. Sadly, they may not.

   As a simple if somewhat contrived example, consider a replicated integer object, in
which threads read their local copy (without synchronization) and update all copies under
protection of a lock:
      lock L
      atomic<int> A[T ] := {0}
      void put(int v):                      int get():
           L.acquire()                           return A[self ].load(∥)
           for i ∈ T
                 A[i].store(v, ∥)
           L.release()
(Throughout this monograph, we use T to represent the set of thread ids. For the sake of
convenience, we assume the thread ids in T can be used to index into arrays.)
   Because of the lock, put operations are totally ordered. Further, because a get operation
performs only a single (atomic) access to memory, it is easily ordered with respect to all
puts—after those that have updated the relevant element of A, and before those that have
not. It is straightforward to identify a total order on operations that respects these constraints
and that is consistent with program order in each thread. In other words, our counter is
sequentially consistent.
   On the other hand, consider what happens if we have two counters—call them X and Y .
Because get operations can occur “in the middle of” a put at the implementation level, we
can imagine a scenario in which threads T 3 and T 4 perform gets on X and Y while both
objects are being updated—and see the updates in opposite orders:

                             local values of shared objects
                               T1      T2      T3     T4
                               XY      XY     XY     XY
      initially                00      00      00     00
      T 1 begins X.put(1)      10      10      00     00
      T 2 begins Y.put(1)      11      11      01     00
      T 3: X.get() returns 0   11      11      01     00
      T 3: Y.get() returns 1   11      11      01     00
      T 1 finishes X.put(1)    11      11      11     10
      T 4: X.get() returns 1   11      11      11     10
      T 4: Y.get() returns 0   11      11      11     10
      T 2 finishes Y.put(1)    11      11      11     11

At this point, the put to Y has happened before the put to X from T 3’s perspective, but
after the put to X from T 4’s perspective. To solve this problem, we might require the
implementation of a shared object to ensure that updates appear to other threads to happen
at some single point in time.
    But this is not enough. Consider a software emulation of the hardware write buffers
described in Sec. 2.2.1. To perform a put on object X , thread T inserts the desired new

value into a local queue and continues execution. Periodically, a helper thread drains the
queue and applies the updates to the master copy of X , which resides in some global location.
To perform a get, T inspects the local queue (synchronizing with the helper as necessary)
and returns any pending update; otherwise it returns the global value of X . From the point
of view of every thread other than T, the update occurs when it is applied to the global value
of X . From T ’s perspective, however, it happens early, and, in a system with more than
one object, we can easily obtain the “bow tie” causality loop of Figure 2.3. This scenario
suggests that we require updates to appear to other threads at the same time they appear to
the updater—or at least before the updater continues execution.

Linearizability
To address the problem of composability, Herlihy and Wing introduced the notion of lin-
earizability (1987, 1990). For 35 years it has served as the standard ordering criterion for
high-level concurrent objects. The implementation of object O is said to be linearizable if,
in every possible execution, the operations on O appear to occur in some total order that is
consistent not only with program order in each thread but also with any ordering that threads
are able to observe by other means.
   More specifically, linearizability requires that each operation appear to occur instanta-
neously at some point in time between its call and return. The “instantaneously” part of this
requirement precludes the shared counter scenario above, in which T 3 and T 4 have different
views of partial updates. The “between its call and return” part of the requirement precludes
the software write buffer scenario, in which a put by thread T may not be visible to other
threads until after it has returned.
   For the sake of precision, it should be noted that there is no absolute notion of objective
time in a parallel system, any more than there is in Einsteinian physics. (For more on the
notion of time in parallel systems, see the classic paper by Lamport (1978).) What really
matters is observable orderings. When we say that an event must occur at a single instant in
time, what we mean is that it must be impossible for thread A to observe that an event has
occurred, for A to subsequently communicate with thread B (e.g., by writing a variable that
B reads), and then for B to observe that the event has not yet occurred.
   To help us reason about the linearizability of a concurrent object, we typically identify
a linearization point within each method at which a call to that method can be said to
have occurred. If we choose these points properly, then whenever the linearization point of
operation A precedes the linearization point of operation B, we shall know that operation
A, as a whole, linearizes before operation B.
   In the trivial case in which every method is bracketed by the acquisition and release
of a common object lock, the linearization point can be anywhere inside the method—we
might arbitrarily place it at the lock release. In an algorithm based on fine-grain locks, the
linearization point might correspond to the release of some particular one of the locks.

    In nonblocking algorithms, in which all possible interleavings must be provably correct
(Chapter 8), it is common to associate linearization with a specific instruction (a load, store,
or other atomic primitive) and then argue that any implementation-level memory updates
that are visible before the linearization point will be recognized by other threads as merely
preparation, and any that can be seen to occur after it will be recognized as merely cleanup.
In the nonblocking stack of Figure 2.7, a successful push or pop can be said to linearize at
its final CAS instruction; an unsuccessful pop (one that returns null) can be said to linearize
at the load of top.
    In a complex method, we may need to identify multiple possible linearization points, to
accommodate branching control flow. In other cases, the outcome of tests at run time may
allow us to argue that a method linearized at some point earlier in its execution (an example
of this sort can be found in Sec. 8.2.1). There are even algorithms in which the linearization
point of a method is determined by behavior in some other thread. All that really matters
is that there be a total order on the linearization points, and that the behavior of operations,
when considered in that order, be consistent with the object’s sequential semantics.
    Given linearizable implementations of objects A and B, one can prove that in every
possible program execution, the operations on A and B will appear to occur in some single
total order that is consistent both with program order in each thread and with any other
ordering that threads are able to observe. In other words, linearizable implementations of
concurrent objects are composable. Linearizability is therefore sometimes said to be a local
property (Weihl 1989; Herlihy and Wing 1990): the linearizability of a system as a whole
depends only on the (local) linearizability of its parts.
Hand-Over-Hand Locking (Lock Coupling). As an example of linearizability achieved
through fine-grain locking, consider the task of parallelizing a set abstraction implemented
as a sorted, singly-linked list with insert, remove, and lookup operations. Absent synchro-
nization, it is easy to see how the list could become corrupted. In Figure 3.1, the code at left
shows a possible sequence of statements executed by thread 1 in the process of inserting
a new node containing the value C, and a concurrent sequence of statements executed by
thread 2 in the process of deleting the node containing the value D. If interleaved as shown
(with thread 1 performing its last statement between thread 2’s last two statements), these
two sequences will transform the list at the upper right into the non-list at the lower right,
in which the node containing C has been lost.
   Clearly a global lock—forcing either thread 1 or thread 2 to complete before the other
starts—would linearize the updates and avoid the loss of C. It can be shown, however, that
linearizability can also be maintained with a fine-grain locking protocol in which each thread
holds at most two locks at a time, on adjacent nodes in the list (Bayer and Schkolnick 1977).
By retaining the right-hand lock while releasing the left-hand and then acquiring the right-
hand’s successor, a thread ensures that it is never overtaken by another thread during its
traversal of the list. In Figure 3.1, thread 1 would hold locks on the nodes containing A and
D until done inserting the node containing C. Thread 2 would need these same two locks
before removing D. Another thread, performing a lookup operation on C, would need the

 thread 1:                     thread 2:
      // insert(C)                  // delete(D)
                                                                A     D        K
      read n v     // A             read n v     // A
      p := n                        p := n
      n := n next                   n := n next
      read n v     // D             read n v     // D
      m := new node(C)              t := n next
      m next := n                                               A     C        D        K
      p next := m
                                    p   next := t

Figure 3.1 Dynamic trace of improperly synchronized list updates. This execution can lose node C
even on a sequentially consistent machine.

lock on A, but would complete before reaching D or K; thread 1’s insert of C might thus be
said to linearize at the release of the lock on A. While threads can never perform conflicting
operations on the same nodes simultaneously, one thread can “chase the other down the list”
to the point where the conflict occurs, achieving substantially higher concurrency than would
be possible with a global lock. Similar “hand-over-hand” locking techniques are commonly
used in concurrent trees and other pointer-based data structures.

Serializability
Recall that the purpose of an ordering criterion is to clarify the meaning of atomicity. By
requiring an operation to complete at a single point in time, and to be visible to all other
threads before it returns to its caller, linearizability guarantees that the order of operations
on any given concurrent object will be consistent with all other observable orderings in an
execution, including those of other concurrent objects.
   The flip side of this guarantee is that the linearizability of individual operations does not
necessarily imply linearizability for operations that manipulate more than one object, but
are still intended to execute as a single atomic unit.
   Consider a banking system in which thread 1 transfers $100 from account A to account
B, while thread 2 adds the amounts in the two accounts:

     // initially A.balance() = B.balance() = 500
     thread 1:                                      thread 2:
          A.withdraw(100)
                                                        sum := A.balance()     // 400
                                                        sum +:= B.balance()    // 900
          B.deposit(100)

   If we think of A and B as separate objects, then the execution can linearize as suggested
by vertical position on the page, but thread 2 will see a cross-account total that is $100 “too
low.” If we wish to treat the code in each thread as a single atomic unit, we must disallow
this execution—something that neither A nor B can do on its own. We need, in short, to be

able to combine smaller atomic operations into larger ones—not just perform the smaller
ones in a mutually consistent order. Where linearizability ensures that the orders of separate
objects will compose “for free,” multi-object atomic operations will generally require some
sort of global or distributed control.
   Multi-object atomic operations are the hallmark of database systems, which refer to them
as transactions. Transactional memory (the subject of Chapter 9) adapts transactions to
shared-memory parallel computing, allowing the programmer to request that a multi-object
operation like thread 1’s transfer or thread 2’s sum should execute atomically.
   The simplest ordering criterion for transactions—both database and memory—is known
as serializability. Transactions are said to serialize if they have the same effect they would
have had if executed one at a time in some total order. For transactional memory (and
sometimes for databases as well), we can extend the model to allow a thread to perform a
series of transactions, and require that the global order be consistent with program order in
each thread.
   It turns out to be NP-hard to determine whether a given set of transactions (with the
given inputs and outputs) is serializable (Papadimitriou 1979). Fortunately, we seldom need
to make such a determination in practice. Generally all we really want is to ensure that
the current execution will be serializable—something we can achieve with conservative
(sufficient but not necessary) measures. A global lock is a trivial solution, but admits no
concurrency. Databases and most TM systems employ more elaborate fine-grain locking. A
few TM systems employ nonblocking techniques.
   If we regard the objects to be accessed by a transaction as “resources” and revisit the
conditions for deadlock outlined at the beginning of Sec. 3.1.1, we quickly realize that a
transaction may, in the general case, need to access some resources before it knows which
others it will need. Any implementation of serializability based on fine-grain locks will
thus entail not only “exclusive use,” but also both “hold and wait” and “circularity.” To
address the possibility of deadlock, a database or lock-based TM system must be prepared to
break the “irrevocability” condition by releasing locks, rolling back, and retrying conflicting
transactions.
   Like branch prediction or CAS-based fetch_and_Φ, this strategy of proceeding “in the
hope” that things will work out (and recovering when they don’t) is an example of specula-
tion. So-called lazy TM systems take this even further, allowing conflicting (non-serializable)
transactions to proceed in parallel until one of them is ready to commit—and only then abort-
ing and rolling back the others.
Two-Phase Locking. As an example of fine-grain locking for serializability, consider a
simple scenario in which transactions 1 and 2 read and update symmetric variables:

     // initially x = y = 0
     transaction 1:                        transaction 2:
          t1 := x                               t2 := y
          y++                                   x++

Left unsynchronized, this code could result in t1 = t2 = 0, even on a sequentially consistent
machine—something that should not be possible if the transactions are to serialize. A global
lock would solve the problem, but would be far too conservative for transactions larger than
the trivial ones shown here. If we associate fine-grain locks with individual variables, we
still run into trouble if thread 1 releases its lock on x before acquiring the lock on y, and
thread 2 releases its lock on y before acquiring the lock on x.
    It turns out (Eswaran et al. 1976) that serializability can always be guaranteed if threads
acquire all their locks (in an “expansion phase”) before releasing any of them (in a “contrac-
tion phase”). As we have observed, this two-phase locking convention admits the possibility
of deadlock: in our example, transaction 1 might acquire a lock on x and transaction 2
might acquire a lock on y before either attempts to acquire a lock on the other. To detect
the problem and trigger rollback, a system based on two-phase locking may construct and
maintain a dependence graph at run time. Alternatively (and more conservatively), it may
simply limit the time it is willing to wait for locks, and assume the worst when this timeout
is exceeded.

Strict Serializability
The astute reader may have noticed the strong similarity between the definitions of sequential
consistency (for high-level objects) and serializability (with the extension that allows a single
thread to perform a series of transactions). The difference is simply that transactions need
to be able to access a dynamically chosen set of objects, while sequential consistency is
limited to a predefined set of single-object operations.
    The similarity between sequential consistency and serializability leads to a common
weakness: the lack of required consistency with other orders that may be observed by a thread.
It was by requiring such “real-time” ordering that we obtained composable orders for single-
object operations in the definition of linearizability. Real-time ordering is also important for
its own sake in many applications. Without it, for example, we might make a large deposit
to a friend’s bank account and tell the friend about it, but the friend might still encounter an
“insufficient funds” message in response to a (subsequent!) withdrawal request. To avoid
such arguably undesirable scenarios, many database systems—and most TM systems—
require strict serializability, which is simply ordinary serializability augmented with real-
time order: transactions are said to be strictly serializable if they have the same effect they
would have had if executed one at a time in some total order that is consistent with program
order (if any) in each thread, and with any other order the threads may be able to observe. In
particular, if transaction A finishes before transaction B begins, then A must appear before

B in the total order. As it turns out, two-phase locking suffices to ensure strict serializability,
but certain other implementations of “plain” serializability do not.

Quiescent Consistency
In certain applications, designers may be willing to accept a limited amount of unintuitive
behavior in return for better performance. One arguably minimal criterion, known as quies-
cent consistency (Derrick et al. 2014; Herlihy et al. 2021, Sec. 3.3), holds that operations on
a concurrent object should appear to occur in some total order such that if operations A and
B are separated by a quiescent interval, in which no operations are in progress, then A should
appear to occur before B. (Some distributed systems adopt even weaker notions of eventual
consistency, which treat quiescence in a similar manner, but do not necessarily require the
appearance of a total order. Such extreme relaxations are uncommon in shared-memory
systems; we do not consider them further here.)
    Like linearizability, quiescent consistency is local: if two concurrent objects are quies-
cently consistent, then any program that uses both objects will see their operations occur
in some single total order that respects quiescent intervals. Quiescently consistent objects,
however, may fail to respect either program order or real-time order during nonquiescent
intervals. To see why this might be useful, consider an object implementation that uses a lock
to serialize operations, and that allows a thread, when the lock is held, to “stage” its operation
for later execution—and, if results are not required, to return immediately. Suppose further
that before releasing the lock, a thread is obligated to execute all pending (“staged”) oper-
ations. (These conventions can be considered a variation on the flat combining of Hendler
et al. (2010b), to which we will return in Sec. 5.4.) If a thread doesn’t necessarily execute
staged operations in the order they were requested (perhaps because some other order is
known to be more efficient), the resulting behavior may well be quiescently consistent.

Relationships Among the Ordering Criteria
Table 3.1 summarizes the relationships among sequential consistency (for high-level
objects), linearizability, serializability, strict serializability, and quiescent consistency (with
serializability defined across threads, rather than individual transactions). A system that cor-
rectly implements any of these five criteria will provide the appearance of a total order on
operations. For all but quiescent consistency, this will be consistent with per-thread program
order. Linearizability and strict serializability add consistency with “real-time” order; quies-
cent consistency adds this in the limited case of quiescent intervals. Serializability and strict
serializability add the ability to define multi-object atomic operations. Of the five criteria,
only linearizability and quiescent consistency are local: they guarantee that operations on
separate objects always occur in a mutually consistent order, and they decline, as it were, to
address multi-object operations.

Table 3.1 Properties of standard ordering criteria. ∗ Quiescent consistency enforces real-time order
only across intervals of inactivity.
         SC = sequential consistency; L = linearizability; S = serializability;
                     SS = strict serializability; QC = quiescent consistency.
                                                       SC L S SS QC
 Equivalent to a sequential order                       +     + +        +      +
 Respects program order in each thread                  +     + +        +      −
 Consistent with other ordering (“real time”)           −     + −        +      ∗
 Can touch multiple objects atomically                  −     − +        +      −
 Local: reasoning based on individual objects only      −     + − −             +

    To avoid confusion, it should be noted that we have been using the term “composability”
to mean that we can merge (compose) the orders of operations on separate objects into a sin-
gle mutually consistent order. In the database and TM communities, “composability” means
that we can combine (compose) individual atomic operations into larger, still atomic (i.e.,
serializable) operations. We will return to this second notion of composability in Chapter 9.
It is straightforward to provide in a system based on speculation; it is invariably supported
by databases and transactional memory. It cannot be supported, in the general case, by con-
servative locking strategies. Somewhat ironically, linearizability might be said to facilitate
composable orders by disallowing composable operations.

3.2       Liveness

Safety properties—the subject of the previous section—ensure that bad things never happen:
threads are never deadlocked; atomicity is never violated; invariants are never broken. To say
that code is correct, however, we generally want more: we want to ensure forward progress.
Just as we generally want to know that a sequential program will produce a correct answer
eventually (not just fail to produce an incorrect answer), we generally want to know that
invocations of concurrent operations will complete their work and return.
   An object method is said to be blocking (in the theoretical sense described in the box on
page 8) if there is some reachable state of the system in which a thread that has called the
method will be unable to return until some other thread takes action. Lock-based algorithms
are inherently blocking: a thread that holds a lock precludes progress on the part of any other
thread that needs the same lock. Liveness proofs for lock-based algorithms require not only
that the code be deadlock-free, but also that critical sections be free of infinite loops, and
that all threads continue to execute.
   A method is said to be nonblocking if there is no reachable state of the system in which
an invocation of the method will be unable, on its own, to complete its execution and return.

Nonblocking algorithms have the desirable property that inopportune preemption (e.g., of a
lock holder) never precludes forward progress in other threads. In some environments (e.g.,
a system with high fault-tolerance requirements), nonblocking algorithms may also allow
the system to survive when a thread crashes or is prematurely killed. We consider several
variants of nonblocking progress in Sec. 3.2.1.
   In both blocking and nonblocking algorithms, we may also care about fairness—the
relative rates of progress of different threads. We consider this topic briefly in Sec. 3.2.2.

3.2.1    Nonblocking Progress

Given the difficulty of guaranteeing any particular rate of execution (in the presence of
timesharing, cache misses, page faults, and other sources of variability), we generally speak
of progress in terms of abstract program steps rather than absolute time.
   A method is said to be wait free (the strongest variant of nonblocking progress) if it is
guaranteed to complete in some bounded number of its own program steps. (This bound
need not be statically known.) A method M is said to be lock free (a somewhat weaker
variant) if some thread is guaranteed to make progress (complete an operation on the same
object) in some bounded number of M’s program steps. M is said to be obstruction free (the
weakest variant of nonblocking progress) if it is guaranteed to complete in some bounded
number of program steps if no other thread executes any steps during that same interval.
   Wait freedom is sometimes referred to as starvation freedom: a given thread is never
prevented from making progress. Lock freedom is sometimes referred to as livelock freedom:
an individual thread may starve, but the system as a whole is never prevented from making
forward progress (equivalently: no set of threads can actively prevent each other from making
progress indefinitely). Obstruction-free algorithms can suffer not only from starvation but
also from livelock; if all threads but one “hold still” long enough, however, the one running
thread is guaranteed to make progress.
   Many practical algorithms are lock free or obstruction free. Treiber’s stack, for example
(Sec. 2.3.1), is lock-free, as is the widely used queue of Michael and Scott (Sec. 8.3.1).
Obstruction freedom was first described in the context of Herlihy et al.’s double-ended queue
(2003a) (Sec. 8.3.2). It is also provided by several TM systems (among them the DSTM of
Herlihy et al. (2003b), the ASTM of Marathe et al. (2005), and the work of Marathe and Moir
(2008)). Moir and Shavit (2005) provide an excellent survey of concurrent data structures,
including coverage of nonblocking progress. Sundell and Tsigas (2008a) describe a library
of nonblocking data structures.
   Wait-free algorithms are significantly less common. Herlihy (1991) demonstrated that
any sequential data structure can be transformed, automatically, into a wait-free concurrent
version, but the construction is highly inefficient. Kogan and Petrank (2012), building on a
series of intermediate results, showed how to reduce the time overhead dramatically, though
space overhead remains proportional to the maximum number of threads in the system.

   Most wait-free algorithms—and many lock-free algorithms—employ some variant of
helping, in which a thread that has begun but not completed its operation may be assisted
by other threads, which need to “get it out of the way” so they can perform their own
operations without an unbounded wait. Other lock-free algorithms—and even a few wait-
free algorithms—are able to make do without helping. As a simple example, consider the
implementation of an increment-only counter. On a machine with a FAI instruction, the
natural single-word implementation of the counter will indeed be wait free. If FAI must be
emulated with CAS, however, the result will be merely lock free. The following array-based
implementation is also wait free. It takes more space than the FAI version, but may yield
better performance if inc operations are more common than val:1

     atomic<int> C[T ] := { 0 … }
                                              int val():
     void inc():                                   int rtn := 0
          // C[self ]++                            for i in [1..N]
          int newval := C[self ].load(∥W)+1               rtn +:= C[i].load(∥)
          C[self ].store(newval, ∥R)               return rtn
Here the aggregate counter value is taken to be the sum of a set of per-thread values.
Because each per-thread value is monotonically increasing (and always by exactly one), so
is the aggregate sum. Given this observation, one can prove that the value returned by the
val method will have been correct at some point between its call and its return: it will be
bounded above by the number of inc operations that were called before val returned, and
below by the number that returned before it was called. In other words, val is linearizable,
though its linearization point cannot in general be statically determined. Because both inc
and val comprise a bounded (in this case, statically bounded) number of program steps, the
methods are wait free.

3.2.2      Fairness

Obstruction freedom and lock freedom clearly admit behavior that defies any notion of
fairness: both allow an individual thread to take an unbounded number of steps without
completing an operation. Even wait freedom allows an operation to execute an arbitrary
number of steps (helping or deferring to peers) before completing, so long as the number is
bounded in any given situation.

1 Interestingly, performance may improve on an x86 machine if the programmer uses a C++
std::fetch_add operation (FAA) instead of separate load and store accesses to C[self ] in inc. With
separate instructions, many compilers will issue an expensive mfence instruction to ensure the ∥ R
ordering on the store. By contrast, fetch_add will trigger the use of an atomic xadd instruction,
which ensures the ordering implicitly.

    We shall often want stronger guarantees. In a wait-free algorithm, we might hope for a
static bound, across all invocations, on the number of steps required to complete an operation.
In a blocking algorithm, we might hope for a bound on the number of competing operations
that may complete before a given thread makes progress. If threads repeatedly invoke a
certain set of operations, we might even wish to bound the ratio of their “success” rates.
These are only a few of the possible ways in which “fairness” might be defined. Without
dwelling on particular definitions, we will consider algorithms in subsequent chapters whose
behavior ranges from potentially very highly skewed (e.g., test_and_set locks that avoid
starvation only when there are periodic quiescent intervals, when the lock is free and no
thread wants it), to strictly first-come, first-served (e.g., locks in which a thread employs a
wait-free protocol to join a FIFO queue). We will also consider intermediate options, such
as locks that deliberately balance locality (for performance) against uniformity of service to
threads.
    In any practical system, forward progress relies on the assumption that any continually
unblocked thread will eventually execute another program step. Without such minimal fair-
ness within the implementation, a system could be “correct” without doing anything at all!
Significantly, even this minimal fairness depends on scheduling decisions at multiple sys-
tem levels—in the hardware, the operating system, and the language runtime—all of which
ensure that runnable threads continue to run.
    When threads may block for mutual exclusion or condition synchronization, we shall
in most cases want to insist that the system display what is known as weak fairness. This
property guarantees that any thread waiting for a condition that is continuously true (or
a lock that is continuously available) eventually executes another program step. Without
such a guarantee, program behavior may be highly unappealing. Imagine a web server, for
example, that never accepts requests from a certain client connection if requests are available
from any other client.
    In the following program fragment, weak fairness precludes an execution in which
thread 1 spins forever: thread 2 must eventually notice that f is false, complete its wait,
and set f to true, after which thread 1 must notice the change to f and complete:

      atomic<bool> f := false
      thread 1:                            thread 2:
           await f.load(∥)                      await ¬f.load(∥)
                                                f.store(true)

Here we have used the notation await (condition) as shorthand for

      while ¬condition
          // spin
      fence(R∥RW)

with the additional understanding that any memory accesses required to evaluate condition
are marked as synchronizing reads.

   Many more stringent definitions of fairness are possible. In particular, strong fairness
requires that any thread waiting for a condition that is true infinitely often (or a lock that
is available infinitely often) eventually executes another program step. In the following
program fragment, for example, weak fairness admits an execution in which thread 1 spins
forever, but strong fairness requires thread 2 to notice one of the “windows” in which g is
true, complete its wait, and set f to true, after which thread 1 must notice the change and
complete:
     atomic<bool> f := false, g := false
     thread 1:                             thread 2:
          while ¬f.load(∥W)                     await (g)
               g.store(true, ∥W)                f.store(true, ∥)
               g.store(false, ∥R)
   Strong fairness is difficult to truly achieve: it may, for example, require a scheduler to
re-check every awaited condition whenever one of its constituent variables is changed, to
make sure that any thread at risk of starving is given a chance to run. Any deterministic
strategy that considers only a subset of the waiting threads on each state change risks the
possibility of deterministically ignoring some unfortunate thread every time it is able to run.
   Fortunately, statistical “guarantees” typically suffice in practice. By considering a ran-
domly chosen thread—instead of all threads—when a scheduling decision is required, we
can drive the probability of starvation arbitrarily low. A truly random choice is difficult,
of course, but various pseudorandom approaches appear to work quite well. At the hard-
ware level, interconnects and coherence protocols are designed to make it unlikely that a
“race” between two cores (e.g., when performing near-simultaneous CAS instructions on a
previously uncached location) will always be resolved the same way. Within the operating
system, runtime, or language implementation, one can “randomize” the interval between
checks of a condition using a pseudorandom number generator or even the natural “jitter”
in execution time of nontrivial instruction sequences on complex modern cores.
   Weak and strong fairness address worst-case behavior, and allow executions that still seem
grossly unfair from an intuitive perspective (e.g., executions in which one thread succeeds a
million times more often than another). Statistical “randomization,” by contrast, may achieve
intuitively very fair behavior without absolutely precluding worst-case starvation.
   Much of the theoretical groundwork for fairness was laid by Nissim Francez (1986).
Proofs of fairness are typically based on temporal logic, which provides operators for con-
cepts like “always” and “eventually.” A brief introduction to these topics can be found
in the text of Ben-Ari (2006, Chapter 4); much more extensive coverage can be found in
Schneider’s comprehensive work on the theory of concurrency (1997).

3.3       The Consensus Hierarchy

In Sec. 2.3 we noted that CAS and LL / SC are universal atomic primitives—capable of
implementing arbitrary single-word fetch_and_Φ operations. We suggested—implicitly, at
least—that they are fundamentally more powerful than simpler primitives like TAS, swap,
FAI, and FAA. Herlihy formalized this notion of relative power in his work on wait-free
synchronization (1991), previously mentioned in Sec. 3.2.1. The formalization is based on
the classic consensus problem.
   Originally formalized by Fischer, et al. (1985) in a distributed setting, the consensus
problem involves a set of potentially unreliable threads, each of which “proposes” a value.
The goal is for the reliable threads to agree on one of the proposed values—a task the authors
proved to be impossible with asynchronous messages. Herlihy adapted the problem to the
shared-memory setting, where powerful atomic primitives can circumvent impossibility.
Specifically, Herlihy suggested that such primitives (or, more precisely, the objects of which
those primitives are methods) be classified according the number of threads for which they
can achieve wait-free consensus.
   It is easy to see that an object with a TAS method can achieve wait-free consensus for two
threads:
   atomic<bool> L := false
   atomic<int> proposal[2]         // initial values immaterial
   agree(i):
       proposal[self ].store(i, ∥RW)
       if L.TAS(∥) return i
       else return proposal[1−self ].load(R∥)

Herlihy was able to show that this is the best one can do: TAS objects (even an arbitrary
number of them) cannot achieve wait-free consensus for more than two threads. Moreover

Consensus and Mutual Exclusion
A solution to the consensus problem clearly suffices for “one-shot” mutual exclusion (a.k.a. leader
election): each thread proposes its own id, and the agreed-upon value indicates which thread is able
to enter the critical section. Consensus is not necessary however: the winning thread needs to know
that it can enter the critical section, but other threads only need to know that they have lost—they
don’t need to know who won. TAS thus suffices to build a wait-free try lock (one whose acquire
method returns immediately with a success or failure result) for an arbitrary number of threads.
It is tempting to suggest that one might solve the consensus problem using mutual exclusion, by
having the winner of the competition for the lock write its id into a location visible to the losers. This
approach, however, cannot be wait free: it fails to bound the number of steps required by a losing
thread. If the winner acquires the lock and then pauses—or dies—before writing down its id, the
losers may execute their spin loops an arbitrary number of times. This is the beauty of CAS or LL / SC:
it allows a thread to win the competition and write down its value in a single indivisible step.

ordinary loads and stores cannot achieve wait-free consensus at all—even for only two
threads. An object supporting CAS, on the other hand (or equivalently LL / SC), can achieve
wait-free consensus for an arbitrary number of threads:
     atomic<int> v := ⊥
     agree(i):
         if v.CAS(⊥, i, ∥) return i
         else return v.load(R∥)

   One can, in fact, define an infinite hierarchy of atomic objects, where those appearing at
level k can achieve wait-free consensus for k threads but no more. Objects supporting CAS
or LL / SC are said to have consensus number ∞. Objects with other common primitives—
including TAS, swap, FAI, and FAA—have consensus number 2. Atomic objects at interme-
diate levels of the hierarchy are not typically encountered on real hardware.

3.4         Memory Models

As described in Sec. 2.2, most modern multicore systems are coherent but not sequentially
consistent: changes to a given variable are serialized, and eventually propagate to all cores,
but accesses to different locations may appear to occur in different orders from the per-
spective of different threads—even to the point of introducing apparent causality loops. For
programmers to reason about such a system, we need a memory model—a formal char-
acterization of its behavior. Such a model can be provided at the hardware level—TSO is
one example—but when programmers write code in a higher-level language, they need a
language-level model. Just as a hardware-level memory model helps the compiler writer
or library builder determine where to employ special ordering instructions, a language-
level model helps the application programmer determine where to employ synchronization
operations or atomic variable accesses.
   There is an extensive literature on language-level memory models. Good starting points
include the tutorial of Adve and Gharachorloo (1996), the monograph of Sorin et al. (2019),
and the articles introducing the models of Java (Manson et al. 2005) and C++ (Boehm and
Adve 2008). Details vary considerably from one model to another, but most now share a
similar framework, designed to balance performance and programmability by asking the
programmer to label those points in the code where ordering “really matters.”
   A crucial goal in the design of any practical memory model is to preserve, as much as
possible, the freedom of compiler writers to employ code improvement techniques originally
developed for sequential programs. The ordering constraints imposed by synchronization
operations necessitate not only hardware-level ordered accesses or memory fences, but also
software-level “compiler fences,” which inhibit the sorts of code motion traditionally used
for latency tolerance, redundancy elimination, and other performance enhancements.

                      Source program                                         (Set of ) abstract
                        and input                                               executions
                                                 Language
                                                 semantics

                               Language                                    Required
                               implementation                        correspondence

                                                (Set of ) concrete
                                                   executions

Figure 3.2 Program executions, semantics, and implementations. A language implementation is
considered safe only if the output of every realizable execution agrees with that of some abstract
execution allowed by language semantics for the given program and input.

3.4.1    Formal Framework

Informally, a memory model specifies which values (i.e., which writes) may be seen by
any given read. At the language level, more precise definitions depend on the notion of an
abstract program execution.
    Programming language semantics are typically defined in terms of execution on some
abstract machine, with language-appropriate built-in types, control-flow constructs, etc. For
a given source program and input, an abstract execution is a set of sequences, one per
thread, of reads, writes, and other atomic program steps, each of which inspects and/or
changes the state of the abstract machine (i.e., memory). For any given program and input,
certain executions of the abstract machine are said to be valid according to the language’s
semantics. Language semantics can be seen, constructively, as a mapping from programs
and inputs to (possibly infinite) sets of valid executions. The semantics can also be seen,
nonconstructively, as a predicate: given a program, its input, and an abstract execution, is
the execution valid?
    For the sake of convenience, the remainder of this section adopts the nonconstructive point
of view, at least with respect to the memory model. In practice, it is the language implementer
who needs to generate an execution—a concrete execution—for a given program and input.
If a language implementation is safe, then given a well formed source program and input,
any execution generated by the implementation will correspond to (produce the same output
as) some valid abstract execution of that program on that input (Figure 3.2). If the language
implementation is live, then it will generate at least one such concrete execution whenever
the set of abstract executions is nonempty. To show that a language implementation is safe
(a task beyond the scope of this monograph), one can define a mapping from concrete to
abstract executions, and then demonstrate that all the resulting abstract executions will be
valid.

    At the programming language level, a memory model is the portion of language semantics
that determines whether the values read from variables in an abstract execution are valid,
given the values written by other program steps. In a single-threaded program, the memory
model is trivial: there is a total order on program steps in any given execution, and the value
read in a given step is valid if and only if it matches the value written by the most recent
prior write to the same variable—or the initial value if there is no such write.2
    In a multithreaded program, the memory model is substantially more complex, because
a read in one thread may see a value written by a write in a different thread. An execution
is said to be sequentially consistent (in the sense of Sec. 2.2) if there exists a total order
on memory operations (across all threads) that explains all values read. As we have seen,
of course, most hardware is not sequentially consistent. Absent language restrictions, it is
unlikely that all concrete executions will be both fast and sequentially consistent. For the
sake of efficiency, the memory model for a concurrent language therefore typically requires
only a partial order—known as happens-before—on the steps of an abstract execution. Using
this partial order, the model then defines a writes-seen relation that identifies, for every read,
the writes whose values may be seen.
    To define the happens-before order, most memory models begin by distinguishing
between “ordinary” and “synchronizing” steps in the abstract execution. Ordinary steps
are typically reads and writes of scalar variables. Depending on the language, synchroniz-
ing steps might be lock acquire and release, transactions, monitor entry and exit, message
send and receive, or reads and writes of special atomic variables. Like ordinary steps, most
synchronizing steps read or write values in memory (an acquire operation, for example,
changes a lock from “free” to “held”). A sequentially consistent execution must explain
these reads and writes, just as it does those effected by accesses to ordinary scalar variables.
    Given the definition of ordinary and synchronizing steps, we proceed incrementally as
follows:

Program order is the union of a collection of disjoint total orders, each of which captures
  the steps performed by one of the program’s threads. Each thread’s steps must be allowable
  under the language’s sequential semantics, given the values returned by read operations.
Synchronization order is a total order, across all threads, on all synchronizing steps. This
  order must be consistent with program order within each thread. It must also explain the
  values read and written by the synchronizing steps (this will ensure, for example, that
  acquire and release operations on any given lock occur in alternating order). Crucially,
  synchronization order is not specified by the source program. An execution is valid only
  if there exists a synchronization order that leads, as described below, to a writes-seen
  relation that explains the values read by both ordinary and synchronizing steps.

2 Note that there may be multiple valid executions of a given source program on a given input, even
when the program is single threaded. Many languages, for example, allow side effects of evaluating
arguments to a given function to occur in any order. Nevertheless, the steps in any given single-
threaded execution will occur in total order.

Synchronizes-with order is a subset of synchronization order induced by language seman-
  tics. In a language based on transactional memory, the subset may be trivial: all trans-
  actions are globally ordered. In a language based on locks, each release operation may
  synchronize with the next acquire of the same lock in synchronization order, but may be
  unordered with respect to other synchronizing steps.
Happens-before order is the transitive closure of program order and synchronizes-with
  order. It captures all the ordering the language guarantees.

To complete a memory model, these order definitions must be augmented with a writes-seen
relation. To understand such relations, we first must understand the notion of a data race.

3.4.2    Data Races

Language semantics specify classes of ordinary program steps that conflict with one another.
A write, for example, is invariably defined to conflict with either a read or a write to the same
variable in another thread. A program is said to have a data race if, for some input, it has a
sequentially consistent execution in which two conflicting ordinary steps are adjacent in the
total order. Data races are problematic because we don’t normally expect an implementation
to force ordinary steps in different threads to occur in a particular order. If an implementation
yields (a concrete execution corresponding to) an abstract execution in which the conflicting
steps occur in one order, we need to allow it to yield another abstract execution (of the same
program on the same input) in which all prior steps are the same but the conflicting steps
are reversed. It is easy to construct examples (e.g., as suggested in Figure 2.3) in which the
remainder of this second execution cannot be sequentially consistent.
    Given the definitions in Sec. 3.4.1, we can also say that an abstract execution has a
data race if it contains a pair of conflicting steps that are not ordered by happens-before.
A program then has a data race if, for some input, it has an execution containing a data
race. This definition turns out to be equivalent to the one based on sequentially consistent
executions. The key to the equivalence is the observation that arcs in the synchronizes-with
order, which contribute to happens-before, correspond to ordering constraints in sequentially
consistent executions. The same language rules that induce a synchronizes-with arc from,
say, the release of a lock to the subsequent acquire also force the release to appear before
the acquire in the total order of any sequentially consistent execution.
    In an execution without any data races, the writes-seen relation is straightforward: the
lack of unordered conflicting accesses implies that all reads and writes of a given location
are ordered by happens-before. Each read can then return the value written by the (unique)
most recent prior write of the same location in happens-before order—or the initial value if
there is no such write. More formally, one can prove that all executions of a data-race-free

program are sequentially consistent: any total order consistent with happens-before will
explain the program’s reads. Moreover, since our (first) definition of a data race was based
only on sequentially consistent executions, we can provide the programmer with a set of
rules that, if followed, will always lead to sequentially consistent executions, with no need
to reason about possible relaxed behavior of the underlying hardware. Such a set of rules is
said to constitute a programmer-centric memory model (Adve and Hill 1990).
    In effect, a programmer-centric model is a contract between the programmer and the
implementation: if the programmer follows the rules (i.e., writes data-race-free programs),
the implementation will provide the illusion of sequential consistency. Moreover, given
the absence of races, any region of code that contains no synchronization (and that does
not interact with the “outside world” via I/O or syscalls) can be thought of as atomic: it
cannot—by construction—interact with other threads.
    But what about programs that do have data races? Many experts argue that such programs
are simply buggy, and need not have well-defined behavior. This is the position adopted by
default in C++ (Boehm and Adve 2008) and, subsequently, C: if a program has a data race
on a given input, its behavior is undefined; otherwise, it behaves according to one of its
sequentially consistent executions. As we shall see, however, the designers of both Java and
C/C++ have felt the need to extend semantics to additional executions, for the sake of safety
in Java and performance in C/C++.

Synchronization Races
The definition of a data race is designed to capture cases in which program behavior may depend on
the order in which two ordinary accesses occur, and this order is not constrained by synchronization.
In a similar fashion, we may wish to consider cases in which program behavior depends on the order
in which synchronization operations occur.
For each form of synchronization operation, we can define a notion of conflict. Acquire operations
on the same lock, for example, conflict with one another, while an acquire and a release do not—nor
do operations on different locks. A program is said to have a synchronization race if it has two
sequentially consistent executions with a common prefix, and the first steps that differ are conflicting
synchronization operations. Together, data races and synchronization races constitute the class of
general races (Netzer and Miller 1992).
Because we assume the existence of a total order on synchronizing steps, synchronization races never
compromise sequential consistency. Rather, they provide the means of controlling and exploiting
nondeterminism in parallel programs. In any case where we wish to allow conflicting high-level
operations to occur in arbitrary order, we design a synchronization race into the program to mediate
the conflict.

3.4.3    Real-World Models

As of this writing, Java and C/C++ are the only widely used parallel programming lan-
guages whose definitions attempt to precisely specify a memory model. (Separately, the
Linux kernel community is developing a memory model distinct from that of mainstream
C (Alglave et al. 2018).) The Java memory model is inherited by Scala and Kotlin. A care-
fully crafted model is also being developed for Go (GoLang 2014; Cox 2021). Ada (Ichbiah
et al. 1991) was the first language to introduce an explicitly relaxed (if informally specified)
memory model. It was designed to facilitate implementation on both shared-memory and
distributed hardware: variables shared between threads were required to be consistent only
in the wake of explicit message passing (rendezvous). The reference implementations of
several scripting languages (notably Ruby and Python) are sequentially consistent, though
other implementations (Jython 2023; JRuby 2023) are not.
    In Java, most programmers rely on monitors (Sec. 7.3.4) to synchronize access to shared
data. These provide a combination of mutual exclusion and condition synchronization. In C
and C++, most programmers likewise rely on mutex variables (locks) and related mecha-
nisms. If we wish to allow programmers to create new synchronization mechanisms, how-
ever, or to build optimized (e.g., nonblocking) concurrent data structures—and indeed if any
of the built-in synchronization mechanisms are to be written in high-level code, rather than
assembler—then the memory model must define synchronizing steps that are more primitive
than lock acquisition and release.
    Java allows a variable to be declared volatile, in which case reads and writes that
access it are included in the global synchronization order—they never induce a data race.
Each read is a load-acquire in the sense of Sec. 2.2.3: it happens before all subsequent
reads and writes in its thread. Each write is a (write-atomic) store-release: all previous reads
and writes in its thread happen before it does, and it becomes visible to all threads before
any thread that sees it can write anything else. Moreover each volatile read induces a
synchronizes-with arc (and thus a happens-before arc) from the (unique) preceding write to
the same location. In a similar vein, C and C++ allow a variable to be declared as atomic;
accesses to such variables behave, by default, much as they do in Java.3
    Variables declared as volatile or atomic allow the programmer to give intuitive
behavior to accesses that would otherwise be data races. Unfortunately, there is no known
way to determine, at reasonable expense, whether all such races have been eliminated.
Moreover, design goals for Java require that no program—including one with data races—

3 The volatile keyword also appears in C and C++, but it is used for interaction with I/O devices,
not for interactions among threads. Some legacy programs (prior to C/C++’11) used volatile as
a stand-in for atomic; this usage is incorrect in modern programs.

ever be able to jeopardize correct operation of the Java Virtual Machine or, by implication, of
any larger system in which that machine might be embedded. To guarantee system integrity,
the Java specification must define the behavior of racy programs.
    C and C++ have no similar concerns about the behavior of racy programs: there is a long
tradition of undefined semantics for code that, say, dereferences an uninitialized pointer or
indexes off the end of an array. There is also, however, a long tradition of unfettered access
to the full capabilities of the underlying hardware. When implementing synchronization
mechanisms, concurrent data structures, or the application code of certain important algo-
rithms (e.g., chaotic relaxation (Chazan and Miranker 1969)), non-sequentially-consistent
executions may dramatically outperform more strongly ordered alternatives, while still
producing acceptable results. To accommodate such cases, C and C++ allow the program-
mer to relax the ordering of synchronization races. Specifically, any explicit load, store,
or fetch_and_Φ operation on an atomic variable can include a memory order annotation
that forgoes write atomicity, acquire-release ordering, or both. This means, of course, that
the global synchronization order of a program with relaxed atomic accesses is no longer
necessarily total.
    In the end, Java and C/C++ arrive at a similar juncture: A C/C++ program in which
certain variables are declared atomic but accessed with relaxed loads and stores poses
the same semantic challenges as a Java program in which the corresponding variables were
never declared as volatile.

3.4.3.1 Out-of-Thin-Air Reads
For programs with data races (or relaxed synchronization races), it is tempting to say that
a read may see the value written either by the most recent write on some backward path
through the happens-before graph, or by any incomparable write (one that is unordered with
respect to the read).
    Any such convention, however, must deal with the possibility of circular causality. Sup-
pose we have an execution in which the assignments x := y, y := z, and z := x race with one
another. Since each of the reads is incomparable to the corresponding write, we can imagine
an execution in which each assignment circularly “justifies” the next, passing along a value
v that is never actually computed anywhere in the program. In addition to being unintu-
itive, such “out of thin air” values could lead to essentially arbitrary behavior elsewhere in
the program (Boehm and Demsky 2014). While no hardware or compiler implementation
currently in use appears to generate out-of-thin-air values in practice, there are plausible
compilation strategies for hypothetical implementations of current architectures (notably
Power (Lahav et al. 2017)) in which such values could arise, and researchers have yet to
devise semantics that would preclude them without forcing compilers to generate fences
that would be expensive on current machines.
    To define the writes-seen relation, the Java specification currently incorporates a notion
of “incremental justification,” in which each read is required to return a value that might

have been produced by a previous write to the same location in some sequential execution
of the given program on the given input (not necessarily the same execution used to justify
previous writes) (Manson et al. 2005). The details are surprisingly subtle and complex
(Aspinall and Ševčík 2007), and as of 2023 it is still unclear whether they can be made
mathematically sound. Mindful of the Java experience, the designers of C and C++ have for
the time being chosen (in programs with relaxed accesses to atomic variables) to forbid
out-of-thin-air reads without actually defining what that means. Formalization of the model
remains an active topic of research (Boehm and Demsky 2014; Pichon-Pharabod and Sewell
2016; Chakraborty and Vafeiadis 2019; Kang et al. 2017).
   In an alternative approach for C and C++, Sinclair et al. (2017) have proposed to guarantee
sequential consistency for data-race-free programs, but to extend the set of operations on
atomic variables to provide sequentially consistent semantics for the most important use
cases of relaxed accesses in existing programs. As a simple example, the notion of operation
commutativity, if supported directly in the language, might allow an operation like counter
increments (without a return value) to be implemented as a reduction (Sec. 5.2.2) without
introducing races.

Advice to the Parallel Programmer
In a C or C++ program, all reads and writes of atomic variables are considered to be synchronizing
accesses. This includes those accesses that are explicitly labeled as relaxed, meaning they are
neither write atomic nor ordered (from the perspective of other threads) with respect to preced-
ing or following accesses of the issuing thread. By using weak but explicit labels on atomic
accesses, the expert programmer (e.g., the author of a synchronization library) can enlarge the
set of valid executions, thereby freeing the compiler and the hardware to pursue more aggressive
optimizations.
At the same time, abundant real-world experience indicates that programmers routinely overestimate
the potential performance benefits of relaxed ordering, and underestimate the likelihood that using
it will lead to subtle bugs. Recent work by Attiya et al. (2011) has also shown that certain W ∥ R
orderings and fetch_and_Φ operations are essential in a fundamental way: standard concurrent
objects cannot be written without them. Absent a compelling, experimentally quantified performance
need and a solid (i.e., formally validated) correctness argument, programmers would be wise to rely
in all cases on the default memory order and its guarantee of sequential consistency for data-race-free
programs.
In keeping with C/C++ conventions, this monograph will, in general, explicitly label all loads and
stores that may race with concurrent accesses in other threads. The principal exception is initialization,
which can generally be performed safely using ordinary writes. Once an initialized object has been
published (made visible to other threads), subsequent accesses will generally require explicit loads
and stores. For more on this subject, see Sec. 9.3.3.
