Practical Spin Locks
                                                                                                  4

The mutual exclusion problem was first identified in the early 1960s. Dijkstra attributes the
first 2-thread solution to Theodorus Dekker (Dijkstra 1968b). Dijkstra himself published
an n-thread solution in 1965 [CACM]. The problem has been intensely studied ever since.
Taubenfeld (2008) provides a summary of significant historical highlights. Ben-Ari (2006,
Chaps. 3, 4, 5) presents a bit more detail. Much more extensive coverage can be found in
Taubenfeld’s encyclopedic text (Taubenfeld 2006).
    Through the 1960 and ’70s, attention focused mainly on algorithms in which the only
atomic primitives were assumed to be load and store. Since the 1980s, practical algorithms
have all assumed the availability of more powerful atomic primitives, though interest in
load/store-only algorithms continues in the theory community.
    We present a few of the most important load/store-only spin locks in the first subsection
below. In Sec. 4.1.1 we consider simple locks based on test_and_set (TAS) and fetch_and_
increment (FAI). In Sec. 4.3 we turn to queue-based locks, which scale significantly better
on large machines. In Sec. 4.4 we consider extensions of the basic acquire–release API.
Finally, in Sec. 4.5, we consider additional techniques to reduce unnecessary overhead.

4.1      Classical Load/Store-Only Algorithms

Peterson’s Algorithm

The simplest known 2-thread spin lock (Figure 4.1) is due to Peterson (1981). The lock is
represented by a pair of Boolean variables, interested[self ] and interested[other] (initially
false), and a integer turn that is either 0 or 1. To acquire the lock, thread i indicates its
interest by setting interested[self ] and then waiting until either (a) the other thread is not
interested or (b) turn is set to the other thread, indicating that thread i set it first.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024             61
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_4

           class lock
                atomic<bit> turn                // 0 or 1
                atomic<bool> interested[0..1] := { false, false }
           lock.acquire():
                   other := 1 − self
                interested[self].store(true, ∥W)
                turn.store(self, ∥R)
                while interested[other].load(∥R) and turn.load(∥) ̸= other;      // spin
                fence(R∥RW)
           lock.release():
                interested[self].store(false, RW∥)

Figure 4.1 Peterson’s 2-thread spin lock. Variable self must be either 0 or 1.

    To release the lock, thread i sets interested[self ] back to false. This allows the other
thread, if it is waiting, to enter the critical section. The initial value of turn in each round is
immaterial: it serves only to break the tie when both threads are interested in entering the
critical section.
    In his original paper, Peterson showed how to extend the lock to n threads by proceeding
through a series of n − 1 rounds, each of which eliminates a possible contender. Total
time for a thread to enter the critical section, however, is Θ(n 2 ), even in the absence of
contention. In separate work, Peterson and Fischer (1977) showed how to generalize any 2-
thread solution to n threads with a hierarchical tournament that requires only O(log n) time,
even in the presence of contention. Burns and Lynch (1980) proved that any deadlock-free
mutual exclusion algorithm using only loads and stores requires Θ(n) space.

Lamport’s Bakery Algorithm

Most of the n-thread mutual exclusion algorithms based on loads and stores can be shown
to be starvation free. Given differences in the relative rates of progress of different threads,
however, most allow a thread to be bypassed many times before finally entering the critical
section. In an attempt to improve fault tolerance, Lamport (1974) proposed a “bakery”
algorithm (Figure 4.2) inspired by the “please take a ticket” and “now serving” signs seen
at bakeries and other service counters. His algorithm has the arguably more significant
advantage that threads acquire the lock in the order in which they first indicate their interest—
i.e., in FIFO order.
    Each thread begins by scanning the number array to find the largest “ticket” value held
by a waiting thread. During the scan it sets its choosing flag to true to let its peers know
that its state is in flux. After choosing a ticket higher than any it has seen, it scans the
array again, spinning until each peer’s ticket is (a) stable and (b) greater than or equal to its
own. The second of these spins uses lexicographic comparison of ⟨value, thread id⟩ pairs
to resolve any ties in the chosen tickets. The equals case in the comparison avoids the need

 class lock                                         lock.acquire():
      atomic<bool> choosing[ ] := { false . . . }        choosing[self].store(true, ∥R)
      atomic<int> number[ ] := { 0 . . . }               int m := 1 + max i ∈ (number[i].load(∥))
 lock.release():                                         number[self].store(m, R∥)
      number[self].store(0, RW∥)                         choosing[self].store(false, W∥R)
                                                         for i ∈
                                                               while choosing[i].load(∥R);        // spin
                                                               repeat
                                                                     int t := number[i].load(∥R)  // spin
                                                               until t = 0 or ⟨t, i⟩ ≥ ⟨m, self⟩
                                                         fence(R∥RW)

Figure 4.2 Lamport’s bakery algorithm. The max operation is not assumed to be atomic. It is,
however, assumed to read each number field only once.

for special-case code when a thread examines its own number field. Once its own ⟨value,
thread id⟩ pair is the smallest in the array, a thread knows that it is “first in line,” and can
enter the critical section.

Synchronizing Instructions in Peterson’s Algorithm
Our code for Peterson’s algorithm employs several explicit synchronizing instructions. (For a
reminder of our notation, see Table 2.1.) The ∥ RW fence at the end of acquire is an “acquire fence”:
it ensures that the lock is held (the preceding spin has completed successfully) before the thread can
execute any instructions in the critical section (the code that will follow the return). Similarly, the
RW ∥ store in release is a “release access”: it ensures that all instructions in the critical section (the
code that preceded the call) have completed before the lock is released.
The two synchronizing stores in acquire are needed to ensure the correctness of the lock, which
depends critically on the order in which these accesses occur. The write to interested[self ] must
precede the write to turn. The latter write must then precede the reads of interested[other] and
turn. Without the explicit synchronizing accesses, the compiler might reorder loads and stores
in the assembly language program, or the hardware might allow their effects to occur out of order
from the other thread’s perspective. As just one example of the trouble that might ensue, suppose
that threads 0 and 1 execute acquire more or less at the same time, and that thread 0 sets turn
first, but thread 0’s write to interested[0] is slow to propagate to thread 1. Then thread 0 may read
interested[1] = true but turn = 1, allowing it to enter the critical section, while thread 1 reads turn
= 0 but interested[0] = false, allowing it to enter also.
Though we will not usually present them explicitly, similar arguments for synchronizing instructions
apply to algorithms throughout the remainder of this monograph. Most lock acquire operations,
for example, will end with a fence instruction that orders a prior spin with respect to the ordinary
loads and stores of the upcoming critical section. Most lock release operations will begin with a
synchronizing store that is ordered with respect to prior ordinary loads and stores.
In general, it can be extremely difficult to determine the minimal set of ordering constraints needed
for correct behavior. We have made a good-faith effort to do so for the simpler algorithms in this
monograph. In more complicated cases, including most of the algorithms in Chapter 8, we have
reverted to the default assumption of full ordering.

   Like all deadlock-free mutual exclusion algorithms based only on loads and stores, the
bakery algorithm requires O(n) space, where n is the total number of threads in the system.
Total time to enter the critical section is also Θ(n), even in the absence of contention. As
originally formulated (and as shown in Figure 4.2), number fields in the bakery algorithm
grow without bound. Taubenfeld (2004) has shown how to bound them instead. For machines
with more powerful atomic primitives, the conceptually similar ticket lock (Fischer et al.
1979; Reed and Kanodia 1979) (Sec. 4.2.2) uses fetch_and_increment on shared “next
ticket” and “now serving” variables to reduce space requirements to O(1) and time to
O(m), where m is the number of threads concurrently competing for access.

4.1.1     Lamport’s Fast Algorithm

One of the truisms of parallel computing is that if a lock is highly contended most of the
time, then the program in which it is embedded probably won’t scale. Turned around, this
observation suggests that in a well designed program, the typical spin lock will usually
be free when a thread attempts to acquire it. Lamport’s “fast” algorithm (1987) (Figure
4.3) exploits this observation by arranging for a lock to be acquired in constant time in the
absence of contention (but in O(n) time, where n is the total number of threads in the system,
whenever contention is encountered).
   The core of the algorithm is a pair of lock fields, x and y. To acquire the lock, thread t must
write its id into x and then y, and be sure that no other thread has written to x in-between.
Thread t checks y immediately after writing x, and checks x immediately after writing y.

Defining Time Complexity for Spin Locks
Given that we generally have no bounds on either the length of a critical section or the relative rates
of execution of different threads, we cannot in general bound the number of load instructions that
a thread may execute in the acquire method of any spin lock algorithm. How then can we compare
the time complexity of different locks?
The standard answer is to count only accesses to shared variables (not those that are thread-local),
and then only when the access is “remote.” This is not a perfect measure, since local accesses are not
free, but it captures the dramatic difference in cost between cache hits and misses on modern machines.
On an NRC-NUMA machine (Sec. 2.1.2), the definition of “remote” is straightforward: we associate
a (static) location with each variable and thread, and charge for all and only those accesses made by
threads to data at other locations. On a globally cache-coherent machine, the definition is less clear,
since whether an access hits in the cache may depend on whether there has been a recent access by
another thread. The standard convention is to count all and only those accesses to shared variables
that might be conflict misses. In a simple loop that spins on a Boolean variable, for example, we
would count the initial load that starts the spin and the final load that ends it. Ideally, we would
not count any of the loads in-between. If, however, another thread could write the variable and then
restore its value before we read it again, we would need to consider—and count—the number of
times this could happen.
Unless otherwise noted, we will use the globally cache coherent model in this monograph.

         class lock
              atomic< > x
              atomic< > y := ⊥
              atomic<bool> trying[ ] := { false . . . }
         lock.acquire():
              loop
                   trying[self].store(true)
                   x.store(self)
                   if y.load(∥) ̸= ⊥
                          trying[self].store(false, ∥)
                          fence()
                         while y.load(∥) ̸= ⊥;          // spin
                         continue                       // go back to top of loop
                   y.store(self)
                   if x.load(∥) ̸= self
                          trying[self].store(false, ∥)
                          fence()
                         for i ∈
                               while trying[i].load(∥); // spin
                          fence()                       // read recent y to avoid starvation
                         if y.load(∥) ̸= self
                               while y.load(∥) ̸= ⊥; // spin
                               continue                 // go back to top of loop
                   break
              fence(R∥RW)
         lock.release():
              y.store(⊥, RW∥)
              trying[self].store(false, W∥)

Figure 4.3 Lamport’s fast algorithm.

If y is not ⊥ when checked, some other thread must be in the critical section; t waits for it
to finish and retries. If x is not still t when checked, some other thread may have entered
the critical section (t cannot be sure); in this case, t must wait until the competing thread(s)
have either noticed the conflict or left the critical section.
    To implement its “notice the conflict” mechanism, the fast lock employs an array of
trying flags, one per thread. Each thread sets its flag while competing for the lock (it also
leaves it set while executing a critical section for which it encountered no contention). If a
thread t does detect contention, it unsets its trying flag, waits for each thread’s entry in the
array to be cleared (ensuring that any competing threads have backed off), and then checks
to see if it was the last thread to set y. If so, it enters the critical section (after first executing
a ∥ RW fence to order upcoming ordinary accesses with respect to previous synchronizing
instructions). If not, it retries the acquisition protocol.
    A disadvantage of the fast lock as presented (both here and in the original paper) is that
it requires Θ(n) time (where n is the total number of threads in the system) even when only
two threads are competing for the lock. Building on the work of Moir and Anderson (1995),

            class lock
                 atomic<bool> f := false
            lock.acquire():                               lock.release():
                 while f.TAS(∥);     // spin                   f.store(false, RW∥)
                 fence(R∥RW)

Figure 4.4 The simple test_and_set lock.

        class lock
             atomic<bool> f := false
        lock.acquire():                                        lock.release():
             while f.TAS(∥)                                         f.store(false, RW∥)
                  while f.load(∥);        // spin
             fence(R∥RW)

Figure 4.5 The test-and-test_and_set lock. Unlike the test_and_set lock of Figure 4.4, this code
will typically induce interconnect traffic only when the lock is modified by another core.

Merritt and Taubenfeld (2000) showed how to reduce this time to O(m), where m is the
number of threads concurrently competing for access.

4.2      Centralized Algorithms

As noted in Secs. 1.3 and 2.3, almost every modern machine provides read-modify-write
(fetch_and_Φ) instructions that can be used to implement mutual exclusion in constant
space and—in the absence of contention—constant time. The locks we will consider in this
section—all of which use such instructions—are centralized in the sense that they spin on
a single, central location. They differ in fairness and in the performance they provide in the
presence of contention.

4.2.1    Test-and-Set Locks

The simplest mutex spin lock embeds a TAS instruction in a loop, as shown in Figure 4.4.
On a typical machine, the TAS instruction will require a writable copy of the target location,
necessitating messages across the processor-memory interconnect on every iteration of the
loop. These messages will typically serialize, inducing enormous hardware contention that
interferes not only with other threads that are attempting to acquire the lock, but also with
any attempt by the lock owner to release the lock.
   Performance can be improved by arranging to obtain write permission on the lock
only when it appears to be free. Proposed by Rudolph and Segall (1984), this test-and-

        class lock
             atomic<bool> f := false
            const int base := ...          // tuning parameters
            const int limit := ...
            const int multiplier := ...
        lock.acquire():
             int delay := base                                   lock.release():
             while f.TAS(∥)                                           f.store(false, RW∥)
                  pause(delay)
                  delay := min(delay × multiplier, limit)
             fence(R∥RW)

Figure 4.6 The test_and_set lock with exponential backoff. The pause(k) operation is typically an
empty loop that iterates k times. Ideal choices of base, limit and multiplier values depend on the
machine architecture and, typically, the application workload.

test_and_set lock is still extremely simple (Figure 4.5), and tends to perform well on
machines with a small handful of cores. Whenever the lock is released, however, every com-
peting thread will fall out of its inner loop and attempt another TAS, each of which induces
coherence traffic. With n threads continually attempting to execute a critical sections, total
time per acquire-release pair will be O(n), which is still unacceptable on a machine with
more than a handful of cores.
    Drawing inspiration from the classic Ethernet contention protocol Metcalfe and Boggs
(1976), Anderson et al. (1990) proposed an exponential backoff strategy for test_and_set
locks (Figure 4.6). Experiments indicate that it works quite well in practice, leading to near-
constant overhead per acquire-release pair on many machines. Unfortunately, it depends
on constants (the base, multiplier, and limit for backoff) that have no single best value in
all situations. Ideally, they should be chosen individually for each machine and workload.
Note that test_and_set suffices in the presence of backoff; test-and-test_and_set is not
required.

4.2.2    The Ticket Lock

Test_and_set locks are potentially unfair. While most machines can be expected to “ran-
domize” the behavior of TAS (e.g., so that some particular core doesn’t always win when
more than one attempts a TAS at roughly the same time), and while exponential backoff can
be expected to inject additional variability into the lock’s behavior, it is still entirely possible
for a thread that has been waiting a very long time to be passed up by a relative newcomer;
in principle, a thread can starve.
   The ticket lock (Fischer et al. 1979; Reed and Kanodia 1979) (Figure 4.7) addresses
this problem. Like Lamport’s bakery lock, it grants the lock to competing threads in first-

 class lock
      atomic<int> next ticket := 0
      atomic<int> now serving := 0
     const int base := ...              // tuning parameter
 lock.acquire():
      int my ticket := next ticket.FAI(∥)
           // returns old value;                              lock.release():
           // arithmetic overflow is harmless                      int t := now serving + 1
      loop                                                         now serving.store(t, RW∥)
           int ns := now serving.load(∥)
           if ns = my ticket
                 break
           pause(base × (my ticket − ns))
                 // overflow in subtraction is harmless
      fence(R∥RW)

Figure 4.7 The ticket lock with proportional backoff. Tuning parameter base should be chosen to
be roughly the length of a trivial critical section.

come-first-served order. Unlike the bakery lock, it uses fetch_and_increment to get by
with constant space, and with time (per lock acquisition) roughly linear in the number of
competing threads.
    The code in Figure 4.7 employs a backoff strategy due to Mellor-Crummey and Scott
(1991b). It leverages the fact that my_ticket—L.now_serving represents the number of
threads ahead of the calling thread in line. If those threads consume an average of k × base
time per critical section, the calling thread can be expected to probe now_serving about
k times before acquiring the lock. Under high contention, this can be substantially smaller
than the O(n) probes expected without backoff.
    In a system that runs long enough, the next_ticket and now_serving counters can be
expected to exceed the capacity of a fixed word size. Rollover is harmless, however: the max-
imum number of threads in any reasonable system will be less than the largest representable
integer, and subtraction works correctly in the ring of integers mod 2wordsize .

4.3      Queued Spin Locks

Even with proportional backoff, a thread can perform an arbitrary number of remote accesses
in the process of acquiring a ticket lock, inducing an arbitrary amount of contention.
Anderson et al. (1990) and (independently) Graunke and Thakkar (1990) showed how to
reduce this to a small constant on a globally cache-coherent machine. The intuition is to
replace a single now_serving variable (or the Boolean flag of a test_and_set lock) with a
queue of waiting threads. Each thread knows its place in line: it waits for its predecessor to
finish before entering the critical section, and signals its successor when it’s done.

    Both Anderson et al. and Graunke and Thakkar implement the queue as an array of
n flag words, where n is the maximum number of threads in the system. Both arrange
for every thread to spin on a different element of the array, and to know the index of the
element on which its successor is spinning. In Anderson et al.’s lock, array elements are
allocated dynamically using fetch_and_increment; a thread releases the lock by updating
the next element (in circular order) after the one on which it originally spun. In Graunke
and Thakkar’s lock, array elements are statically allocated. A thread releases the lock by
writing its own element; it finds the element on which to spin by performing a swap on an
extra tail element.
    Inspired by the QOLB hardware primitive of the Wisconsin Multicube (Goodman et al.
1989) and the IEEE SCI standard (Aboulenein et al. 1994) (Sec. 2.3.3), Mellor-Crummey
and Scott (1991b) devised a queue-based spin lock that employs a linked list instead of
an array. Craig and, independently, Magnussen et al. devised an alternative version that,
in essence, links the list in the opposite direction. Unlike the locks of Anderson et al. and
Graunke and Thakkar, these list-based locks do not require a static bound on the maximum
number of threads; equally important, they require only O(n + j) space for n threads and
 j locks, rather than O(n j). They are generally considered the methods of choice for FIFO
locks on large-scale systems. (Note, however, that strict FIFO ordering may be inadvisable
on a system with preemption; see Sec. 7.5.2.)

4.3.1    The MCS Lock

Pseudocode for the MCS lock appears in Figure 4.8. Every thread using the lock allocates a
qnode record containing a queue link and a Boolean flag. Typically, this record lies in the
stack frame of the code that calls acquire and release; it must be passed as an argument to
both (but see the discussion under “Modifications for a Standard Interface” below).
    Threads holding or waiting for the lock are chained together, with the link in the qnode
of thread t pointing to the qnode of the thread to which t should pass the lock when done
with its critical section. The lock itself is simply a pointer to the qnode of the thread at the
tail of the queue, or null if the lock is free.
    Operation of the lock is illustrated in Figure 4.9. The acquire method takes as parameter
an otherwise unused qnode, most likely allocated in the stack frame of the caller. It initializes
the next pointer of this qnode to null and swaps it into the tail of the queue. If the value
returned by the swap is null, then the calling thread has acquired the lock (line 2). If the
value returned by the swap is non-null, it refers to the qnode of the caller’s predecessor in
the queue (indicated by the dashed arrow in line 3). Here thread B must set A’s next pointer
to refer to its own qnode. Meanwhile, some other thread C may join the queue (line 4).
    When thread A has completed its critical section, the release method reads the next
pointer of A’s qnode to find the qnode of its successor B. It changes B’s waiting flag to
false, thereby granting it the lock (line 5).

  type qnode = record
       atomic<qnode*> next
       atomic<bool> waiting
  class lock
       atomic<qnode*> tail := null
  lock.acquire(qnode* p):                         // Initialization of waiting can be delayed
       p→next := null                             // until the if statement below,
       p→waiting := true                          // but at the cost of an extra W∥W fence.
       qnode* prev := tail.swap(p, W∥)
       if prev ̸= null                            // queue was nonempty
             prev→next.store(p, ∥R)
             while p→waiting.load(∥);             // spin
       fence(R∥RW)
  lock.release(qnode* p):
       qnode* succ := p→next.load(RW∥)
       if succ = null                           // no known successor
            if tail.CAS(p, null, ∥) return
            repeat succ := p→next.load(∥) until succ ̸= null
       succ→waiting.store(false, ∥)

Figure 4.8 The MCS queued lock.

    If release finds that the next pointer of its qnode is null, it attempts to CAS the lock
tail pointer back to null. If some other thread has already swapped itself into the queue
(line 5), the CAS will fail, and release will wait for the next pointer to become non-null
(line 6). If there are no waiting threads (line 7), the CAS will succeed, returning the lock to
the appearance in line 1.
    The MCS lock has several important properties. Threads join the queue in a wait-free
manner (using swap), after which they receive the lock in FIFO order. Each waiting thread
spins on a separate location, eliminating contention for cache and interconnect resources.
In fact, because each thread provides its own qnode, it can arrange for it to be local even
on an NRC-NUMA machine. Total (remote access) time to pass the lock from one thread
to the next is constant. Total space is linear in the number of threads and locks.
    As written (Figure 4.8), the MCS lock requires both swap and CAS. CAS can of course
be used to emulate the swap in the acquire method, but entry to the queue drops from
wait-free to lock-free (meaning that a thread can theoretically starve). Mellor-Crummey and
Scott (1991b) also show how to make do with only swap in the release method, but FIFO
ordering may be lost when a thread enters the queue just as its predecessor is releasing the
lock.

                    (1)   L

                    (2)                   (R)
                          L           A

                    (3)                   (R)             W
                          L           A               B

                    (4)                   (R)             W               W
                          L           A               B               C

                    (5)                                   R               W
                          L                           B               C

                    (6)                                   R               W
                          L                           B               C

                    (7)                                                   R
                          L                                           C

Figure 4.9 Operation of the MCS lock. An ‘R’ indicates that the thread owning the given qnode
is running its critical section (parentheses indicate that the value of the waiting flag is immaterial).
A ‘W’ indicates that the corresponding thread is waiting. A dashed arrow represents a local pointer
(returned to the thread by swap).

Modifications for a Standard Interface
One disadvantage of the MCS lock is the need to pass a qnode pointer to acquire and release.
Test_and_set and ticket locks pass only a reference to the lock itself. If a programmer
wishes to convert code from traditional to queued locks, or to design code in which the
lock implementation can be changed at system configuration time, it is natural to wish for a
version of the MCS lock that omits the extra parameters, and can be substituted in without
rewriting all the call points. Auslander et al. (2003) devised such a version as part of the
K42 project at IBM Research (Appavoo et al. 2005). Their code exploits the fact that once
a thread has acquired a lock, its qnode serves only to hold a reference to the next thread in
line. Since the thread now “owns” the lock, it can move its next pointer to an extra field of
the lock, at which point the qnode can be discarded.
    Code for the K42 variant of the MCS lock appears in Figure 4.10. Operation of the lock
is illustrated in Figure 4.11. An idle, unheld lock is represented by a qnode containing two
null pointers (line 1 of Figure 4.11). The first of these is the usual tail pointer from the MCS
lock; the other is a “next” pointer that will refer to the qnode of the first waiting thread,
if and when there is one. Newly arriving thread A (line 2) uses CAS to replace a null tail

     type qnode = record
          atomic<qnode*> tail
          atomic<qnode*> next
     const qnode* waiting := 1
         // In a real qnode, tail = null means the lock is free;
         // In the qnode that is a lock, tail is the real tail pointer.
     class lock
          atomic<qnode> q := { null, null }
     lock.acquire():
          loop
               qnode* prev := q.tail.load(∥)
               if prev = null                                       // lock appears to be free
                     if q.tail.CAS(null, &q, ∥) break
               else
                     qnode n := { waiting, null }
                     if q.tail.CAS(prev, &n, W∥)                    // we’re in line
                           prev→next.store(&n, W∥R)
                           while n.tail.load(∥) = waiting;          // spin
                           // now we have the lock
                           qnode* succ := n.next.load(R∥)
                           if succ = null
                                q.next.store(null, ∥)
                                // try to make lock point at itself:
                                if ¬q.tail.CAS(&n, &q, W∥R)
                                      // somebody got into the timing window
                                      repeat succ := n.next.load(∥) until succ ̸= null
                                      q.next.store(succ, R∥)
                                break
                           else
                                q.next.store(succ, R∥)
                                break
          fence(R∥RW)
     lock.release():
          qnode* succ := q.next.load(RW∥)
          if succ = null
               if q.tail.CAS(&q, null, ∥) return
               repeat succ := q.next.load(∥) until succ ̸= null
          succ→tail.store(null, ∥)

Figure 4.10 K42 variant of the MCS queued lock. Note the standard interface to acquire and release,
with no parameters other than the lock itself.

                                tail next
                     (1)    L

                     (2)                        (R)
                            L               A

                     (3)                        (R)           W
                            L               A             B

                     (4)                        (R)           W              W
                            L               A             B              C

                     (5)                                      R              W
                            L                             B              C

Figure 4.11 Operation of the K42 MCS lock. An ‘R’ (running) indicates a null “tail” pointer; ‘W’
indicates a “waiting” flag. Dashed boxes indicate qnodes that are no longer needed, and may safely
be freed by returning from the method in which they were declared. In (1) the lock is free. In (2) a
single thread is active in the critical section. In (3) and (4) two new threads have arrived. In (5) thread
A has finished and thread B is now active.

pointer with a pointer to the lock variable itself, indicating that the lock is held, but that no
other threads are waiting. At this point, newly arriving thread B (line 3) will see the lock
variable as its “predecessor,” and will update the next field of the lock rather than that of A’s
qnode (as it would have in a regular MCS lock). When thread C arrives (line 4), it updates
B’s next pointer, because it obtained a pointer to B’s qnode when it performed a CAS on
the tail field of the lock. When A completes its critical section (line 5), it finds B’s qnode
by reading the head field of the lock. It then changes B’s “head” pointer (which serves as
a waiting flag) to null, thereby releasing B. Upon leaving its spin, B updates the head field
of the lock to refer to C’s qnode. Assuming no other threads arrive, when C completes its
critical section it will return the lock to the state shown in line 1.
    The careful reader may notice that the code of Figure 4.10 has a lock-free (not wait-free)
entry protocol, and thus admits the (remote, theoretical) possibility of starvation. This can
be remedied by replacing the original CAS with a swap, but a thread that finds that the lock
was previously free must immediately follow up with a CAS, leading to significantly poorer
performance in the (presumably common) uncontended case. A potentially attractive hybrid
strategy starts with a load of the tail pointer, following up with a CAS if the lock appears to
be free and a swap otherwise.

4.3.2    The CLH Lock

Because every thread spins on a field of its own qnode, the MCS lock achieves a constant
bound on the number of remote accesses per lock acquisition, even on a NRC-NUMA
machine. The cost of this feature is the need for a newly arriving thread to write the address
of its qnode into the qnode of its predecessor, and for the predecessor to wait for that write
to complete before it can release a lock whose tail pointer no longer refers to its own qnode.
    Craig (1993) and, independently, Magnussen et al. (1994) observed that this extra “hand-
shake” can be avoided by arranging for each thread to spin on its predecessor’s qnode, rather
than its own. On a globally cache-coherent machine, the spin will still be local, because the
predecessor’s node will migrate to the successor’s cache. The downside of the change is that
a thread’s qnode must potentially remain accessible long after the thread has left its criti-
cal section: we cannot bound the time that may elapse before a successor needs to inspect
that node. This requirement is accommodated by having a thread provide a fresh qnode to
acquire, and return with a different qnode from release.
    In their original paper, Magnussen et al. presented two versions of their lock: a simpler
“LH” lock and an enhanced “M” lock; the latter reduces the number of cache misses in the
uncontended case by allowing a thread to keep its original qnode when no other thread is
trying to acquire the lock. The M lock needs CAS to resolve the race between a thread that
is trying to release a heretofore uncontended lock and the arrival of a new contender. The
LH lock has no such races; all it needs is swap.
    Craig’s lock is essentially identical to the LH lock: it differs only in the mechanism used
to pass qnodes to and from the acquire and release methods. It has become conventional
to refer to this joint invention by the initials of all three inventors: CLH.
    Code for the CLH lock appears in Figure 4.12. An illustration of its operation appears
in Figure 4.13. A free lock (line 1 of the latter figure) contains a pointer to a qnode whose
succ_must_wait flag is false. Newly arriving thread A (line 2) obtains a pointer to this
node (dashed arrow) by executing a swap on the lock tail pointer. It then spins on this node
(or simply observes that its succ_must_wait flag is already false). Before returning from
acquire, it stores the pointer into its own qnode so it can find it again in release. (In the
LH version of the lock (Magnussen et al. 1994), there was no pointer in the qnode; rather,
the API for acquire returned a pointer to the predecessor qnode as an explicit parameter.)
    To release the lock (line 4), thread A writes false to the succ_must_wait field of its own
qnode and then leaves that qnode behind, returning with its predecessor’s qnode instead
(here previously marked ‘X’). Thread B, which arrived at line 3, releases the lock in the
same way. If no other thread is waiting at this point, the lock returns to the state in line 1.
    In his original paper, Craig (1993) explored several extensions to the CLH lock. By
introducing an extra level of indirection, one can eliminate remote spinning even on an
NRC-NUMA machine—without requiring CAS, and without abandoning strict either FIFO
ordering or wait-free entry. By linking the list both forward and backward, and traversing
it at acquire time, one can arrange to grant the lock in order of some external notion of

        type qnode = record
            qnode* prev                    // read and written only by owner thread
             atomic<bool> succ must wait
        class lock
             atomic<qnode*> tail := new qnode(null, false)
             ~lock():                             // destructor
                 delete tail
        lock.acquire(qnode* p):
             p→succ must wait.store(true, ∥)
             qnode* pred := p→prev := tail.swap(p, W∥)
             while pred→succ must wait.load(∥);                      // spin
             fence(R∥RW)
        lock.release(qnode** pp):
             qnode* pred := (*pp)→prev
             (*pp)→succ must wait.store(false, RW∥)
             *pp := pred                                             // take pred’s qnode

Figure 4.12 The CLH queued lock.

                      (1)                     R
                            L          X

                      (2)                     R              W
                            L          X              A

                      (3)                     R              W              W
                            L          X              A              B

                      (4)                     R               R             W
                            L          A              X              B

                      (5)                                     R             W
                            L                         B              X

Figure 4.13 Operation of the CLH lock. An ‘R’ indicates that a thread spinning on this qnode (i.e.,
the successor of the thread that provided it) is free to run its critical section; a ‘W’ indicates that
it must wait. Dashed boxes indicate qnodes that are no longer needed by successors, and may be
reused by the thread releasing the lock. Note the change in label on such nodes, indicating that they
now “belong” to a different thread.

       qnode initial thread qnodes[ ]
       qnode* thread qnode ptrs[ ] := { i ∈ : &initial thread qnodes[i] }
       type qnode = record
            atomic<bool> succ must wait
       class lock
            atomic<qnode*> tail := new qnode(null, false)
           qnode* head                              // accessed only by lock owner
            ~lock():                                  // destructor
                delete tail
       lock.acquire():
            qnode* p := thread qnode ptrs[self]
            p→succ must wait.store(true, ∥)
            qnode* pred := tail.swap(p, W∥)
            while pred→succ must wait.load(∥);        // spin
            fence(R∥RW)
            head := p
            thread qnode ptrs[self] := pred
       lock.release():
            head→succ must wait.store(false, RW∥)

Figure 4.14 A CLH variant with standard interface.

priority, rather than first-come-first-served (Markatos (1991) presented a similar technique
for MCS locks). By marking nodes as abandoned, and skipping over them at release time,
one can accommodate timeout (we will consider this topic further in Sec. 7.5.2, together
with the possibility—suggested by Craig as future work—of skipping over threads that are
currently preempted). Finally, Craig sketched a technique to accommodate nested critical
sections without requiring a thread to allocate multiple qnodes: arrange for the thread to
acquire its predecessor’s qnode when the lock is acquired rather than when it is released,
and maintain a separate thread-local stack of pointers to the qnodes that must be modified
in order to release the locks.

Modifications for a Standard Interface
Craig’s suggestion for nested critical sections requires that locks be released in the reverse
of the order in which they were acquired; it does not generalize easily to idioms like hand-
over-hand locking (Sec. 3.1.2). If we adopt the idea of a head pointer field from the K42
MCS lock, however, we can devise a (previously unpublished) CLH variant that serves as a
“plug-in” replacement for traditional locks (Figure 4.14).
   Our code assumes a global array, thread_qnode_ptrs, indexed by thread id. In prac-
tice this could be replaced by any form of “thread-local” storage—e.g., using the POSIX
pthread_getspecific mechanism. Operation is very similar to that of the original CLH lock:

the only real difference is that instead of requiring the caller to pass a qnode to release,
we leave that pointer in a head field of the lock. Dynamic allocation and deallocation of
qnodes (not shown in Figure 4.14) happens only when locks are created and destroyed.
At any given time, the total number of extant nodes is always n + j for n threads and j
locks—one per lock at the head of each queue (with succ_must_wait true or false, as
appropriate), one enqueued (not at the head) by each thread currently waiting for a lock, and
one (in the appropriate slot of thread_qnode_ptrs) reserved for future use by each thread
not currently waiting for a lock. (Elements of thread_qnode_ptrs corresponding to threads
currently waiting for a lock are overwritten, at the end of acquire, before being read again.)
   As in the original CLH variant, qnodes cycle among the locks as threads move
through their critical sections. With the new, standard interface, the qnode saved in
thread_qnode_ptrs[self ] at the end of lock.release will typically be different from the one
retrieved at the beginning of lock.acquire. Similarly, the qnode deallocated when a lock is
destroyed will typically be different from the one allocated when the lock was created.

4.3.3    Hemlock

In 2021, Dice and Kogan presented a remarkably simple and scalable variant on the CLH
lock, which they dubbed Hemlock. Code appears in Figure 4.15. Like a CLH lock, a Hemlock
comprises a single word that is null when the lock is free and that otherwise identifies the
last thread currently in line. There are, however, no qnodes. Instead, each thread uses a
single status word, located in shared memory, to link into the queue of any lock for which
it is currently waiting.
    A thread that wishes to enter a critical section swaps the address of its status word into
the lock’s tail pointer. If the return value is null, the thread has acquired the lock. Otherwise,
it has learned the address of its predecessor’s status word, on which it proceeds to spin.
    To release a lock, a thread attempts a CAS on the tail pointer; this succeeds if and only
if no other thread is waiting. In the failure case, the thread writes the lock’s address into
its status word. This write terminates the successor’s spin. Using the lock’s address as the
written value serves to disambiguate cases in which a thread holds more than one lock and
there is more than one successor spinning on the status word. To avoid the possibility of a
lost wakeup if the thread tries to release another lock before the first successor has noticed the
wakeup, the release method waits for a “handshake” in which the first successor confirms
that it has indeed noticed.
    If a thread holds a large number of locks, the wakeup operation may cause a flurry
of coherence activity, as multiple potential successors reload the line to see who is being
awoken. In the common case, in which a thread holds a single lock, coherence traffic is
comparable to that of the CLH lock. To reduce the overhead of handshakes, in which a
thread obtains a status word in shared mode and must then upgrade it to exclusive, Dice
and Kogan suggest the counter-intuitive but effective strategy of spinning (in both acquire
and release) with CAS instead of load.

                  type status = atomic<lock*>
                  status ts[T ] := { null . . . }
                  class lock
                       atomic<status*> tail := null
                  lock.acquire():
                       status* pred := tail.swap(&ts[self], ∥R)
                       if pred ̸= null
                             while pred→load(∥) ̸= this;      // spin
                             pred→store(null, R∥)             // handshake
                       fence(R∥RW)
                  lock.release():
                       if ¬tail.CAS(&ts[self], null, RW∥)
                            ts[self].store(this, R∥R)
                            while ts[self].load(∥) ̸= null;   // spin

Figure 4.15 The Hemlock algorithm. Array ts need not be contiguous, so long as each thread can
easily find the address of its own status word.

4.3.4    Which Spin Lock Should I Use?

On modern machines, there is little reason to consider load/store-only spin locks, except per-
haps as an optimization in programs with highly asymmetric access patterns (see Sec. 4.5.3
below).
   Table 4.1 summarizes the tradeoffs among fetch_and_Φ-based spin locks. Absolute per-
formance will vary with the machine and workload, and is difficult to quantify here. For
small numbers of threads—single digits, say—both the test_and_set lock with exponential
backoff and the ticket lock with proportional backoff tend to work quite well. The ticket
lock is fairer, but this can actually be a disadvantage in some situations (see the discussion
of locality-conscious locking in Sec. 4.5.1 and of inopportune preemption in Sec. 7.5.2).
   The problem with both test_and_set and ticket locks is their brittle performance as
the number of contending threads increases. In any application in which lock contention
may be a bottleneck—even rarely—it makes sense to use a queue-based lock. Here the
choice between MCS and CLH locks depends on architectural features and costs. The MCS
lock is generally preferred on an NRC-NUMA machine: the CLH lock can be modified
to avoid remote spinning, but the extra level of indirection requires additional fetch_and_
Φ operations on each lock transfer. For machines with global cache coherence, either lock
can be expected to work well. Given the absence of dummy nodes, space needs are lower
for MCS locks, but performance may be better (by a small constant factor) for CLH locks
on some machines. If threads hold only a single lock at a time, or perhaps a small constant
number of locks, the Hemlock is fast, space efficient, and highly scalable. It also employs a
standard interface.

Table 4.1 Tradeoffs among fetch_and_Φ-based spin locks. Symbols are meant to suggest “good”
(+), “fair” (◦), and “poor” (−). Space needs are in words, for n threads and j locks, none of which
is requested or held.
                              TAS ticket     MCS CLH          MCS     CLH         Hem-
                             (w/ backoff)    (original)         (“K42”)           lock
 Fairness                      −      +       +        +       +        +          +
 Preemption tolerance          ◦      −       −        −       −        −          −
 Scalability                   ◦       ◦      +        +       +        +          +
 Fast-path overhead            +      +       ◦        ◦       −        −           ◦
 Interoperability              +      +       −        −       +        +          +
 NRC-NUMA suitability          −      −       +        ◦       +        ◦          −
 Space needs                   j      2j       j      2j       2j   2n + 3 j      n+ j

4.4       Interface Extensions

The acquire–release interface for locks—both busy-wait and blocking—is often extended
to accommodate special use cases. In many packages, for example, acquire takes an extra,
optional timeout parameter that specifies the maximum length of time that the thread is
willing to wait to acquire the lock. A Boolean return value then indicates whether the lock
was actually acquired, or whether it timed out. Timeout is sometimes useful in interactive
applications, which may need to pursue an alternative code path when a lock is not available
in time to meet a real-time deadline. It may also be useful in programs that are prone to
deadlock, and in which prevention and avoidance (Sec. 3.1.1) are impractical: expiration of
a lengthy timeout can be taken as an indication that deadlock has probably occurred, and
that the calling thread should back out, release its other locks, and retry the operation later.
    In some cases, an application may wish to specify a “timeout” of zero—to acquire a lock
if and only if it is not currently held. This trylock extension is straightforward: a try-acquire
operation takes no extra parameters, but does return a Boolean: true indicates that the lock
has just been acquired; false indicates that it was already held by another thread.
    Throughout this chapter we have been assuming that the access pattern for a given lock
is always a sequence of acquire-release pairs, in which the release method is called by the
same thread that called acquire—and before the thread attempts to acquire the same lock
again. This assumption is not explicit in the acquire–release API, but is often embedded in
the underlying implementation.
    There are times, however, when it may be desirable to allow a thread to acquire the same
lock multiple times, so long as it releases it the same number of times before any other thread
acquires it. Suppose, for example, that operation foo accesses data protected by lock L, and
that foo is sometimes called by a thread that already holds L, and sometimes by a thread that

does not. In the latter case, foo needs to acquire L. With most of the locks presented above,
the program will deadlock in the former case: the thread will end up “waiting for itself.”
   A lock that can be re-acquired by the owner thread, and that returns to being free only
after an equal number of releases, is said to be reentrant. A simple strategy, which can
be used with any mutual exclusion lock (spin or scheduler-based), is to extend the base
implementation with an owner field and a counter:
     class reentrant_lock
          lock L
          atomic<T > owner := ⊥
          int count := 0
     reentrant_lock.acquire()             reentrant_lock.release()
         if owner.load(∥W) ̸ = self           if −−count = 0
              L.acquire()                          owner.store(⊥, ∥)
              owner.store(self, ∥)                 L.release()
         count++

Given the overhead of inspecting and updating owner and count fields, many designers
choose not to make locks reentrant by default.
   Note the use of explicit loads and stores to access the owner field. These mediate a race
between the read of owner in reentrant_lock.acquire and the writes of owner in acquire
and release. There are no races on the count field.

4.5        Special-Case Optimizations

Many techniques have been proposed to improve the performance of spin locks in important
special cases. We will consider the most important of these—read-mostly synchronization—
in Chapter 6. In this section we consider three others. Locality-conscious locking biases the
acquisition of a lock toward threads that are physically closer to the most recent prior
holder, thereby reducing average hand-off cost on NUMA machines. Double-checked lock-
ing addresses situations in which initialization of a variable must be synchronized, but
subsequent use need not be. Asymmetric locking addresses situations in which a lock is
accessed repeatedly by the same thread, and performance may improve if that thread is able
to reacquire the lock more easily than others can acquire it.

4.5.1      Locality-Conscious Locking

On a NUMA machine—or even one with a non-uniform cache architecture (sometimes
known as NUCA)—inter-core communication costs may differ dramatically. If, for example,
we have multiple processors, each with multiple cores, we may be able to pass a lock to
another core within the same processor much faster than we can pass it to a core of another

processor. More significantly, since locks are typically used to protect shared data structures,
we can expect the cache lines of the protected structure to migrate to the acquiring core, and
this migration will be cheaper if the core is nearby rather than remote.
    Radović and Hagersten (2002) were the first to observe the importance of locality in
locking, and to suggest passing locks to nearby cores when possible. Their “RH lock,”
developed for a machine with two NUMA “clusters,” is essentially a pair of test_and_set
locks, one on each cluster, with one initialized to FREE and the other to REMOTE. A thread
attempts to acquire the lock by swapping its id into its own cluster’s lock. If it gets back
FREE or L_FREE (locally free), it has succeeded. If it gets back a thread id, it backs off and
tries again. If it gets back REMOTE, it has become the local representative of its cluster, in
which case it spins (with a different set of backoff parameters) on the other cluster’s lock,
attempting to CAS it from FREE to REMOTE. To release the lock, a thread usually attempts to
CAS it from its own id to FREE. If this fails, a nearby thread must be spinning, in which case
the releasing thread stores L_FREE to the lock. Occasionally (subject to a tuning parameter),
a releasing thread immediately writes FREE to the lock, allowing it to be grabbed by a remote
contender, even if there are nearby ones as well.
    While the RH lock could easily be adapted to larger numbers of clusters, space consump-
tion would be linear in the number of such clusters—a property Radović and Hagersten
considered undesirable. Their subsequent “hierarchical backoff” (HBO) lock (Radović and
Hagersten 2003) relies on statistics instead. In effect, they implement a test_and_set lock
with CAS, in such a way that the lock variable indicates the cluster in which the lock currently
resides. Nearby and remote threads then use different backoff parameters, so that nearby
threads are more likely than remote threads to acquire the lock when it is released.
    While a test_and_set lock is naturally unfair (and subject to the theoretical possibility
of starvation), the RH and HBO locks are likely to be even less fair in practice. Ideally, one
should like to be able to explicitly balance fairness against locality. Toward that end, Dice
et al. (2012) present a general NUMA-aware design pattern that can be used with (almost)
any underlying locks, including (FIFO) queued locks. Their cohort locking mechanism
employs a global lock that indicates which cluster currently owns the lock, and a local lock
for each cluster that indicates the owning thread. The global lock needs to allow release
to be called by a different thread from the one that called acquire; the local lock needs to
be able to tell, at release time, whether any other local thread is waiting. Apart from these
requirements, cohort locking can be used with any known form of lock. Experimental results
indicate particularly high throughput (and excellent fairness, subject to locality) using MCS
locks at both the global and cluster level.
    While the techniques discussed here improve locality only by controlling the order in
which threads acquire a lock, it is also possible to control which threads perform the oper-
ations protected by the lock, and to assign operations that access similar data to the same
thread, to minimize cache misses. Such locality-conscious allocation of work can yield
major performance benefits in systems that assign fine-grain computational tasks to worker

 foo* p := null                   atomic<foo*> p := null
 lock L                           lock L
 foo* get p():                    foo* get p():
      L.acquire()                      foo *rtn := p.load(∥RW)
           if p = null                 if rtn = null
                 p := new foo()              L.acquire()
           foo* rtn := p                          rtn := p
      L.release()                                 // double check:
      return rtn                                  if rtn = null
                                                        rtn := new foo()
                                                        p.store(rtn, W∥) // init. before making visible
                                             L.release()
                                       return rtn

Figure 4.16 Lazy initialization (left) and double-checked locking idiom (right).

threads, a possibility that will arise in Secs. 5.3.3, 7.4.3, and 8.3.2. It is also a key feature of
flat combining, which we will consider briefly in Sec. 5.4.

4.5.2     Double-Checked Locking

Many applications employ shared variables that must be initialized before they are used for
the first time. A canonical example can be seen on the left side of Figure 4.16. Unfortunately,
this idiom imposes the overhead of acquiring L on every call to get_p. With care, we can
use the double-checked locking idiom instead (right side of Figure 4.16).
   The synchronizing accesses in the idiom are critical. In Java, variable p must be declared
volatile; in C++, atomic. Without the explicit ordering, the initializing thread may set p to
point to not-yet-initialized space, or a reading thread may use fields of p that were prefetched
before initialization completed. On machines with highly relaxed memory models (e.g.,
Arm and Power), the cost of the synchronizing accesses may be comparable to the cost of
locking in the original version of the code, making the “optimization” of limited benefit. On
machines with a TSO memory model (e.g., the x86 and SPARC), the optimization is much
more appealing, since R ∥ R, R ∥W, and W ∥W orderings are essentially free. Used judiciously,
(e.g., in the Linux kernel for x86), double-checked locking can yield significant performance
benefits. Even in the hands of experts, however, it has proven to be a significant source of
bugs: with all the slightly different forms the idiom takes in different contexts, one can easily
forget a necessary synchronizing access (Bacon et al. 2001). Windows Vista introduced a
special InitOnce API that regularizes usage and encapsulates all necessary ordering.

4.5.3       Asymmetric Locking

Many applications contain data structures that are usually—or even always—accessed by a
single thread, but are nonetheless protected by locks, either because they are occasionally
accessed by another thread, or because the programmer is preserving the ability to reuse code
in a future parallel context. Several groups have developed locks that can be biased toward
a particular thread, whose acquire and release operations then proceed much faster than
those of other threads. The HotSpot Java Virtual Machine, for example, uses biased locks
to accommodate objects that appear to “belong” to a single thread, and to control re-entry
to the JVM by threads that have escaped to native code, and may need to synchronize with
a garbage collection cycle that began while they were absent (Dice et al. 2001; Russell and
Detlefs 2006).
    On a sequentially consistent machine, one might be tempted to avoid (presumably expen-
sive) fetch_and_Φ operations by using a two-thread load/store-only synchronization algo-
rithm (e.g., Dekker’s or Peterson’s algorithm) to arbitrate between the preferred (bias-
holding) thread and some representative of the other threads. Code might look like this:
      class lock
           Peterson_lock PL
           general_lock GL
      lock.acquire():                         lock.release():
           if ¬preferred_thread                    PL.release()
                GL.acquire()                       if ¬preferred_thread
           PL.acquire()                                 GL.release()

   The problem, of course, is that load/store-only acquire routines invariably contain some
variant of the Dekker store–load sequence—
      interested[self ].store(true, ∥)
      bool potential_conflict := interested[other].load(W∥)
      if potential_conflict …
—and this code works correctly on a non-sequentially consistent machine only when it
incorporates the (presumably also expensive) W ∥ R ordering between the first and second
lines. The cost of the ordering has led several researchers (Dice et al. 2001; Russell and
Detlefs 2006; Vasudevan et al. 2010 to propose asymmetric Dekker-style synchronization.
Applied to Peterson’s lock, the solution looks as shown in Figure 4.17.
   The key is the handshake operation on the “slow” (non-preferred) path of the lock. This
operation must interact with execution on the preferred thread’s core in such a way that

 class lock
      atomic<bool> fast turn := true
      atomic<bool> fast interested := false
      atomic<bool> slow interested := false
     general lock GL
 lock.acquire():
      if preferred thread
            fast interested.store(true, ∥)
            fence(W∥W)                                                 // free on TSO machine
            fast turn.store(true, ∥)
            // W∥R fence intentionally omitted
            while slow interested.load(∥) and fast turn.load(∥);       // spin
      else
            GL.acquire()
            slow interested.store(true, ∥)
            fence(W∥W)
            fast turn.store(false, ∥)
            fence(W∥R)                                                 // slow
            handshake()                                                // very slow
            while fast interested.load(∥) and ¬fast turn.load(∥);      // spin
      fence(R∥RW)                                                      // free on TSO machine
 lock.release():
      fence(RW∥W)                                                      // free on TSO machine
      if preferred thread
            fast interested.store(false, ∥)
      else
            GL.release()
            slow interested.store(false, ∥)

Figure 4.17 An asymmetric lock built around Peterson’s algorithm. We have written the code entirely
with fences rather than annotated synchronizing accesses to highlight the ordering operations. The
handshake operation on the slow path forces a known ordering with respect to the store–load
sequence on the fast path.

1. if the preferred thread set fast_interested before the interaction, then the non-preferred
   thread is guaranteed to see it afterward.
2. if the preferred thread did not set fast_interested before the interaction, then it (the
   preferred thread) is guaranteed to see slow_interested afterward.

   Handshaking can be implemented in any of several ways, including cross-core interrupts,
migration to or from the preferred thread’s core, forced un-mapping of pages accessed
in the critical section, waiting for an interval guaranteed to contain a W ∥ R fence (e.g.,
a scheduling quantum), or explicit communication with a “helper thread” running on the
preferred thread’s core. Dice et al. (2001) explore many of these options in detail. Because
of their cost, they are profitable only in cases where access by non-preferred threads is
exceedingly rare. In subsequent work, Dice et al. (2003) observe that handshaking can be
avoided if the underlying hardware provides coherence at word granularity, but supports
atomic writes at subword granularity.
