Read-Mostly Atomicity
                                                                                                    6

In Chapter 4 we considered the topic of busy-wait mutual exclusion, which achieves atomic-
ity by allowing only one thread at a time to execute a critical section. While mutual exclusion
is sufficient to ensure atomicity, it is by no means necessary. Any mechanism that satisfies
the ordering constraints of Sec. 3.1.2 will also suffice. In particular, read-mostly optimiza-
tions exploit the fact that operations can safely execute concurrently, while still maintaining
atomicity, if they read shared data without writing it.
    Section 6.1 considers the simplest read-mostly optimization: the reader-writer lock, which
allows multiple readers to occupy their critical section concurrently, but requires writers (that
is, threads that may update shared data, in addition to reading it) to exclude both readers
and other writers. To use the “reader path” of a reader-writer lock, a thread must know, at
the beginning of the critical section, that it will never attempt to write. Sequence locks, the
subject of Sec. 6.2, relax this restriction by allowing a reader to “upgrade” to writer status
if it forces all concurrent readers to back out and retry their critical sections. (Transactional
memory, which we will consider in Chapter 9, can be considered a generalization of sequence
locks. TM systems typically automate the back-out-and-retry mechanism; sequence locks
require the programmer to implement it by hand.) Finally read-copy update (RCU), the
subject of Sec. 6.3, explores an extreme position in which the overhead of synchronization
is shifted almost entirely off of readers and onto writers, which are assumed to be quite rare.

6.1      Reader-Writer Locks

Reader-writer locks, first suggested by Courtois et al. (1971), relax the constraints of mutual
exclusion to permit more than one thread to inspect a shared data structure simultaneously,
so long as none of them modifies it. Critical sections are separated into two classes: writes,

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024              103
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_6

which require exclusive access while modifying protected data, and reads, which can be
concurrent with one another (though not with writes) because they are known in advance to
make no observable changes.
    As recognized by Courtois et al., different fairness properties are appropriate for a reader-
writer lock, depending on the context in which it is used. A “reader preference” lock min-
imizes the delay for readers and maximizes total throughput by allowing a newly arriving
reader to join a group of current readers even if a writer is already waiting. A “writer pref-
erence” lock ensures that updates are seen as soon as possible by requiring readers to wait
for any current or waiting writer, even if other threads are currently reading, and even if
the writer arrived after some of the readers did. Both of these options permit indefinite
postponement and even starvation of non-preferred threads when competition for the lock
is high. Though not explicitly recognized by Courtois et al., it is also possible to construct
a reader-writer lock (called a “fair” lock below) in which readers wait for any earlier writer
and writers wait for any earlier thread of either kind.
    The locks of Courtois et al., were based on semaphores, a scheduler-based synchroniza-
tion mechanism that we will introduce in Sec. 7.2. In the current chapter we limit ourselves to
busy-wait synchronization. Like standard mutual-exclusion locks, reader-writer locks admit
a wide range of special-purpose adaptations. Calciu et al. (2013), for example, describe
mechanisms to extend the locality-conscious locking of Sec. 4.5.1 to the reader-writer case.

6.1.1    Centralized Algorithms

There are many ways to construct a centralized reader-writer lock. We consider three exam-
ples here.
    Our first example (Figure 6.1) gives preference to readers. It uses an unsigned integer to
represent the state of the lock. The lowest bit indicates whether a writer is active; the upper
bits contain a count of active or interested readers. When a reader arrives, it increments the
reader count (atomically) and waits until there are no active writers. When a writer arrives,
it attempts to acquire the lock using CAS. The writer succeeds, and proceeds, only when all
bits were clear, indicating that no other writer was active and that no readers were active or
interested. Since a reader waits only when a writer is active, and is able to proceed as soon
as that one writer finishes, exponential backoff for readers is probably not needed (constant
backoff may sometimes be appropriate; we do not consider it here). Since writers may be
delayed during the execution of an arbitrary number of critical sections, they use exponential
backoff to minimize contention.
    The symmetric case—writer preference—appears in Figure 6.2. In this case we must
count both active readers (to know when all of them have finished) and interested writers (to
know whether a newly arriving reader must wait). We also need to know whether a writer is
currently active. Even on a 32-bit machine, a single word still suffices to hold both counts
and a Boolean flag. A reader waits until there are no active or waiting writers; a writer waits

 class rw lock
      atomic<int> n := 0
     // low-order bit indicates whether a writer is active;
     // remaining bits are a count of active or waiting readers
     const int WA flag = 1
     const int RC inc = 2
     const int base, limit, multiplier = . . .  // tuning parameters
 rw lock.writer acquire():                               rw lock.reader acquire():
      int delay := base                                       (void) n.FAA(RC inc, ∥R)
      while ¬n.CAS(0, WA flag, ∥)                             while (n.load(∥) & WA flag) = 1; // spin
           pause(delay)                                       fence(R∥R)
           delay := min(delay × multiplier, limit)
      fence(R∥RW)
 rw lock.writer release():                               rw lock.reader release():
      (void) n.FAA(−WA flag, RW∥)                             (void) n.FAA(−RC inc, R∥)

Figure 6.1 A centralized reader-preference reader-writer lock, with exponential backoff for writers.

until there are no active readers. Because writers are unordered (in this particular lock),
they use exponential backoff to minimize contention. Readers, on the other hand, can use
ticket-style proportional backoff to defer to all waiting writers.
    Our third centralized example—a fair reader-writer lock—appears in Figure 6.3. It is
patterned after the ticket lock (Sec. 4.2.2), and is represented by two pairs of counters. Each
pair occupies a single word: the upper half of each counts readers; the lower half counts
writers. The counters of the request word indicate how many threads have requested the lock.
The counters of the completion word indicate how many have already acquired and released
it. With arithmetic performed modulo the precision of half-word quantities (and with this
number assumed to be significantly larger than the total number of threads), overflow is
harmless. Readers spin until all earlier writers have completed. Writers spin until all earlier
readers and writers have completed. For both readers and writers, we use the difference
between requested and completed numbers of writers to estimate the expected wait time.
Depending on how many (multi-)reader episodes are interleaved with these, this estimate
may be off by as much as a factor of 2.
    Brandenburg and Anderson (2010) have introduced a fourth reader-writer lock variant,
which they call a phase-fair lock. In phase-fair locking, readers and writers alternate, so
long as there is a continuing supply of each. A centralized implementation is similar to that
of Figure 6.3, but each reader waits for at most one writer, rather than all writers with earlier
arrival times. When a writer finishes its critical section, all waiting readers are permitted
to proceed. Newly arriving readers are permitted to join the current read session if there
are no writers waiting; otherwise they wait until after the first waiting writer. Brandenburg
and Anderson demonstrate, both analytically and experimentally, that phase-fair ordering is
particularly effective for locks in real-time systems.

      class rw lock
           atomic<⟨short, short, bool⟩> n := ⟨0, 0, false⟩
          // high half of word counts active readers; low half counts waiting writers,
          // except for low bit, which indicates whether a writer is active
          const int base, limit, multiplier = . . .   // tuning parameters
      rw lock.writer acquire():
           int delay := base
           loop
                ⟨short ar, short ww, bool aw⟩ := n.load(∥)
                if aw = false and ar = 0                // no active writer or readers
                      if n.CAS(⟨ar, ww, false⟩, ⟨ar, ww, true⟩, ∥) break
                      // else retry
                else if n.CAS(⟨ar, ww, aw⟩, ⟨ar, ww+1, aw⟩, ∥)
                      // I’m registered as waiting
                      loop                              // spin
                            ⟨ar, ww, aw⟩ := n.load()
                            if aw = false and ar = 0    // no active writer or readers
                                 if n.CAS(⟨ar, ww, false⟩, ⟨ar, ww−1, true⟩, ∥) break outer loop
                            pause(delay)                // exponential backoff
                            delay := min(delay × multiplier, limit)
                // else retry
           fence(R∥RW)
      rw lock.writer release():
           fence(RW∥W)
           short ar, wr; bool aw
           repeat // fetch-and-phi
                 ⟨ar, ww, aw⟩ := n.load(∥)
           until n.CAS(⟨ar, ww, aw⟩, ⟨ar, ww, false⟩, ∥)
      rw lock.reader acquire():
           loop
                ⟨short ar, short ww, bool aw⟩ := n.load(∥)
                if ww = 0 and aw = false
                      if n.CAS(⟨ar, 0, false⟩, ⟨ar+1, 0, false⟩, ∥) break
                // else spin
                pause(ww × base)                         // proportional backoff
           fence(R∥R)
      rw lock.reader release():
           fence(R∥W)
           short ar, ww; bool aw
           repeat // fetch-and-phi
                 ⟨ar, ww, aw⟩ := n.load(∥)
           until n.CAS(⟨ar, ww, aw⟩, ⟨ar−1, ww, aw⟩, ∥)

Figure 6.2 A centralized writer-preference reader-writer lock, with proportional backoff for readers
and exponential backoff for writers.

 class rw lock
      atomic<⟨short, short⟩> requests := ⟨0, 0⟩
      atomic<⟨short, short⟩> completions := ⟨0, 0⟩
     // top half of each word counts readers; bottom half counts writers
     const int base = . . .               // tuning parameter
 rw lock.writer acquire():
      short rr, wr, rc, wc
      repeat // fetch-and-phi increment of writer requests
            ⟨rr, wr⟩ := requests.load(∥)
      until requests.CAS(⟨rr, wr⟩, ⟨rr, wr+1⟩, ∥)
      fence(W∥R)
      loop        // spin
            ⟨rc, wc⟩ := completions.load(∥)
            if rc = rr and wc = wr break    // all previous readers and writers have finished
            pause((wc−wr) × base)
      fence(R∥RW)
 rw lock.writer release():
      fence(RW∥W)
      short rc, wc
      repeat // fetch-and-phi increment of writer completions
            ⟨rc, wc⟩ := completions.load(∥)
      until completions.CAS(⟨rc, wc⟩, ⟨rc, wc+1⟩, ∥)
 rw lock.reader acquire():
      short rr, wr, rc, wc
      repeat // fetch-and-phi increment of reader requests
            ⟨rr, wr⟩ := requests.load(∥)
      until requests.CAS(⟨rr, wr⟩, ⟨rr+1, wr⟩, ∥)
      fence(W∥R)
      loop        // spin
            ⟨rc, wc⟩ := completions.load(∥)
            if wc = wr break                // all previous writers have finished
            pause((wc−wr) × base)
      fence(R∥R)
 rw lock.reader release():
      fence(R∥W)
      short rc, wc
      repeat // fetch-and-phi increment of reader completions
            ⟨rc, wc⟩ := completions.load(∥)
      until completions.CAS(⟨rc, wc⟩, ⟨rc+1, wc⟩, ∥)

Figure 6.3 A centralized fair reader-writer lock with (roughly) proportional backoff for both readers
and writers. Addition is assumed to be modulo the precision of (unsigned) short integers.

 type role t = (reader, active reader, writer)
 type qnode = record
      atomic<role t> role
     spin lock mutex
      atomic<bool> waiting
      atomic<qnode*> next
      atomic<qnode*> prev
 class rw lock
      atomic<qnode*> tail := null
 rw lock.writer acquire(qnode* I):
      I→role := writer
      I→waiting := true
      I→next := null
      qnode* pred := tail.swap(I, W∥)
      if pred ̸= null                                        // lock is not free
            pred→next.store(I)
            while I→waiting.load(∥);                         // spin
      fence(R∥RW)
 rw lock.writer release(qnode* I):
      fence(RW∥W)
      qnode* succ := I→next.load(∥)
      if succ = null and tail.CAS(I, null, ∥R)
           return                                            // no successor; lock is now free
      repeat succ := I→next.load(∥) until succ ̸= null
      succ→prev.store(null, ∥)
      succ→waiting.store(false, W∥)

Figure 6.4 A fair queued reader-writer lock (declarations and writer routines).

6.1.2    Queued Reader-Writer Locks

Just as centralized mutual exclusion locks—even with backoff—can induce unacceptable
contention under heavy load on large machines, so too can centralized reader-writer locks.
To reduce the contention problem, Mellor-Crummey and Scott (1991a) showed how to adapt
queued spin locks to the reader-writer case. Specifically, they presented reader-preference,
writer-preference, and fair reader-writer locks based on the MCS lock (Sec. 4.3.1). All three
variants employed a global counter, which, while never the target of a spin, was nonetheless
a source of possible contention.
   Krieger et al. (1993) showed how to eliminate the global counter in the fair queued reader-
writer lock. A subtle bug in this algorithm was found by Dice et al. (2013), who observed
that hardware transactional memory (HTM—Chapter 9) could be used both to fix the bug
and to significantly simply the code. Dice et al. also provided a pair of software-only fixes;

 rw lock.reader acquire(qnode* I):
      I→role := reader; I→waiting := true
      I→next := I→prev := null
      qnode* pred := tail.swap(I, W∥)
      if pred ̸= null                                         // lock is not free
            I→prev.store(pred, ∥)
            pred→next.store(I, W∥)
            if pred→role.load(W∥) ̸= active reader
                  while I→waiting.load(∥);                    // spin
      qnode* succ := I→next.load(R∥)
      if succ ̸= null and succ→role.load(R∥) = reader
            succ→waiting.store(false, R∥)                     // unblock contiguous readers
      I→role.store(active reader, RW∥R)
 rw lock.reader release(qnode* I):
      fence(R∥W)
      qnode* pred := I→prev.load(∥)
      if pred ̸= null                                             // need to disconnect from predecessor
            pred→mutex.acquire()
            while pred ̸= I→prev.load()
                  pred→mutex.release()
                  pred := I→prev.load(∥);
                  if pred = null break
                  pred→mutex.acquire()
            // At this point we hold the mutex of our predecessor, if any.
            if pred ̸= null
                  I→mutex.acquire()
                  pred→next.store(null, ∥)
                  qnode* succ := I→next.load(∥)
                  if succ = null and ¬tail.CAS(I, pred, ∥R)
                        repeat succ := I→next.load(∥) until succ ̸= null
                  if succ ̸= null                                 // need to disconnect from successor
                        succ→prev.store(pred, R∥)
                        pred→next.store(succ, R∥)
                  I→mutex.release()
                  pred→mutex.release()
                  return
      I→mutex.acquire()
      qnode* succ := I→next.load(∥)
      if succ = null and ¬tail.CAS(I, null, ∥)
            repeat succ := I→next.load(∥) until succ ̸= null
      if succ ̸= null                                             // ∃ successor but no predecessor
            bool succ is writer := succ→role.load(R∥) = writer
            succ→waiting.store(false, R∥)
            if ¬succ is writer
                  succ→prev.store(null, W∥)
      I→mutex.release()

Figure 6.5 A fair queued reader-writer lock (reader routines).

after incorporating one of these, code for the lock of Krieger et al. appears in Figures 6.4
and 6.5.
   As in the MCS spin lock, the acquire and release routines expect a qnode argument,
which they add to the end of the list. Each contiguous group of readers maintains both
forward and backward pointers in its segment of the list; segments consisting of writers are
singly linked. A reader can begin reading if its predecessor is a reader that is already active,
though it must first unblock its successor (if any) if that successor is a waiting reader.
   In Mellor–Crummey and Scott’s reader-writer locks, as in the MCS spin lock, queue
nodes could be allocated in the stack frame of the routine that calls acquire and release. In
the lock of Krieger et al., this convention would be unsafe: it is possible for another thread
to modify a node an arbitrary amount of time after the node’s owner has removed it from the
queue. To avoid potential corruption, queue nodes must employ some form of safe memory
reclamation—for example, by using a dynamic type-preserving allocator, as described in
the box on page 140 or, in general, as described in Sec. 8.7.
   When a reader finishes its critical section, it removes itself from its doubly-linked group
of contiguous readers. To avoid races during the unlink operation, the reader acquires mutex
locks on its predecessor’s qnode and its own. (These can be very simple, since at most
two threads will ever contend for access.) If a reader finds that it is the last member of its
reader group, it unblocks its successor, if any. That successor will typically be a writer; the
exception to this rule is the subject of the bug repaired by Dice et al.
   In their paper on phase-fair locks, Brandenburg and Anderson (2010) also present a
queue-based implementation with local-only spinning. As of this writing, their lock and the
code of Figures 6.4 and 6.5 appear to be the best all-around performers on medium-sized
machines (up to perhaps a few dozen hardware threads). For heavily contended locks on
very large machines, Lev et al. (2009b) show how to significantly reduce contention among
concurrent readers, at the cost of higher overhead when the thread count is low, using a
variant of the scalable nonzero indicator described in Sec. 5.4.
   One additional case merits special attention. If reads are much more common than writes,
and the total number of threads is not too large, the fastest performance may be achieved
with a distributed reader-writer lock consisting of |T | “reader locks”—one per thread—and
one “writer lock” (Hsieh and Weihl 1992). The reader_acquire routine simply acquires the
reader lock corresponding to the calling thread. The writer_acquire routine acquires first the
writer lock and then all the reader locks, one at a time. The corresponding release routines
release these same component locks (in reverse order in the case of writer_release). Reader
locks can be very simple, since they are accessed only by a single reader and the holder of
the writer lock. Moreover reader_acquire and reader_release will typically be very fast:
assuming reads are more common than writes, the needed reader lock will be unheld and
locally cached. The writer operations will be slow of course, and each lock will consume
space linear in the number of threads. Linux uses locks of this sort to synchronize some
kernel-level operations, with per-core kernel instances playing the role of threads.

 class seqlock                               bool seqlock.become writer(int seq):
      atomic<int> n := 0                         if n.CAS(seq, seq+1, R∥)
                                                       fence(R∥W)
 int seqlock.reader start():
                                                      return true
      int seq
                                                 return false
      repeat // spin until even
            seq := n.load(∥)                 seqlock.writer acquire():
      until seq ≡ 0 mod 2                        int seq
      fence(R∥R)                                 repeat // spin
      return seq                                       seq := n.load(∥)
                                                 until seq ≡ 0 mod 2 and n.CAS(seq, seq+1, ∥)
 bool seqlock.reader validate(int seq):
                                                 fence(R∥RW)
     return (n.load(R∥) = seq)
                                             seqlock.writer release():
                                                 int seq := n.load(∥)
                                                 n.store(seq+1, RW∥)

Figure 6.6 Centralized implementation of a sequence lock. The CAS instructions in writer_acquire
and become_writer need to be write atomic.

6.2      Sequence Locks

For read-mostly workloads, reader-writer locks still suffer from two significant limitations.
First, a reader must know that it is a reader, before it begins its work. A deeply nested
conditional that occasionally—but very rarely—needs to modify shared data will force the
surrounding critical section to function as a writer every time. Second, a reader must write
the metadata of the lock itself to ward off simultaneous writers. Because the write requires
exclusive access, it is likely to be a cache miss (in a non-distributed, constant-size lock) when
multiple readers are active. Given the cost of a miss, lock overhead can easily dominate the
cost of other operations in the critical section.
    Sequence locks (seqlocks) (Lameter 2005) address these limitations. A reader is allowed to
“change its mind” and become a writer in the middle of a critical section. More significantly,
readers only read the lock—they do not update it. In return for these benefits, a reader must
be prepared to repeat its critical section if it discovers, at the end, that it has overlapped the
execution of a writer. Moreover, the reader’s actions must be simple enough that nothing a
writer might do can cause the reader to experience an unrecoverable error—divide by zero,
dereference of an invalid pointer, infinite loop, etc. Put another way, seqlocks provide mutual
exclusion among writers, but not between readers and writers. Rather, they allow a reader to
discover, after the fact, that its execution may not have been valid, and needs to be retried.
    A simple, centralized implementation of a sequence lock appears in Figure 6.6. The lock
is represented by single integer. An odd value indicates that the lock is held by a writer; an
even value indicates that it is not. For writers, the integer behaves like a test-and- test_and_
set lock. We assume that writers are rare.
    A reader spins until the lock is even and then proceeds, remembering the value it saw.
If it sees the same value in reader_validate, it knows that no writer has been active, and

that everything it has read in its critical section was mutually consistent. (We assume that
critical sections are short enough—and writers rare enough—that the lock’s value, n, can
never roll over and repeat before the reader completes. For real-world integers and critical
sections, this is a completely safe assumption.) If a reader sees a different value in validate,
however, it knows that it has overlapped a writer and must repeat its critical section:
   repeat
        int s := SL.reader_start()
        // critical section
   until SL.reader_validate(s)

    It is essential here that the critical section be idempotent—harmlessly repeatable, even if a
writer has modified data in the middle of the operation, causing the reader to see inconsistent
state. In the canonical use case, seqlocks serve in the Linux kernel to protect multi-word
time information, which can then be read atomically and consistently. If a reader critical
section updates thread-local data (only shared data must be read-only), the idiom shown
above can be modified to undo the updates in the case where reader_validate returns false.
    If a reader needs to perform a potentially “dangerous” operation (integer divide, pointer
dereference, unbounded iteration, memory allocation/deallocation, etc.) within its critical
section, the reader_validate method can be called repeatedly (with the same parameter
each time). If reader_validate returns true, the upcoming operation is known to be safe
(all values read so far are mutually consistent); if it returns false, consistency cannot be
guaranteed, and code should branch back to the top of the repeat loop. In the (presumably
rare) case where a reader discovers that it really needs to write, it can request a “promotion”
with become_writer:

   loop
          int s := SL.reader_start()
          ...
          if unlikely_condition
                if ¬ SL.become_writer(s) continue   // return to top of loop
                ...
                SL.writer_release()
                break
          else                                      // still reader
                ...
                if SL.reader_validate(s) break

After becoming a writer, of course, a thread has no further need to validate its reads: it will
exit the loop above after calling writer_release.
   Unfortunately, because they are inherently speculative, seqlocks induce a host of data
races (Boehm 2012). Every read of a shared location in a reader critical section will typically
race with some write in a writer critical section. These races compound the problem of
readers seeing inconsistent state: the absence of synchronization means that updates made
by writers may be seen by readers out of order. In a language like C or C++, which forbids

data races, a straightforward fix is to label all read locations atomic; this will prevent the
compiler from reordering accesses, and cause it to issue special instructions that prevent
the hardware from reordering them either. This solution is overly conservative, however: it
inhibits reorderings that are clearly acceptable within idempotent read-only critical sections.
Boehm (2012) explores the data-race issue in depth, and describes other, less conservative
options.
   A related ordering issue arises from the fact that readers do not modify the state of a
seqlock. Because they only read it, on some machines their accesses will not be globally
ordered with respect to writer updates. If threads inspect multiple seqlock-protected data
structures, a situation analogous to the IRIW example of Figure 2.4 can occur: threads 2
and 3 see updates to objects X and Y, but thread 2 thinks that the update to X happened first,
while thread 3 thinks that the update to Y happened first. To avoid causality loops, writers
must update the seqlock using sequentially consistent (write-atomic) synchronizing stores.
   Together, the problems of inconsistency and data races are subtle enough that seqlocks are
best thought of as a special-purpose technique, to be employed by experts in well constrained
circumstances, rather than as a general-purpose form of synchronization. That said, seqlock
usage can be safely automated by a compiler that understands the nature of speculation.
Dalessandro et al. (2010a) describe a system (in essence, a minimal implementation of
transactional memory) in which (1) a global sequence lock serializes all writer transactions,
(2) fences and reader_validate calls are inserted automatically where needed, and (3) local
state is checkpointed at the beginning of each reader transaction, for restoration on abort. A
follow-up paper (Dalessandro et al. 2010c) describes a more concurrent system, in which
writer transactions proceed speculatively, and a global sequence lock serializes only the
write-back of buffered updates. We will return to the subject of transactional memory in
Chapter 9.

6.3      Read-Copy Update

Read-copy update, more commonly known simply as RCU (McKenney et al. 2001; McKen-
ney 2004), is a synchronization strategy originally developed for use within the operating
system kernel (McKenney et al. 2020, retrospective), and subsequently extended to user
space as well (Desnoyers et al. 2012). RCU attempts to drive the overhead of reader syn-
chronization as close to zero as possible, at the expense of potentially very high overhead
for writers. Instances of the strategy typically display the following four main properties:

No shared updates by readers. As in a sequence lock, readers modify no shared metadata
  before or after performing an operation. While this makes them invisible to writers, it
  avoids the characteristic cache misses associated with locks. To ensure a consistent view
  of memory, readers may need to execute R ∥ R fences on some machines, but these are
  typically much cheaper than a cache miss.

Single-pointer updates. Writers synchronize with one another explicitly. They make their
   updates visible to readers by performing a single atomic memory update—typically by
   “swinging” a pointer (under protection of a lock, or using CAS) to refer to the new version
   of (some part of) a data structure, rather than to the old version. Readers serialize before
   or after the writer depending on whether they see this update. (In either case, they see
   data that was valid at some point after they began their operation.)
Unidirectional data traversal. To ensure consistency, readers must never inspect a pointer
   more than once. To ensure serializability (when it is desired), users must additionally
   ensure (via program logic) that if writers A and B modify different pointers, and A
   serializes before B, it is impossible for any reader to see B’s update but not A’s. The
   most straightforward way to ensure this is to require all structures to be trees, traversed
   from the root toward the leaves, and to arrange for writers to replace entire subtrees.
Delayed reclamation of deallocated data. When a writer updates a pointer, readers that
   have already dereferenced the old version—but have not yet finished their operations—
   may continue to read old data for some time. Implementations of RCU must therefore
   provide a (potentially conservative) way for writers to tell that all readers that could still
   access old data have finished their operations and returned. Only then can the old data’s
   space be reclaimed.

   Implementations and applications of RCU vary in many details, and may diverge from the
description above if the programmer is able to prove that (application-specific) semantics will
not be compromised. We consider relaxations of the single-pointer update and unidirectional
traversal properties below. First, though, we consider ways to implement relaxed reclamation
and to accommodate, at minimal cost, machines with relaxed memory order.
Grace Periods and Relaxed Reclamation. In a language and system with automatic garbage
collection, the delayed reclamation property is trivial: the normal collector will reclaim old
data versions when—and only when—no readers can see them any more. In the more
common case of manual memory management, a writer may wait until all readers of old
data have completed, and then reclaim space itself. Alternatively, it may append old data to
a list for eventual reclamation by some other, bookkeeping thread. The latter option reduces
latency for writers, potentially improving performance, but may also increase maximum
space usage.
    Arguably the biggest differences among RCU implementations concern the “grace
period” mechanism used (in the absence of a general-purpose garbage collector) to deter-
mine when all old readers have completed. In a nonpreemptive OS kernel (where RCU was
first employed), the writer can simply wait until a (voluntary) context switch has occurred
in every hardware thread. Perhaps the simplest way to do this is to request migration to each
hardware thread in turn: such a request will be honored only after any active reader on the
target thread has completed.
    More elaborate grace period implementations can be used in more general contexts.
Desnoyers et al. (2012, App. D) describe several implementations suitable for user-level

applications. Most revolve around a global counter C and a global set S of counters, indexed
by thread id. C is monotonically increasing (extensions can accommodate rollover): in the
simplest implementation, it is incremented at the end of each write operation. In a partial
violation of the no-shared-updates property, S is maintained by readers. Specifically, S[i ]
will be zero if thread i is not currently executing a reader operation. Otherwise, S[i ] will
be j if C was j when thread i’s current reader operation began. To ensure a grace period
has passed (and all old readers have finished), a writer iterates through S, waiting for each
element to be either zero or a value greater than or equal to the value just written to C.
Assuming that each set element lies in a separate cache line, the updates performed by
reader operations will usually be cache hits, with almost no performance impact. Moreover,
since each element is updated by only one thread, and the visibility of updates can safely be
delayed, no synchronizing instructions are required (assuming memory ordering issues are
handled as described in the following paragraph).
Memory Ordering. When beginning a read operation with grace periods based on the global
counter and set, a thread must update its entry in S using a ∥ R store, or follow the update
with a W ∥ R fence. At the end of the operation, it must update its entry with a R ∥ store, or
precede the update with a R ∥W fence. When reading a pointer that might have been updated
by a writer, a reader must use a R ∥ load, or follow the read with a R ∥ R fence. Among these
three forms of ordering, the W ∥ R case is typically the most expensive (the others will in fact
be free on a TSO machine). We can avoid the overhead of W ∥ R ordering in the common
case by requiring the writer to interrupt all potential readers (e.g., with a POSIX signal) at
the end of a write operation. The signal handler can then “handshake” with the writer, using
appropriate memory barriers, thereby ensuring that (a) each reader’s update of its element in
S is visible to the writer, and (b) the writer’s updates to shared data are visible to all readers.
Assuming that writers are rare, the cost of the signal handling will be outweighed by the
no-longer-required W ∥ R ordering in the (much more numerous) reader operations.
   For writers, the rules are similar to the seqlock case: to avoid causality loops when readers
inspect more than one RCU-updatable pointer, writers must use sequentially consistent
(write-atomic) synchronizing stores to modify those pointers.
Multi-write Operations. The single-pointer update property may become a single-word
update in data structures that use some other technique for traversal and space management.
In many cases, it may also be possible to accommodate multi-word updates, by exploiting
application-specific knowledge. In their original paper, for example, McKenney et al. (2001)
presented an RCU version of doubly-linked lists, in which a writer must update both forward
and backward pointers. The key to their solution is to require that readers search for nodes
only in the forward direction. The backward pointers can then be treated as hints that facilitate
constant-time deletion. Readers serialize before or after a writer depending on whether they
see the change to the forward pointer.
   In subsequent work with a similar flavor, Clements et al. (2012) show how to implement
an RCU version of balanced external binary trees. They begin by noting that rebalancing is
a semantically neutral operation, and can be separated from insertion and deletion, allowing

                                                          r

                                                              p
                                                update

                                           x             z′

                                           x′            z

                                       A          B               C

Figure 6.7 Rebalancing of a binary tree via internal subtree replacement (rotation). Adapted from
Clements et al. (2012, Figure 8b). Prior to the replacement, node z is the right child of node x. After
the replacement, x ′ is the left child of z ′ .

the latter to be effected with single-pointer updates to a leaf. Assuming that the tree is linked
only from parents to children, they then observe that rotation-based rebalancing can be
designed to change only a small internal subtree, with a single incoming pointer. One can
effect an RCU rotation by creating a new version of the subtree and then swinging the pointer
to its root. The portion of the structure above the subtree can safely remain unchanged under
the usual single-pointer-update rule. More important, most of the tree fragments below the
subtree can also safely remain unchanged, and need not be copied.
    As an example, suppose we wish to rotate nodes x and z in Figure 6.7. We create new
nodes x ′ and z ′ , and initialize their child pointers to refer to trees A, B, and C. Then, with
a single store (for atomicity with respect to readers) and under protection of a write lock
(for atomicity with respect to other writers), we swing p’s left or right child pointer (as
appropriate) to refer to z ′ instead of x. Trees A, B, and C will remain unchanged. Once a
grace period has expired, nodes x and z can be reclaimed. In the meantime, readers that have
traveled through x and z will still be able to search correctly down to the fringe of the tree.
In-Place Updates. As described above, RCU is designed to incur essentially no overhead for
readers, at the expense of very high overhead for writers. In some cases, even this property
can be relaxed, extending the low-cost case to certain kinds of writers. In the same paper
that introduced RCU balanced trees, Clements et al. (2012) observed that trivial updates
to tree-based page tables—specifically, single-leaf modifications associated with demand
page-in—are sufficiently common to be a serious obstacle to scalability on large shared-
memory multiprocessors. Their solution is essentially a hybrid of RCU and sequence locks.
Major (multi-page) update operations continue to function as RCU writers: they exclude
one another in time, install their changes via single-pointer update, and wait for a grace
period before reclaiming no-longer-needed space. The page fault interrupt handler, however,
functions as an RCU reader. If it needs to modify a page table entry to effect demand page-in,
it makes its modifications in place.

   This relaxation of the rules introduces a variety of synchronization challenges. For exam-
ple: a fault handler that overlaps in time with a major update (e.g., an munmap operation
that invalidates a broad address range) may end up modifying the about-to-be-reclaimed
version of a page table entry, in which case it should not return to the user program as if
nothing had gone wrong. If each major update acquires and updates a (per-address-space)
sequence lock, however, then the fault handler can check the value of the lock both before
and after its operation. If the value has changed, it can retry, using the new version of the
data. (Alternatively, if starvation is a concern, it can acquire the lock itself.) Similarly, if
fault handlers cannot safely run concurrently with one another (e.g., if they need to modify
more than a single word in memory), then they need their own synchronization—perhaps a
separate sequence lock in each page table entry. If readers may inspect more than one word
that is subject to in-place update, then they, too, may need to inspect such a local sequence
lock, and repeat their operation if they see a change. This convention imposes some on the
(presumably dominant) read-only code path, but the overhead is still small—in particular,
readers still make no updates to shared data.
