Synchronization and Scheduling
                                                                                               7

So far in this monograph, we have emphasized busy-wait synchronization. In the current
chapter we turn to mechanisms built on top of a scheduler, which multiplexes some collection
of cores among a (typically larger) set of threads, switching among them from time to time
and—in particular—when the current thread needs to wait for synchronization.
   We begin with a brief introduction to scheduling in Sec. 7.1. We then discuss the oldest
(and still most widely used) scheduler-based synchronization mechanism—the semaphore—
in Sec. 7.2. Semaphores have a simple, subroutine-call interface. Many scheduler-based
synchronization mechanisms, however, were designed to be embedded in a concurrent pro-
gramming language, with special, non-procedural syntax. We consider the most important
of these—the monitor—in Sec. 7.3, and others—conditional critical regions, futures, and
series-parallel (split-merge) execution—in Sec. 7.4.
   With these mechanisms as background, we return in Sec. 7.5 to questions surrounding
the interaction of user- and kernel-level code: specifically, how to minimize the number of
context switches, avoid busy-waiting for threads that are not running, and reduce the demand
for kernel resources.

7.1      Scheduling

As outlined in Sec. 1.3, scheduling often occurs at more than one level of a system. The
operating system kernel, for example, may multiplex kernel threads on top of hardware
cores, while a user-level run-time package multiplexes user threads on top of the kernel
threads. On many machines, the processor itself may schedule multiple hardware threads
on the pipeline(s) of any given core (in which case the kernel schedules its threads on top
of hardware threads, not cores). Library packages (e.g., in Java) may sometimes schedule

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024         119
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_7

run-to-completion (unblockable) tasks on top of user threads. System-level virtual machine
monitors may even multiplex the (virtual) hardware threads seen by guest operating systems
on top of some smaller number of physical hardware threads.
    Regardless of the level of implementation, we can describe the construction of a scheduler
by starting with an overly simple system and progressively adding functionality. The details
are somewhat tedious (Scott 2009, Secs. 8.6, 12.2.4, and 12.3.4); we outline the basic
ideas here in the interest of having “hooks” that we can call in subsequent descriptions
of synchronization mechanisms. We begin with coroutines—each of which is essentially
a stack and a set of registers—and a single core (or kernel thread) that can execute one
coroutine at a time. To switch to a different coroutine, the core (or kernel thread) calls an
explicit transfer routine, passing as argument a pointer to the context block (descriptor) of
some other coroutine. The transfer routine (1) pushes all registers other than the stack pointer
onto the top of the (current) stack, (2) saves the (updated) stack pointer into the context block
of the current coroutine (typically found by examining a global current_thread variable),
(3) sets current_thread to the address of the new context block (the argument to transfer),
and (4) retrieves a (new) stack pointer from that context block. Because the new coroutine
could only have stopped running by calling transfer (and new coroutines are created in such
a way that they appear to have just called transfer), the program counter need not change—it
will already be at the right instruction. Consequently, the transfer routine simply (5) pops
registers from the top of the (new) stack and returns.
    On top of coroutines, we implement non-preemptive threads (otherwise known as run-
until-block or cooperatively scheduled threads) by introducing a global ready list (often
but not always a queue) of runnable-but-not-now-running threads, and a parameterless
reschedule routine that pulls a thread off the ready list and transfers to it. To avoid monop-
olizing resources, a thread should periodically relinquish its core or kernel thread by calling
a routine (often named yield) that enqueues it at the tail of the ready list and then calls
reschedule. To block for synchronization, the thread can call reschedule after adding itself
to some other data structure (other than the ready list), with the expectation that another
thread will move it from that structure to the ready list when it is time for it to continue.
    The problem with cooperatively scheduled threads, of course, is the need to cooperate—to
call yield periodically. At the kernel level, where threads may belong to mutually untrusting
applications, this need for cooperation is clearly unacceptable. And even at the user level,
it is highly problematic: how do we arrange to yield often enough (and uniformly enough)
to ensure fairness and interactivity, but not so often that we spend all of our time in the
scheduler? The answer is preemption: we arrange for periodic timer interrupts (at the kernel
level) or signals (at the user level) and install a handler for the timer that simulates a call
to yield in the currently running thread. To avoid races with handlers when accessing the
ready list or other scheduler data structures, we temporarily disable interrupts (signals) when
executing scheduler operations explicitly.
    Given transfer, reschedule/yield, and preemption, we can multiplex concurrent kernel
or user threads on a single core or kernel thread. To accommodate true parallelism, we

need a separate current_thread variable for each core or kernel thread, and we need one or
more spin locks to protect scheduler data structures from simultaneous access by another
core or kernel thread. The disabling of interrupts/signals eliminates races between normal
execution and timer handlers; spin locks eliminate races among cores or kernel threads.
Explicit calls to scheduler routines first disable interrupts (signals) and then acquire the
appropriate spin lock(s); handlers simply acquire the lock(s), on the assumption that nested
interrupts (signals) are disabled automatically when the first one is delivered.

Races in the Scheduler
Schedulers are tricky algorithms, with many opportunities for data and (low-level) synchronization
races. When implementing (high-level) condition synchronization, for example, the scheduler must
generally check a condition and de-schedule the current thread if the condition does not hold. To
ensure correctness, we must avoid scenarios in which the corresponding wakeup operation in some
other thread falls into the “timing window” between the check of the condition and the operation
(typically an enqueue) that makes the waiting thread visible to peers:
thread 1:                                   thread 2:
     if ¬condition
                                                 if ¬Q.empty()
                                                      ready_list.enqueue(Q.dequeue())
          Q.enqueue(self )
          reschedule()
Here it is important that thread 1 acquire the scheduler spin lock before it checks the awaited condition,
and hold it through the call to reschedule.

Priority Inversion
The problem addressed by disabling interrupts or signals during scheduler operations is an example
of a more general class of problems known as priority inversion. Priority inversion occurs when a
high priority task (of any sort) preempts a low priority task (of any sort), but is unable to proceed
because it needs some resource held by the low priority task. Cast in these terms, a program running
above a preemption-based scheduler can be thought of as a low-priority task; an arriving interrupt
or signal preempts it, and runs a handler at high priority instead. A spin lock on scheduler data
structures ensures atomicity among explicit scheduler operations performed by different cores (or
kernel threads), but it cannot provide the same protection between normal execution and interrupt
(signal) handlers: a handler that tried to acquire a lock held by the normal code it preempted would
end up spinning forever; priority inversion would leave the system deadlocked.

 class buffer
     const int SIZE = . . .
     data buf[SIZE]
     int next full, next empty := 0, 0
     semaphore mutex := 1
     semaphore full slots, empty slots := 0, SIZE
 buffer.insert(data d):                                     buffer.remove():
     empty slots.P()                                            full slots.P()
     mutex.P()                                                  mutex.P()
     buf[next empty] := d                                       data d := buf[next full]
     next empty := (next empty + 1) mod SIZE                    next full := (next full + 1) mod SIZE
     mutex.V()                                                  mutex.V()
     full slots.V()                                             empty slots.V()
                                                                return d

Figure 7.1 Implementation of a bounded buffer using semaphores. Semaphore mutex is used to
ensure the atomicity of updates to buf, next_full, and next_empty. Semaphores full_slots and
empty_slots are used for condition synchronization.

7.2       Semaphores

Semaphores are the oldest and probably still the most widely used of the scheduler-based
synchronization mechanisms. They were introduced by Dijkstra in the mid 1960s (Dijkstra
1968b). A semaphore is essentially a non-negative integer with two special operations, P and
V.1 P waits, if necessary, for the semaphore’s value to become positive, and then decrements
it. V increments the value and, if appropriate, unblocks a thread that is waiting in P. If the
initial value of the semaphore is C, is easy to see that # P − #V ≤ C, where # P is the
number of completed P operations and #V is the number of completed V operations.
    If we let C = 1, the semaphore functions as a mutual exclusion lock: P is the acquire
operation; V is the release operation. Assuming that the program uses acquire and release
correctly (never attempting to release a lock that is not held), the value of the semaphore
will always be either 0 (indicating that the lock is held) or 1 (indicating that the lock is
free). In this case we say we have a binary semaphore. In other cases, a semaphore may
represent some general resource of which there are C instances. In this case we say we have
a general or counting semaphore. A thread reserves a resource instance using P; it releases
it using V. Within the OS kernel, a semaphore might represent a frame buffer, an optical
drive, a physical page of memory, a recurring slot in a time-based communication protocol,
or any other resource with a limited, discrete set of instances. Many (though not all) forms
of condition synchronization can be captured by the notion of waiting for such a resource.
    In Sec. 1.2 we introduced condition synchronization using the example of a bounded
buffer, where insert operations would wait, if necessary, for the buffer to become nonfull,
and remove operations would wait for it to become nonempty. Code for such a buffer using
semaphores appears in Figure 7.1.

1 The names stand for words in Dijkstra’s native Dutch: passeren (to pass) and vrijgeven (to release).
English speakers may find it helpful to pretend that P stands for “pause.”

    The code for insert and remove is highly symmetric. An initial P operation delays the
calling thread until it can claim the desired resource (a full or empty slot). A subsequent
brief critical section, protected by the binary mutex semaphore, updates the contents of the
buffer and the appropriate index atomically. Finally, a V operation on the complementary
condition semaphore indicates the availability of an empty or full slot, and unblocks an
appropriate waiting thread, if any.
    Given the scheduler infrastructure outlined in Sec. 7.1, the implementation of semaphores
is straightforward. Each semaphore is represented internally by an integer counter and a
queue for waiting threads. The P operation disables signals and acquires the scheduler spin
lock. It then checks to see whether the counter is positive. If so, it decrements it; if not, it
adds itself to the queue of waiting threads and calls reschedule. Either way (immediately
or after subsequent wakeup), it releases the scheduler lock, reenables signals, and returns.
(Note that the reschedule operation, if called, will release the scheduler lock and reenable
signals after pulling a new thread off the ready list.

Binary and Counting Semaphores
Counting semaphores obviously subsume binary semaphores: given a counting semaphore, we can
always choose to initialize it to either 0 or 1, and then perform P and V operations in alternating
pairs. As it turns out, we can also build counting semaphores from binary semaphores. Barz (1983)
suggests the following implementation:

      class general_sem
           int count := . . .
           binary_sem mutex := 1
           binary_sem gate := min(1, count)
      general_sem.P():                          general_sem.V():
          gate.P()                                  mutex.P()
          mutex.P()                                 ++count
          −−count                                   if count = 1
          if count >0                                    gate.V()
               gate.V()                             mutex.V()
          mutex.V()
The gate binary semaphore serves to serialize P operations. So long as count remains positive, each
P “occupies” the gate briefly and then opens it for its successor. A P that drops the count to zero
leaves the gate closed; a V that makes it positive again reopens the gate.
The mutual implementability of binary and counting semaphores implies that the two mechanisms
are equally powerful. Because their implementations in terms of underlying scheduler primitives are
comparable in speed, time, and code size, most systems provide the counting version. A few provide
the binary version as well, with extra code to enforce a mutual exclusion-style use pattern: if the
program attempts to perform two V operations in a row, a run-time error is announced.

   That thread will, in turn, reacquire the lock and disable signals before calling back into
the scheduler.) The V operation disables signals, acquires the scheduler lock, and checks to
see whether the queue of waiting threads is empty. If so, it moves a thread from that queue
to the ready list; if not, it increments the counter. Finally, it releases the scheduler lock,
reenables signals, and returns.
   With very similar implementation techniques, we can implement native support for
scheduler-based reader-writer locks (we could also build them on top of semaphores). Mod-
est changes to the internal representation (protected, of course, by the disabling of signals
and the scheduler lock), would lead to fair, reader-preference, or writer-preference versions.
In a similar vein, while we have described the behavior of counting semaphores in terms of
a “queue” of waiting threads (suggesting FIFO ordering), the choice of thread to resume in
V could just as easily be arbitrary, randomized, or based on some notion of priority.

7.3      Monitors

To a large extent, the enduring popularity of semaphores can be attributed to their simple
subroutine-call interface: implemented by a run-time library or operating system, they can
be used in almost any language. At the same time, the subroutine-call interface can be seen
as a liability. To start with, while mutual exclusion constitutes the most common use case
for semaphores, the syntactic independence of P and V operations makes it easy to omit
one or the other accidentally—especially in the presence of deeply nested conditions, break
and return statements, or exceptions. This problem can be addressed fairly easily by adding
syntax in which lock acquisition introduces a nested scope, e.g.:
   with_lock(L) {
       // …
   }
The compiler can ensure that the lock is released on any exit from the critical section,
including those that occur via break, return, or exception. (Note, however, that syntactic
nesting does not accommodate the hand-over-hand locking of Sec. 3.1.2.) In languages like
C++, which provide a destructor mechanism for objects, a similar effect can be achieved
without extending language syntax:
   {std::lock_guard<std::mutex> _(L);
       // ...
   }
This construct declares a dummy object (here named simply with an underscore) of class
lock_guard. The constructor for this object takes a parameter L of class mutex, and
calls its acquire method. The destructor for the unnamed object, which will be called
automatically on any exit from the scope, calls L’s release method. Both mutex and
lock_guard are defined in the C++ standard library.

    While scope-based critical sections help to solve the problem of missing acquire and
release calls, the association between a lock and the data it protects is still entirely a matter
of convention. Critical sections on a given lock may be widely scattered through the text of
a program, and condition synchronization remains entirely ad hoc.
    To address these limitations, Dijkstra (1972), Brinch Hansen (1973), and Hoare (1974)
developed a language-level synchronization mechanism known as the monitor. In essence,
a monitor is a data abstraction (a module or class) whose methods (often called entries) are
automatically translated into critical sections on an implicit per-monitor lock. Since fields of
the monitor are visible only within its methods, language semantics ensure that the state of
the abstraction will be read or written only when holding the monitor lock. To accommodate
condition synchronization, monitors also provide condition variables. A thread that needs
to wait for a condition within the monitor executes a wait operation on a condition variable;
a thread that has made a condition true performs a signal operation to awaken a waiting
thread. Unlike semaphores, which count the difference in the number of P and V operations
over time, condition variables contain only a queue of waiting threads: if a signal operation
occurs when no threads are waiting, the operation has no effect.
    Over the past 40 years, monitors have been incorporated into dozens of programming
languages. Historically, Concurrent Pascal (Brinch Hansen 1975), Modula (Wirth 1977), and
Mesa (Lampson and Redell 1980) were probably the most influential. Today, Java (Goetz
et al. 2006) is probably the most widely used. There have also been occasional attempts to
devise a library interface for monitors, but these have tended to be less successful: the idea
depends quite heavily on integration into a language’s syntax and type system.
    Details of monitor semantics vary from one language to another. In the first subsection
below we consider the classic definition by Hoare. Though it is not followed precisely (to
the best of the authors’ knowledge) by any particular language, it is the standard against
which all other variants are compared. The following two subsections consider the two
most significant areas of disagreement among extant monitor variants. The final subsection
describes the variant found in Java.

7.3.1    Hoare Monitors

As originally defined by Hoare (1974), a monitor can be represented pictorially as shown
in Figure 7.2. Threads queue for entry at the left and exit at the right. Only one is allowed
“inside the box” at any given time. When a thread performs a wait operation, it steps out of
the box and into a condition queue. When a thread performs a signal operation, it checks
to see whether any thread is waiting on the associated condition queue. If so, it steps out of
the box and into the urgent queue, and the thread at the head of the condition queue steps
in. When a thread exits the monitor, the implementation allows a thread to enter from the
urgent queue or, if that queue is empty, from the entry queue. If both queues are empty, the
monitor is unlocked.

                                         urgent queue

                           entry queue
                                                    Monitor methods
                                                (run in mutual exclusion;
                                                can access protected data)      exit

                                                           ...
                                                    condition queues

Figure 7.2 A Hoare monitor. Only one thread is permitted “inside the box” at any given time.

 monitor buffer
    const int SIZE = . . .
    data buf[SIZE]
    int next full, next empty := 0, 0
    int full slots := 0
    condition full slot, empty slot
 entry insert(data d):                                        entry remove():
      if full slots = SIZE                                         if full slots = 0
             empty slot.wait()                                            full slot.wait()
      buf[next empty] := d                                         data d := buf[next full]
      next empty := (next empty + 1) mod SIZE                      next full := (next full + 1) mod SIZE
     ++full slots                                                  −−full slots
      full slot.signal()                                           empty slot.signal()
                                                                   return d

Figure 7.3 Implementation of a bounded buffer as a Hoare monitor. Threads wait on condition
variables full_slot and empty_slot only when the associated condition does not currently hold.

    Some implementations of monitors dispense with the urgent queue, and move signalers
back to the entry queue instead. Some implementations also relax the ordering constraints
on the various queues, and unblock, when appropriate, an arbitrary, random, or high-priority
thread instead of the first in line.
    We can use Hoare monitors to implement a bounded buffer as shown in Figure 7.3. It can
be instructive to compare it to the semaphore version in Figure 7.1. Where Figure 7.1 uses
a binary semaphore for mutual exclusion, Figure 7.3 relies on the implicit mutual exclusion
of the monitor lock. More significantly, where Figure 7.1 uses a pair of general semaphores
for condition synchronization, and performs a P operation at the beginning of every call to
insert or remove, Figure 7.3 inspects integer variable full_slots, and waits only when its
value indicates that the desired condition does not hold. This difference reflects the fact that
semaphores “remember” an excess of V operations, but monitor condition variables do not
remember an excess of signals.

    Hoare’s original paper contains a concise definition of monitors in terms of semaphores.
It also notes that a monitor can be used, trivially, to implement a general semaphore, thus
proving that the two notations are equally powerful. The principal advantage of the monitor
is data abstraction: protected variables (fields) cannot be accessed outside the monitor that
contains them, and mutual exclusion on calls to monitor methods is guaranteed implicitly,
without the need for explicit acquire (P) and release (V) operations.
    To argue that a concurrent data abstraction has been implemented correctly with a mon-
itor, one typically specifies a monitor invariant—a logical property of the protected data
that must be true whenever the monitor is unoccupied, and whenever the thread inside is
changed. Clearly a monitor invariant must always be true initially. It must similarly be true
on monitor exit, at every call to wait, and (in a Hoare monitor) on every call to signal. In
our bounded buffer example, an appropriate invariant might be that the full_slots variable
correctly indicates the number of items in the buffer, and that these items reside in slots
next_full through next_empty−1 (mod SIZE) of buf. (We also know that threads will be
waiting on the full_slot condition variable only if full_slots is 0, and on the empty_slot
condition variable only if full_slots is SIZE, but since the thread queues are generally hidden,
this information may not be included in the invariant.)

7.3.2       Signal Semantics

In a Hoare monitor, the thread performing a signal operation (the “signaler”) steps out
of the monitor and into the urgent queue, so the thread performing a wait operation (the
“signalee”) can execute immediately. The argument for this behavior is that it allows the
signalee to assume that the condition discovered by the signaler still holds. If the signaler
were permitted to continue, it might (intentionally or inadvertently) change the state of the
monitor before leaving in such a way that the condition no longer held. If any other thread
could enter the monitor between the signaler and the signalee, there would be no way to
ensure the condition.
   Unfortunately, immediate resumption of the signalee implies that the signaler must be
blocked and then unblocked before continuing execution, entailing two arguably unnecessary
context switches of the core on which it is executing. An immediate switch also requires
that the signaler reestablish the monitor invariant before the call to signal; it cannot defer
this action to code between the signal and the end of the entry. In an attempt to reduce the
overhead of context switches, and also to relax reestablishment of the monitor invariant, the
designers of Mesa (Lampson and Redell 1980) chose to define signals as “hints” instead of
“absolutes.” Mesa dispenses with the urgent queue, and allows a signaling thread to continue
execution, switching only when it reaches the end of its entry. Code that would be written
      if ¬condition
           cvar.wait()

in a Hoare monitor would be

   while ¬condition
       cvar.wait()

in a Mesa monitor. This change is certainly not onerous. It is also consistent with the notion of
covering conditions, discussed in the box below. Most modern implementations of monitors
adopt Mesa semantics for signals.
    As it turns out, many algorithms (including our bounded buffer) naturally place signal
operations only at the ends of entries. A few languages—notably Concurrent Pascal—have
required this positioning of signals, thereby maintaining the semantics of signals as absolutes
while avoiding any extra context switches for immediate transfer to the signalee.

7.3.3     Nested Monitor Calls

A second major difference among monitor implementations concerns behavior in the event
of nested calls. Suppose a thread calls entry E of monitor M1, which in turn calls entry F
of monitor M2, and the code in F then waits on a condition variable. Clearly monitor M2
will be unlocked. But what about M1? If we leave it locked, the program will deadlock if
the only way for another thread to reach the necessary signal in M2 is through M1. If we
unlock it, however, then the waiting thread in M2 will need to reacquire it when it wakes
up, and we may deadlock if some other thread is holding M1’s lock at that time—especially
if that thread can’t release M1’s lock without making a nested call to M2.

Covering Conditions and Cascading Signals
Several languages, including Mesa and Java, provide a broadcast or signalAll operation that awakens
all threads waiting on a condition. Such an operation finds obvious use in cases where all threads
should continue: it makes it trivial, for example, to implement a monitor-based barrier. Broadcast can
also be used in programs where the conditions on which threads may wait cannot easily be statically
enumerated. Consider, for example, a concurrent set that provides a remove(v) method that waits until
v is a member of the set. Absent a separate condition variable for every possible value of v, waiting
threads must share a covering condition. When such threads may be present, a thread performing an
insert operation must broadcast the covering condition, awakening all threads. Since at most one
thread will continue in this case, while the rest discover that they must wait again, covering conditions
can lead to very high overhead, and must be used with care.
In the absence of broadcast operations, one can employ a cascading signal idiom, in which only one
thread is initially awoken. If unable to proceed, it explicitly re-signals the condition variable before
waiting on it again. Unfortunately, this idiom requires both FIFO ordering of waiting threads (which
some systems may not provide) and some mechanism to avoid an infinite loop of signals in the case
where no waiting thread is able to proceed.

   A possible solution, suggested by Wettstein (1978), is to release the outer monitor when
waiting, dictate that signals are only hints, and arrange for a re-awakened lock to re-acquire
locks from the outside in—i.e., first on M1 and then on M2. This strategy is deadlock free
so long as the programmer takes care to ensure that nested monitor calls always occur in the
same order (i.e., always from M1 to M2, and never from M2 to M1).
   Unfortunately, any scheme in which a nested wait releases the locks on outer monitors
will require the programmer to restore the monitor invariant not only on monitor exit, wait,
and possibly signal, but also whenever calling an entry of another monitor that may wait—or
a subroutine that may call such an entry indirectly. The designers of most languages—Java
among them—have concluded that this requirement constitutes an unacceptable burden, and
have opted to leave the outer monitor locked.

7.3.4     Java Monitors

The original design of Java—still present in the core of the language—combines scope-based
critical sections with a simplified form of monitors. Each object is associated, implicitly,
with a mutex lock and a single condition variable. A critical section on the lock is specified
by a synchronized block that names the object:
      synchronized (my_object) {
          // critical section
      }

As a form of syntactic sugar, the declaration of a class method can be prefaced with
synchronized, in which case its body behaves as if surrounded by synchronized
(this) { ... }. A class whose methods are all synchronized functions as a monitor.
   Within a synchronized method or block, a thread can block for condition synchro-
nization by executing the wait method, which all objects inherit from the root class
Object; it can unblock a waiting peer by executing notify. If threads need to wait
for more than one condition associated with some abstraction (as they do in our bounded
buffer), one must either restructure the code in such a way that each condition is awaited
in a different object, or else use some single object’s one condition variable to cover all the
alternatives. To unblock all threads waiting in a given object, one can execute notifyAll.
   C# provides mechanisms similar to those of core Java. Its lock statement is analogous
to synchronized, and conditions are awaited and signaled with Wait, Pulse, and
PulseAll.
   The Java 5 revision of the language, released in 2004, introduced a new library-based
interface to monitors. Its Lock class (with a capital ‘L’) has explicit lock (acquire) and
unlock (release) methods. These can be used for hand-over-hand locking (Sec. 3.1.2) and
other techniques that cannot easily be captured with scope-based critical sections. Locks can
also have an arbitrary number of associated condition variables, eliminating many unneces-

sary uses of covering conditions. Unfortunately, the library-based interface makes programs
somewhat awkward. There is no equivalent of the synchronized label on methods, and
the Lock-based equivalent of a synchronized block looks like this:
   Lock l = ...;
   ...
   l.lock();
   try {
       // critical section
   } finally {
       // l.unlock();
   }

The C# standard library also provides more general synchronization mechanisms, via its
WaitHandle objects, but these are operating-system specific, and may behave differently
on different systems.

7.4      Other Language Mechanisms

7.4.1    Conditional Critical Regions

In Sec. 1.2 we introduced condition synchronization in the form of a hypothetical await
condition statement. One potential complaint with both semaphores and monitors is that
they require explicit variables as “stand-ins” for Boolean conditions. This observation led
(Brinch Hansen 1973, Sec. 3.4.3) to propose a notation—the conditional critical region—in
which awaited conditions could be specified directly. Critical conditional regions appear in
several languages, including Edison (Brinch Hansen 1981) and Ada 95 (Intermetrics 1995,
Secs. II.9 and 9.1). Syntax is generally some variant on
   region protected_variable when condition
        // … (critical section)

   As in a Java synchronized block, the protected_variable specifies an object whose
implicit lock is to be acquired. Some languages allow the programmer to specify a list of
objects, in which case their locks are acquired in some canonical order (to avoid deadlock).
Significantly, the when clause (also known as a guard) can appear only at the beginning of
the critical section. The intent is that the enclosed code execute atomically at some point
in time where the specified condition is true. This convention avoids the issue of monitor
signal semantics, but leaves the issue of nested calls.
   Figure 7.4 uses conditional critical sections to implement a bounded buffer. The code is
arguably more natural than the semaphore (Figure 7.1) or monitor (Figure 7.3) versions, but
raises a crucial implementation question: when and how are the guards evaluated?

 class buffer
     const int SIZE = . . .
     data buf[SIZE]
     int next full, next empty := 0, 0
 buffer.insert(data d):                               buffer.remove():
     region when full slots < SIZE                       data d
          buf[next empty] := d                           region when full slots > 0
          next empty := (next empty + 1) mod SIZE             d := buf[next full]
                                                              next full := (next full + 1) mod SIZE
                                                         return d

Figure 7.4 Implementation of a bounded buffer using conditional critical regions. Here we have
assumed that regions are with respect to the current object (this) unless otherwise specified.

    With no restrictions on the conditions tested by guards, we are faced with the prospect,
when one thread leaves a region, of context switching into every other thread that is waiting
to enter a region on the same object, so that each can evaluate its own condition in its own
referencing environment. With a bit more sophistication, we may be able to determine—
statically or at run time—the set of variables on which a condition depends, and only switch
into a thread when one of these has changed value (raising the possibility that the condition
may now be true). This optimization turns out to be natural in the context of transactional
memory; we will return to it in Sec. 9.3.2. Depending on the cost of tracking writes, it may be
cheaper in practice than resuming every thread on every region exit, but worst-case overhead
remains significant.
    Another cost-reduction strategy, originally proposed by Kessels (1977) and adopted (in
essence) by Ada, is to require conditions to depend only on the state of the lockable object
(never on the parameters passed to methods), and to list these conditions explicitly in the
object’s declaration. These rules allow the implementation to associate each condition with
an implicit queue of waiting threads, and to evaluate it in a generic context, without restoring
the referencing environment of any particular thread. When one thread leaves a region, each
condition can be evaluated exactly once, and a corresponding thread resumed if the condition
is true.
    As noted in Sec. 5.1, it is important that tests of a condition not race with updates to the
variables on which the condition depends. This property, too, can be ensured by allowing
conditions to depend only on the state of the lockable object—and perhaps also on parameters
passed by value, which cannot be changed by other threads.

7.4.2     Futures

Futures, first proposed by Halstead (1985) for the Multilisp dialect of Scheme, exploit
the observation that function arguments, in most languages, are evaluated before they are

passed, but may not actually be used for some time. In Multilisp, any expression—but most
commonly a function argument—could be enclosed in a future construct:
   (future expression)

Evaluation of the expression might then proceed in parallel with continued execution in the
caller, up until the point (if any) at which the caller actually needs the value of the expression.
   Futures embody synchronization in the sense that evaluation of the enclosed expression
will not begin until execution in the parent thread reaches the point at which the future
appears, and execution in the parent thread will not proceed beyond the point where the
value is needed until evaluation has completed. Using futures, the key recursive step in
quicksort might be written as follows:
   (append (future (sort elements less than or equal to pivot))
           (list pivot)
           (future (sort elements greater than pivot)))

   In general, a future and the continuation of its caller need to be independent, up to
the point where the value of the future is needed. If the threads executing the future and
the continuation share a data or synchronization race, behavior of the program may be
nondeterministic or even undefined. As recognized by Halstead, futures are thus particularly
appealing in purely functional programs, in which the lack of side effects means that an
expression will always evaluate to the same value in a given context.
   Some thread libraries provide futures outside the language core—typically as a generic
(polymorphic) object whose constructor accepts a closure (a subroutine and its parameters)
and whose get method can be used to retrieve the computed value (waiting for it if necessary).
In Java, given a Callable < T > object c, the code
   T val = c.call();

can be replaced by
   Future<T> f = new FutureTask<T>(c);
       // Class FutureTask implements interface Future
   f.run();
   ...
   T val = f.get();

Because Java is not a functional language, the programmer must exercise special care to
ensure that a future will execute safely. Welc et al. (2005) have proposed that futures
be made safe in all cases, using an implementation reminiscent of transactional memory.
Specifically, they use multiversioning to ensure that a future does not observe changes made
by the continuation of its caller, and speculation in the caller to force it to start over if it fails
to observe a change made by the future.

7.4.3        Series-Parallel Execution

At the beginning of Chapter 5, we noted that many spin-based mechanisms for condition
synchronization can be rewritten, straightforwardly, to use scheduler-based synchronization
instead. Examples include flags, barriers, and reader-writer locks. Any place a thread might
spin for a (statically known) condition, we can lock out signals or interrupts, grab the
scheduler lock, move the current thread to a condition queue, and call reschedule instead.
   Scheduler-based implementations are also commonly used for series-parallel execution,
mentioned briefly in Sec. 5.3.3. In Cilk (Frigo et al. 1998; Blumofe et al. 1995), for example,
a multi-phase application might look something like this:
      do {
          for (i = 0; i < n; i++) {
              spawn work(i);
          }
          sync;   // wait for all children to complete
      } while ¬terminating condition

    Conceptually, this code suggests that the main thread create (“fork”) n threads at the top
of each do loop iteration, and “join” them at the bottom. The Cilk runtime system, however,
is designed to make spawn and sync as inexpensive as possible. Concise descriptions of
the tasks are placed into a “work-stealing queue” (Blumofe et al. 1995) from which they are
farmed out to a collection of preexisting worker threads. Similar schedulers are used in a
variety of other languages as well. Source code syntax may vary, of course. X10 (Charles
et al. 2005), for example, replaces spawn and sync with async and finish.
    Many languages (including the more recent Cilk++) include a “parallel for” loop whose
iterations proceed logically in parallel. An implicit sync causes execution of the main pro-
gram to wait for all iterations to complete before proceeding with whatever comes after the
loop. Similar functionality can be added to existing languages in the form of a library routine
that takes the loop bounds as arguments, together with a parameterized lambda expression
to represent the body of the loop; examples can be found in C# and C++’17. In the absence
of lambdas, extensions can leverage annotations on sequential loops. OpenMP (Chandra
et al. 2001), in particular, defines a set of compiler- or preprocessor-based pragmas that
can be used to parallelize loops in C and Fortran. Like threads executing the same phase of
a barrier-based application, iterations of a parallel loop must generally be free of data races.
If occasional conflicts are allowed, they must be resolved using other synchronization.
    In a very different vein, Fortran 95 and its descendants provide a forall loop whose
iterations are heavily synchronized. Code like the following

                          (a)                   (b)                     (c)

Figure 7.5 Parallel task graphs for programs based on a fork and join, b spawn and sync, and c
parallel enumeration (split-merge).

   forall (i=1:n)
       A[i] = expr1
       B[i] = expr2
       C[i] = expr3
   end forall

contains (from a semantic perspective) a host of implicit barriers: All instances of expr1
are evaluated first, then all writes are performed to A, then all instances of expr2 are
evaluated, followed by all writes to B, and so forth. A good compiler will elide any barriers
it can prove to be unneeded.
    In contrast to unstructured fork-join parallelism, in which a thread may be created—
or its completion awaited—at any time, series-parallel programs always generate properly
nested groups of tasks. The difference is illustrated in Figure 7.5. With fork and join (a),
tasks may join their parent out of order, join with a task other than the parent, or terminate
without joining at all. With spawn and sync (b), the parent launches tasks one at a time, but
rejoins them as a group. In split-merge parallelism (c), we think of the parent as dividing
into a collection of children, all at once, and then merging together again later. While less
flexible, series-parallel execution leads to clearer source code structure. Assuming that tasks
do not conflict with each other, there is also an obvious equivalence to serial execution.
For debugging purposes, series-parallel semantics may even facilitate the construction of
efficient race detection tools, which serve to identify unintended conflicts (Raman et al.
2012; Lu et al. 2014).
    Recognizing the host of different patterns in which parallel threads may synchronize,
Shirako et al. (2008) have developed a barrier generalization known as phasers. Threads
can join (register with) or leave a phaser dynamically, and can participate as signalers,
waiters, or both. Their signal and wait operations can be separated by other code to effect a
fuzzy barrier (Sec. 5.3.1). Threads can also, as a group, specify a statement to be executed,
atomically, as part of a phaser episode. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, a thread that is
registered with multiple phasers can signal or wait at all of them together when it performs a

signal or wait operation. This capability facilitates the management of stencil applications,
in which a thread synchronizes with its neighbors at the end of each phase, but not with other
threads. Neighbor-only synchronization is also supported, in a more limited fashion, by the
topological barriers of Scott and Michael (1996). In the message-passing world, barrier-like
operations are supported by the collective communication primitives of systems like MPI
(Bruck et al. 1995), but these are beyond the scope of this monograph.

7.5       Kernel/User Interactions

Throughout this chapter, we have focused on scheduling as a means of implementing syn-
chronization. It is also, however, a means of sharing some limited number of cores or kernel
threads among a (usually larger) number of kernel or user threads. Fair sharing requires
that user-level applications cross into the kernel when switching between kernel threads,
introducing nontrivial overheads. Inopportune preemption—e.g., during a critical section—
may introduce greater overheads. Resources required for synchronization (e.g., headers for
queues of waiting threads) may constitute a significant burden for systems with large num-
bers of synchronization objects. The subsections below address these issues in turn.

7.5.1     Context Switching Overhead

As we noted in Sec. 1.3, spinning is generally preferable to blocking when the expected wait
time is less than twice the context-switching overhead. When switching between kernel
threads in user space, this overhead can easily be hundreds of cycles, due to the cost of
crossing into kernel mode and back. Some 30 years ago, Ousterhout (1982) suggested that
a user-level thread that is unable to acquire a lock (or that is waiting for a currently-false
condition) should spin for some modest amount of time before invoking the kernel-level
scheduler, in the hope that it might avoid the context switch. Many widely used locks today,
including most implementations of pthread locks and Java synchronized blocks, use
spin-then-block techniques. Karlin et al. (1991) provide a detailed analysis of how long to
spin before blocking; they demonstrate the value of dynamic adaptation, and prove bounds
on worst-case performance.
   Of course, spinning in user space requires that the state of the lock be visible in user-
level memory. This is natural for locking among threads of the same application, but not for
threads in separate address spaces. Traditional interprocess locks, such as Unix System V
semaphores, are implemented entirely within the kernel. The semget system call returns
an opaque handle, which can be passed to P and V (semop). Spinning before blocking is
simply not an option. Sadly, this implies an overhead of hundreds of cycles to acquire even
an uncontended lock.

   To accommodate fast user-level synchronization across address spaces, Franke and Rus-
sell (2002) introduced the notion of a futex —a fast userspace mutex. Now widely used in
Linux and other operating systems, futexes require at least one page of memory to be mapped
into the address spaces of all processes sharing a lock. The futex syscalls are intended for use
only by user-space thread libraries, and are not ordinarily exported to application program-
mers.2 They manipulate data structures in shared memory, and call into the kernel only when
required. In any thread that does need to block, the kernel-level context block is modified to
indicate the location on which the thread is waiting; this allows the OS to recover cleanly if a
process misuses the interface, or terminates unexpectedly. In a similar vein, Oracle’s Solaris
operating system provides lwp_park and lwp_unpark syscalls that allow a thread to
be descheduled and rescheduled explicitly. Oracle’s adaptive mutex library uses these calls
to build an enhanced analog of futex. Johnson et al. (2010) discuss the behavior of these
mechanisms under a variety of workloads, and present adaptive techniques to control not
only the duration of spinning, but also the number of threads that are permitted to spin at
any given time.

7.5.2     Preemption and Convoys

Authors of parallel programs have known for decades that performance can suffer badly if
a thread is preempted while holding a lock; this is sometimes referred to as inopportune
preemption. If other threads attempt to acquire the lock, they will need to wait until the lock
holder is rescheduled and can complete its critical section. If threads block while waiting,
there is reason to hope that the preempted thread will acquire one of the freed-up kernel
threads or cores, but if threads spin while waiting instead, an entire scheduling quantum (or
more) may expire before the lock holder gets to run again.
   Inopportune preemption can generate contention even in otherwise well-balanced pro-
grams. Blasgen et al. (1979) describe what they call the convoy phenomenon. Suppose that
every thread in an application attempts to execute a brief critical section on lock L on a
regular but infrequent basis—say once per millisecond. Normally we would not expect the
lock to be a bottleneck. But if lock holder T is preempted for more than a millisecond, every
other thread may be waiting for L by the time T runs again, and the lock may become a
bottleneck. Worse, if threads tend to follow similar code paths, their actions coming out
of back-to-back critical sections may generate a storm of cache coherence traffic, and they
may end up contending for whatever lock is accessed next in program order. Over time
the contention may abate, as execution histories drift apart, but as soon as a lock holder is
preempted again, the pattern may repeat.
   To address the convoy phenomenon, Edler et al. (1988) introduced the notion of temporary
non-preemption. In a region of memory shared between them, the user thread and the kernel
maintain a pair of flags. The first flag is written by the user thread and read by the kernel: it

2 Drepper (2011) discusses some of the surprisingly subtle aspects of using futexes correctly.

indicates that the user wishes not to be preempted. The second flag is written by the kernel
and read by the user thread: it indicates that the kernel wanted to preempt the thread, but
refrained because the first flag was set. A test_and_set spin lock might use these flags as
follows:
      atomic<bool> do not preempt me := false             // shared between the kernel and user
      atomic<bool> kernel wanted to preempt me := false   // shared between the kernel and user
      class lock
           atomic<bool> f := false
      lock.acquire():                                     lock.release():
           do not preempt me.store(true, ∥)                    f.store(false, RW∥)
           while ¬f.TAS(W∥)                                    do not preempt me.store(false, W∥)
                do not preempt me.store(false, R∥)             if kernel wanted to preempt me.load(W∥)
               if kernel wanted to preempt me.load(W∥)              yield
                    yield
                do not preempt me.store(true, R∥)
           fence(R∥RW)

To avoid abuse, the kernel is free to ignore the do_not_preempt_me flag if it stays set
for too long. It can also deduct any extra time granted a thread from the beginning of its
subsequent quantum. Other groups have proposed related mechanisms that can likewise
be used to avoid (Marsh et al. 1991) or recover from (Anderson et al. 1992) inopportune
preemption. Solaris (Dice 2011) provides a schedctl mechanism closely related to that of
Edler et al.
   The code shown for test_and_set above can easily be adapted to many other locks,
with features including backoff, locality awareness, timeout, double-checked or asymmetric
locking, and adaptive spin-then-wait. Fair queueing is harder to accommodate. In a ticket,
Hemlock, MCS, or CLH lock, one must consider the possibility of preemption not only while
holding a lock, but also while waiting in line. So if several threads are waiting, preemption
of any one may end up creating a convoy.
   To avoid passing a lock to a thread that has been preempted while waiting in line,
Kontothanassis et al. (1997) proposed extensions to the kernel interface in the spirit of
Edler et al. Specifically, they provide additional values for the do_not_preempt_me flag,
and make it visible to other threads. These changes allow one thread to pass a lock to
another, and to make the other nonpreemptable, atomically. In a different vein, He et al.
(2005) describe a family of queue-based locks in which a lock-releasing thread can esti-
mate (with high confidence) whether the next thread in line has been preempted and, if so,
dynamically remove it from the queue. The key to these locks is for each spinning thread to
periodically write the wall-clock time into its lock queue node. If a thread discovers that the
difference between the current time and the time in its successor’s queue node exceeds some
appropriate threshold, it assumes that the successor is preempted. A thread whose node has
been removed from the queue will try again the next time it has a chance to run.

7.5.3    Resource Minimization

In addition to avoiding unnecessary crossings in and out of kernel mode, the futexes of
Linux and the lwp_park-based mutexes of Solaris also eliminate the need to allocate a
kernel-level condition queue for every lock. Lists of blocked threads are kept in user-level
memory; within the kernel, a waiting thread is simply descheduled, with a note in its context
block that indicates what it is waiting for. Since kernel address space is often a scarce resource
(especially for preallocated structures), this migration of information into user space may
significantly increase the maximum number of locks a system can support.
   A similar observation regarding kernel resources was made by the designers of the NT
kernel, the foundation for Microsoft OS releases starting with Windows 2000. Compared to
Unix variants, the Windows API includes a much larger number of standard library routines.
These in turn declare a very large number of internal locks (Windows mutex objects), most
of which are never used in a typical program. To economize on kernel resources, NT delays
allocating a kernel queue for a given lock until some thread actually tries to acquire the
lock. Kernel space is still required for every active lock, and kernel-mode crossings occur
on every acquire and release, but space is never wasted on locks that are not used.
   Unfortunately, delayed allocation of kernel queues raises the possibility of a run-time
exception if space is not available. This possibility was a source of considerable complexity
and brittleness in Windows 2000. To eliminate the run-time exception, the designers of
Windows XP introduced the notion of keyed events (Duffy 2006), which allow logically
distinct conditions to share a single kernel-level queue. Every call to wait or set (signal)
must specify both an event and a 32-bit key. Every thread waiting in the queue is then tagged
with the key it provided, and set will only awaken a thread with a matching key. Under most
circumstances, the kernel allocates a new keyed event for every active lock. If it runs out
of memory, however, it falls back to a preexisting (per-address-space) keyed event, with a
new lock-specific key. In Windows XP, which used a linked list for the per-address-space
queue, performance could sometimes be a problem. Windows Vista replaced the list with
a hash table for fast key-based lookups. It also introduced a new family of synchronization
objects, including a “slim reader-writer lock,” or SRWL. Like futexes and lwp_park-based
mutexes, these objects maintain state in user-level memory, and avoid kernel-mode crossings
whenever possible. When a thread does need to block, it always employs the per-address-
space queue.
