Nonblocking Algorithms
                                                                                               8

When devising a concurrent data structure, we typically want to arrange for methods to be
atomic—most often linearizable (Sec. 3.1.2). Most concurrent algorithms achieve atomicity
by means of mutual exclusion, implemented using locks. Locks are blocking, however,
in the formal sense of the word: whether implemented by spinning or rescheduling, they
admit system states in which a thread is unable to make progress without the cooperation
of one or more peers. This in turn leads to the problems of inopportune preemption and
convoys, discussed in Sec. 7.5.2. Locks—coarse-grain locks in particular—are also typically
conservative: in the course of precluding unacceptable thread interleavings, they tend to
preclude many acceptable interleavings as well.
    We have had several occasions in earlier chapters to refer to nonblocking algorithms, in
which there is never a reachable state of the system in which some thread is unable to make
forward progress. In effect, nonblocking algorithms arrange for every possible interleaving
of thread executions to be acceptable. They are thus immune to inopportune preemption.
For certain data structures (counters, stacks, queues, linked lists, hash tables—even skip
lists) they can also outperform lock-based alternatives even in the absence of preemption or
contention.
    The literature on nonblocking algorithms is enormous and continually growing. Rather
than attempt a comprehensive survey here, we will simply introduce a few of the most widely
used nonblocking data structures, and use them to illustrate a few important concepts and
techniques. A more extensive and tutorial survey can be found in the text of Herlihy et al.
(2021). Håkan Sundell’s Ph.D. thesis (2004) and the survey of Moir and Shavit (2005) are
also excellent sources of background information. Before proceeding here, readers may wish
to refer back to the discussion of liveness in Sec. 3.2.

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024         139
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_8

          class counter                                     int counter.increase(int v):
               atomic<int> c                                     int old, new
                                                                 repeat
          int counter.get():
                                                                       old := c.load(∥)
               return c.load(∥)
                                                                       new := old + v
          void counter.set(int v):                               until c.CAS(old, new, ∥)
               c.store(v, ∥)                                     return old

Figure 8.1 A single-word atomic counter, implemented with CAS. If updates to the counter are to
be seen in consistent order by all threads, the store in set and the CAS in increase must both be write
atomic.

8.1       Single-Location Structures

The simplest nonblocking algorithms use the CAS and LL / SC-based fetch_and_Φ con-
structions of Sec. 2.3 to implement methods that update a single-word object. An atomic
counter (accumulator) object, for example, might be implemented as shown in Figure 8.1.
Reads (get) and writes (set) can use ordinary loads and stores, though the stores must be
write atomic to avoid causality loops. Updates similarly require that fetch_and_Φ instruc-
tions be write atomic. Note that in contrast to the lock algorithms of Chapter 4, we have
chosen not to avail ourselves of the default RW ∥ RW ordering on synchronizing instructions.
This is appropriate, for example, in programs that only look at the value of a counter at the
end of the computation. If calls to get, set, or increase need to be ordered with respect to
preceding or following operations in the calling thread—that is, if they need to be not only
atomic but also linearizable—then the programmer will need to insert explicit fences.

8.1.1     The Treiber Stack

Slightly more complicated than a single-word counter is the lock-free stack of Sec. 2.3.1,
originally published by Treiber (1986) for the IBM System/370, and very widely used
today. Code for this stack is repeated here as Figure 8.2. As discussed in the earlier section,
a sequence count has been embedded in the top-of-stack pointer to avoid the ABA prob-
lem. Without this count (or some other ABA solution (Jayanti and Petrovic 2003, Michael
2004a)), the stack would not function correctly.

Write Atomicity In any algorithm based on mutual exclusion or reader-writer locks, lin-
earizability is trivially ensured by the order of updates to the lock. With seqlocks or RCU,
as noted in Secs. 6.2 and 6.3, write atomicity is needed to ensure that readers see updates
in consistent order. In a similar way, any updates in a nonblocking data structure that might
otherwise appear inconsistent to other threads (whether in read-only operations or in por-
tions of more general operations) will need to be write atomic. In the specific case of the

      class stack { atomic<⟨node*, int⟩> top }        node* stack.pop():
      class node { atomic<node*> next, ... }              repeat
      void stack.push(node* n):                                 ⟨o, c⟩ := top.load(∥)
           repeat                                               if o = null return null
                 ⟨o, c⟩ := top.load(∥)                          n := o next load(∥)
                 n next store(o, ∥)                       until top.CAS(⟨o, c⟩, ⟨n, c+1⟩, R∥)
           until top.CAS(⟨o, c⟩, ⟨n, c⟩, W∥)              return o

Figure 8.2 The lock-free “Treiber stack,” with a counted top-of-stack pointer to solve the ABA
problem (reprised from Figure 2.7). It suffices to modify the count in pop only; if CAS is available
in multiple widths, it may be applied to only the pointer in push.

Treiber stack, a pop operation on an empty stack must be considered to take effect (i.e., to
linearize) on its load of top. To ensure this, the CAS operations in push and pop must be
write atomic. Similar observations will apply to other nonblocking data structures, later in
thisf chapter.

Memory Management The code in Figure 8.2 does not explicitly allocate or free node
objects. To see why, suppose we modify the Treiber stack to pass push a value (rather than
a node), and have the method allocate a new node to hold it. In this case, if a node were
deallocated and then reused by unrelated code (in, say, an array of floating-point numbers),
it would be possible (if unlikely) that one of those numbers might match the bit pattern
of a counted pointer from the memory’s former life, leading the stack code to perform an
erroneous operation. To avoid this problem, the Treiber stack uses a combination of counted
pointers (as described in Sec. 2.3.1 and a type-preserving allocator.
    A type-preserving allocator ensures that a block of memory is reused only for an object
of the same type and alignment. With such an allocator, space that was once occupied by a
counted pointer will continue to hold a counted pointer even when reallocated. Moreover,
assuming wrap-around does not occur, the pointer’s count will strictly increase as the node
is repeatedly reused, so a CAS will succeed only in the absence of reuse.

A simple type-preserving allocator
In an elegant example of mutual support, one simple implementation of a type-preserving allocator
employs a Treiber stack as a free list: old nodes are pushed onto the stack when freed; new nodes are
popped from the stack, or, if the stack is empty, obtained from the system memory manager. A more
sophisticated implementation avoids unnecessary cache misses and contention on the top-of-stack
pointer by employing a separate pool of free nodes for each thread or core. If the local pool is empty,
a thread obtains a new “batch” of nodes from a backup central pool, or, if it is empty, the system
memory manager. If the local pool grows too large (e.g., in a program that performs most enqueues
in one thread and most dequeues in another), a thread moves a batch of nodes back to the central
pool. The central pool is naturally implemented as a Treiber stack of batches.

                                       25
                                 CAS
                 10             20          30                   10               20     30
        head                                            head          CAS
                          (a)                                               (b)

                                       25

                 10             20          30                   10               20     30
        head                                            head
                          (c)                                               (d)

Figure 8.3 Atomic update of a singly linked list. Naive insertion (a) and deletion (b), if executed
concurrently, can leave the list in an inconsistent state (c). The H&M list therefore performs a two-step
deletion that first marks the next pointer of the to-be-deleted node (shown here with shading) (d),
thereby preventing conflicting insertion.

   Strictly speaking, the use of a type-preserving allocator means that initialization of a
newly allocated object may race (in the sense of Sec. 3.4.2) with accesses in other threads
that retain references from the object’s prior incarnation. While we have not used explicit
synchronizing stores for initialization in any of our code examples, correct source code
would need to do so to avoid data races in a language like C++.
   In some cases the restriction to a type-preserving allocator may be undesirable (for exam-
ple, because it prevents memory from being released to the operating system for the duration
of a program’s execution). There are many alternative approaches to memory management
for nonblocking data structures, including reference counting, hazard pointers, and epochs.
We survey these options in Sec. 8.7.

8.2       Linked Lists

8.2.1     Harris and Michael (H&M) Lists

Singly-linked lists are among the most ubiquitous data structures in computer science. Sorted
linked lists, in particular, are frequently used as a simple implementation of a set, and may
also be used as a component of more complex data structures (e.g., hash tables and skip lists).
Sundell and Tsigas (2008b) have shown that even doubly linked lists can be manipulated in
a lock-free fashion, though the code to do so is quite complex. We focus here on the singly
linked case.
    It is tempting to expect that both insertion of a node into a list and removal of a node from
a list would be trivial to implement in a nonblocking fashion using CAS, since in each case
only a single pointer of the existing list needs to change. In Figure 8.3a, insertion of a node
containing the value 25 requires only that we swing the next pointer of the node containing

20. In Figure 8.3b, deletion of the node containing 20 requires only that we swing the next
pointer of the node containing 10.
    The problem with this expectation is that insertion after the node containing 20 is correct
only if that node remains a member of the list. If the deletion in Figure 8.3(b) happens
immediately before the insertion in Figure 8.3(a), we shall be left with the configuration of
Figure 8.3(c), in which the node containing 25 has inadvertently been lost.
    The solution to this problem, first used in an early queue algorithm by Prakash et al. (1994)
and then adapted to the general linked-list case by Harris (2001), is to perform deletion in
two steps. The first step, shown in Figure 8.3(d), marks the to-be-deleted node by flipping
a bit in its own next pointer (this is suggested in the figure by shading the box containing
the pointer). A second, separate step (not shown in the figure) updates the next pointer of
the node containing 10 to actually remove the deleted node from the list. In between these
two steps, the list remains intact, and can safely be traversed, but lookup operations will
decline to “see” the deleted node, and insert operations will decline to update its marked
next pointer. Moreover, because the state of the list remains well defined, and the second
step can be effected with a single CAS, any thread that comes upon a deleted node can safely
remove it, without waiting for help from any other thread. Assuming the desired key was
in the list, deletion linearizes at the initial, pointer-marking CAS; assuming the desired key
was absent, insertion linearizes at the single CAS that adds its node to the list. (Linearization
points differ for lookups and for failed deletions and insertions; see below.)
    As in the Treiber stack, the ABA problem becomes an issue if nodes can be reused.
Harris’s algorithm assumes the existence of general-purpose garbage collection (e.g., based
on reference counts) that will refrain from reclaiming nodes until all existing references have
disappeared. Michael (2002b) refined the algorithm to accommodate memory management
based either on counted pointers and a type-preserving allocator (as in the Treiber stack) or
on hazard pointers (Michael 2004b) (to be discussed in Sec. 8.7). This refinement hinged on
a key observation that general garbage collection can be avoided as long as threads do not
dereference marked pointers. Thus, whereas Harris’s algorithm allows traversal of marked
nodes, Michael’s refinement does not.
    The counted pointer version of the list, adapted from Michael’s paper and augmented with
appropriate synchronizing instructions, appears in Figures 8.4 and 8.5. While it requires a
double-width CAS to update a pointer and count simultaneously, it has the advantage of easy
adaptation to applications in which a node must be moved from one list to another, without
waiting for stale references to expire.
    The heart of the Harris & Michael algorithm is the search routine, shown in Figure 8.4,
and called in turn by insert, delete, and lookup (Figure 8.5). For the sake of notational
convenience, search is designed to “return” three values—PREVp, CURR, and NEXT as
thread-local variables. CURR is a counted-pointer reference to the first node, if any, with a
key greater than or equal to the searched-for value. PREVp is a conventional pointer to the
counted pointer in the list that refers to CURR. NEXT is a counted-pointer reference to the

 type ptr = ⟨bool d, node* p, int c⟩                       // markable counted pointer
 type node
      atomic<value> val
      atomic<ptr> next
 class list
      atomic<ptr> head
 // thread-private variables, changed by search:
 atomic<ptr>* PREVp
 ptr CURR, NEXT
 // Find first node N (or null) where val is ≥ v. On return, CURR refers to N (or is null);
 // PREVp points at ptr that referred to N; NEXT caches N’s next ptr (if any).
 private bool list.search(value v):
       loop
            PREVp := &head
            CURR := PREVp→load()
            loop
                 if CURR.p = null                          // v is bigger than anything in list
                      return false
                 NEXT := CURR.p→next.load()
                 value cv := CURR.p→val.load()
                 if PREVp→load() ̸= ⟨false, CURR.p, CURR.c⟩
                      continue outer loop                  // list has been changed; start over
                 if NEXT.d
                      // node has been marked deleted; attempt to link it out
                      if PREVp→CAS(⟨false, CURR.p, CURR.c⟩, ⟨false, NEXT.p, CURR.c+1⟩)
                            free for reuse(CURR.p)         // type-preserving
                            NEXT.c := CURR.c+1
                      else continue outer loop             // list has been changed; start over
                 else
                      if cv ≥ v return cv = v
                      PREVp := &CURR.p→next
                 CURR := NEXT

Figure 8.4 The H&M lock-free list, as presented by Michael (2002b) (definitions and internal search
routine), with counted pointers to solve the ABA problem. Synchronizing instructions have been
added to the original, but no attempt has been made to specify minimal ordering. CAS instructions
are assumed to be write atomic.

node, if any, that follows CURR. The various cases that arise near the beginning and end of
the list are illustrated in Figure 8.6.
   In Sec. 3.1.2 we mentioned the existence of algorithms in which a run-time check allows a
method to determine that it linearized at some previous instruction. The H&M list is such an
algorithm. As noted above, successful insertions and deletions linearize at CAS operations
that occur after the call to search. Unsuccessful insertions (attempts to insert an already
present key), unsuccessful deletions (attempts to remove an already missing key), and all
calls to lookup linearize within the search routine. If the list is empty, the linearization

 bool list.insert(value v):
     if search(v) return false
     node* n := new node(v, ⟨false, CURR.p, 0⟩)
     loop
            // note that CAS is ordered after initialization/update of node
            if PREVp→CAS(⟨false, CURR.p, CURR.c⟩, ⟨false, n, CURR.c+1⟩)
                 return true
            if search(v)
                 free(n)           // node has never been seen by others
                 return false
            n→next := ⟨false, CURR.p, 0⟩
 bool list.delete(value v):
     loop
            if ¬search(v) return false
            // attempt to mark node as deleted:
            if ¬CURR.p→next.CAS(⟨false, NEXT.p, NEXT.c⟩, ⟨true, NEXT.p, NEXT.c+1⟩)
                  continue                               // list has been changed; start over
            // attempt to link node out of list:
            if PREVp→CAS(⟨false, CURR.p, CURR.c⟩, ⟨false, NEXT.p, CURR.c+1⟩)
                  free for reuse(CURR.p)                 // type-preserving
            else (void) search(v) // list has been changed; re-scan and clean up deleted node(s)
            return true
 bool list.lookup(value v):
     return search(v)

Figure 8.5 The H&M lock-free list (externally visible methods). Note in Figure 8.4 that PREVp,
CURR, and NEXT are thread-private variables changed by list.search.

point is the load of CURR from *PREVp, immediately before the inner loop; if the list is
non-empty, it is the last dynamic load of NEXT from CURR.p→next at the third line of the
last iteration of the inner loop. In all these intra-search cases, we don’t know that the method
has linearized until we inspect the loaded value.

8.2.2     More Recent Linked Lists

One downside of the Harris & Michael algorithm is that operations must restart their searches
from the head after failing a CAS. To avoid this inefficiency, Fomitchev and Ruppert (2004)
augmented each list node with a back pointer. When a node is removed from the list, its
back pointer is set to point to the node just before it. Of course, that previous node might
also get deleted, but an operation can always follow back pointers until it finds an unmarked
node—one that has not been deleted. This process eliminates the need to restart from the
head.
   Heller et al. (2005) took a different approach, designing a list whose updates acquire
fine-grained locks (blocking other updates), but whose searches are wait-free (as opposed

                  PREVp   CURR       NEXT                         PREVp    CURR      NEXT

                 10             20          30                   10             20          30
        head                                            head
                          (a)                                             (b)

                  PREVp   CURR       NEXT                         PREVp    CURR      NEXT

                 10             20          30                   10             20          30
        head                                            head
                          (c)                                             (d)

Figure 8.6 Searching within an H&M list. PREVp is a pointer to a markable counted pointer (ptr);
CURR and NEXT are ptrs. Diagrams (a), (b), (c), and (d) show the final positions of PREVp, CURR,
and NEXT when the searched-for value is ≤ 10, ≤ 20, ≤ 30, and > 30, respectively. The return value
of search will be true if and only if the value is found precisely at *CURR.

to merely lock-free). Searches ignore marks on next pointers, and can traverse nodes even
after they have been removed from the list. The correctness argument for this strategy is
both subtle and clever.
    Timnat et al. (2015) introduced a list that improves on the back pointer idea of Fomitchev
and Ruppert. Instead of adding a separate back pointer field to each node, the algorithm reuses
the next pointer of a deleted node as the back pointer. This strategy allows an operation to find
its way back to an unmarked node simply by following next pointers (eliminating the need
to check whether a node is marked to determine whether to follow the next or back pointer).
To ensure correctness, the algorithm must simultaneously delete a node and change its next
pointer to point to the previous node.1 To effect this simultaneity, the algorithm employs a
sophisticated synchronization primitive called multi-compare-multi-swap (MCMS, a.k.a.
k-CAS), which allows changes to multiple memory addresses to occur atomically. (We
consider such higher-level constructs in Sec. 8.10.) MCMS can be implemented in software
using CAS, and can be accelerated using hardware transactional memory on certain recent
processors (Sec. 9.2).
    Braginsky and Petrank (2011a) proposed a lock-free chunked linked list algorithm. The
key idea is to reduce the impact of pointer changing by packing multiple values into each
linked list node.

1 If the back pointer were changed before the node was deleted, then a cycle would be created in the
list, and could remain in place indefinitely if the calling thread stalled or crashed. On the other hand,
if the node were deleted first and then the thread stalled or crashed, the next pointer might remain
unchanged indefinitely, and threads traversing the node would not have access to a back pointer.

                                         head    tail
                         CAS (dequeue)                  CAS 2 (enqueue)

                                           val          val           val
                            dummy node                          CAS 1
                                                                (enqueue)

Figure 8.7 Operation of the M&S queue. After appropriate preparation (“snapshotting”), dequeue
reads a value from the second node in the list, and updates head with a single CAS to remove the old
dummy node. In enqueue, two CASes are required: one to update the next pointer in the previous
final node; the other to update tail.

8.3      Queues and Deques

8.3.1    The Michael and Scott (M&S) Queue

Queues are substantially more difficult than stacks to implement in a nonblocking fashion.
The most commonly used solution is due to Michael and Scott (1996, 1998). It appears
in most operating systems, and in a wide variety of run-time systems. The authors report
that it rivals or exceeds the performance of lock-based alternatives on all machines they
tested. Like the Treiber stack, the M&S queue is lock free but not wait free: it precludes
livelock, but admits the possibility of starvation. A single enqueue and a single dequeue
can proceed concurrently on a nonempty queue, without interfering with one another. If
multiple enqueues or multiple dequeues are active concurrently, one of each is guaranteed
to complete in a bounded number of steps; the others back out and retry.
   An illustration of the M&S queue appears in Figure 8.7. Code appears in Figure 8.8.
Where the Treiber stack expected a node to be passed to push and returned from pop, we
have written enqueue to expect (and dequeue to return) a simple value. We assume the
existence of a distinguished error value ⊥ that will be returned on any attempt to dequeue
an item from an empty queue. One could, of course, return a separate status code or throw
an exception instead.
   To avoid special cases found in prior algorithms, the M&S queue always keeps a “dummy”
node at the head of the queue. The first real item is the one in the node, if any, that follows
the dummy node. As each item is dequeued, the old dummy node is reclaimed, and the
node in which the dequeued item was located becomes the new dummy node.
   To understand the behavior of the queue, it helps to consider its linearization points—to
identify instructions such that whenever the linearization point of operation A precedes the
linearization point of operation B, we will know that operation A, as a whole, linearizes
before operation B.
   A successful dequeue operation linearizes straightforwardly at the CAS that moves the
head pointer. An unsuccessful dequeue (one that returns ⊥) linearizes at the load of n in

 type ptr = ⟨node* p, int c⟩                                // counted pointer
 type node
      atomic<value> val
      atomic<ptr> next
 class queue
      atomic<ptr> head
      atomic<ptr> tail
 void queue.init()
      node* n := new node(⊥, null)                          // initial dummy node
      head.p := tail.p := n
 void queue.enqueue(value v):
      node* w := new node(v, null);                         // allocate node for new value
      ptr t, n
      loop
            t := tail.load()                                // counted pointers
            n := t.p next.load()
            if t = tail.load()                              // are t and n consistent?
                  if n.p = null                             // was tail pointing to the last node?
                         if t.p next.CAS(n, ⟨w, n.c+1⟩)     // try to add w at end of list
                               break                        // success; exit loop
                  else                                      // tail was not pointing to the last node
                         (void) tail.CAS(t, ⟨n.p, t.c+1⟩)   // try to swing tail to next node
      (void) tail.CAS(t, ⟨w, t.c+1⟩)                        // try to swing tail to inserted node
 value queue.dequeue():
     ptr h, t, n
     loop
          h := head.load()                                 // counted pointers
          t := tail.load()
          n := h.p next.load()
          value rtn
          if h = head.load()                               // are h, t, and n consistent?
                 if h.p = t.p                              // is queue empty or tail falling behind?
                       if n.p = null return ⊥              // empty; return failure
                       (void) tail.CAS(t, ⟨n.p, t.c+1⟩)    // tail is falling behind; try to update
                 else                                      // no need to deal with tail
                       // read value before CAS; otherwise another dequeue might free n
                       rtn := n.p val.load()
                       if head.CAS(h, ⟨n.p, h.c+1⟩)        // try to swing head to next node
                             break                         // success; exit loop
     free for reuse(h.p)                                   // type-preser ving
     return rtn                                            // queue was nonempty; return success

Figure 8.8 The M&S lock-free queue, with counted pointers to solve the ABA problem.

the last iteration of the loop. An enqueue operation is somewhat trickier: it requires a pair
of updates: one to make the next field of the most recent previously enqueued node point
to the new node, and one to make the tail pointer point to it. The update to the next pointer
constitutes the linearization point; the update of the tail is cleanup, and can be performed
by any thread.
Consistent Snapshots. Prior to its linearization point, enqueue must read both the
tail pointer and, subsequently, tail.p→next. To ensure that these reads are mutually
consistent—that no other enqueue linearizes in-between—the code re-reads tail after read-
ing tail.p→next. Since every change to tail increments tail.c, we can be sure (absent rollover)
that there was a moment in time at which both locations held the values read, simultaneously.
A subsequent CAS of tail.p→next will be attempted only if tail.p→next.p is null; given
the use of counted pointers, the CAS will be successful only if tail.p→next has not changed
since it was read. Since a node is never removed from the list unless it has a non-null suc-
cessor (which will become the new dummy node), we can be sure that our new node will be
linked into the queue only as the successor to an end-of-list node that has not been re-used
since it was pointed at by tail.
    The dequeue operation, for its part, re-reads head after reading tail and head.p→next.
Since an enqueue operation can move tail farther away from head, but never closer, we
can be sure, if the values read for head and tail are not equal, that the queue cannot become
empty until head changes: a successful CAS that expects the original value of head cannot
cause head to move past tail. Similarly, since a node is never removed from the queue
without changing head, a successful CAS that expects the original value of head can be
sure that the previously read value of head.p→next is the right value to install as the new
head.
Memory Management. As in the Treiber Stack, Michael and Scott employ a type-preserving
allocator to ensure that (1) the word occupied by a node’s next pointer is never reused for a
purpose that might inappropriately exhibit the same bit pattern used for the counted pointer
and (2) the space occupied by a removed node is never returned to the operating system
(allowing an access to trigger a segmentation fault). As we shall see in Sec. 8.7, various
other approaches can also be used for safe memory reclamation.
    Over the years, several techniques have been proposed to improve the performance of
nonblocking queues. Ladan-Mozes and Shavit (2008) effect an enqueue with a single CAS
by using an MCS-style list in which the operation linearizes at the update of the tail pointer,
and the forward link is subsequently created with an ordinary store. If a dequeue-ing thread
finds that the next node has not yet been “linked in” (as may happen if a thread is delayed),
it must traverse the queue from the tail to fix the broken connection. Hoffman et al. (2007)
observe that enqueue operations (and likewise dequeue operations) that overlap in time
can linearize correctly in arbitrary order; they leverage this fact to structure the queue as an
ordered list of internally unordered “baskets,” whose contents can be accessed concurrently.
Hendler et al. (2010b) use flat combining (Sec. 5.4) to improve locality in high-contention

workloads by arranging for multiple pending operations to be performed by a single thread.
Morrison and Afek (2013) observe that both the overhead of memory management and the
contention caused by failed-and-repeating CAS operations can be dramatically reduced by
structuring the queue as an ordered list of array-based ring buffers. Elements of this Linked
Concurrent Ring Queue can in most cases be enqueued and dequeued using fetch_and_
increment.

8.3.2    Double-Ended Queues

Unlike a stack, which permits insertions and deletions at one end of a list, and a queue,
which permits insertions at one end and deletions at the other, a double-ended queue, or
deque (pronounced “deck” or “deek”) permits insertions and deletions at both ends (but still
not in the middle). In comparison to stacks and queues, deques have fewer practical uses. The
most compelling sequential use, perhaps, occurs in the elegant O(n) convex hull algorithm
of Melkman (1987). The most familiar is probably the history or undo list of an interactive
application: new operations are pushed onto the head of the list, undone operations are
popped off the head, and old operations are dropped off the tail as the list continues to grow
(there are, however, no insertions at the tail).
    For nonblocking concurrent programming, deques have long been a subject of intrinsic
intellectual interest, because they are more complex than stacks and queues, but still simpler
than structures like search trees. The original CAS-based lock-free deque is due to Michael
(2003). Where the enqueue operation of the M&S queue employed a two-step update
(in which the second step could be helped by any thread), the push_left and push_right
operations of Michael’s dequeue both employ three-step updates. We describe this algorithm
in the first subsection below. We then consider an algorithm due to Herlihy et al. (2003a),
which achieves a significant reduction in complexity by using obstruction freedom rather
than lock freedom as its liveness criterion. Michael’s deque employs an unbounded, doubly
linked list. The deque of Herlihy et al. employs a circular array. Graichen et al. (2016) show
how to extend the latter to be unbounded and still extremely simple. Other algorithms can be
found in the literature; in particular, Sundell and Tsigas (2008b) use their lock-free doubly
linked lists to construct an unbounded nonblocking dequeue in which operations on the head
and tail can proceed in parallel.
    In addition to uses inherited from sequential programming, concurrent deques have a
compelling application of their own: the management of tasks in a work-stealing scheduler.
We consider this application in the final subsection below.

Unbounded Lock-Free Deques
The lock-free deque of Michael (2003) uses a single, double-width, CAS-able memory
location (the “anchor”) to hold the head and tail pointers of the list, together with a 2-bit

                                                        pop

                                                        push
                                             S0                      S1
                                           STABLE                STABLE

                        Li                                                              Ri
                                                                     ?
                       LPUSH                                                           RPUSH
                                                                     ?
                                                  pop                v
                                ?                                                              X   ?
                                                              push
              ?    X                                                             ?
              v    v           v                                                 v             v   v
                                                        S2+
                                                      STABLE
                               push_left                                  push_right

                                                                 ?
                        Lc                                                              Rc
                                                  ?
                       LPUSH                      v              v                     RPUSH

                                ?                                                                  ?
              ?                                                                  ?
              v    v            v                                                v             v   v
                                                        pop

Figure 8.9 Operation of a lock-free deque (figure adapted from Michael (2003)). Blue arrows indicate
state transitions. In each state, the anchor word is shown at top, comprising the head pointer, status
flag, and tail pointer. Nodes in the queue (oriented vertically) contain right and left pointers and a
value (‘v’). Interior nodes are elided in the figure, as suggested by dashed arrows. A left or right
push from state S2 is a three-step process. Nodes in the process of being inserted are shown in
gray. Question marks indicate immaterial values, which will not be inspected. An ‘X’ indicates a
temporarily incorrect (incoherent) pointer.

status flag that can take on any of three possible values: STABLE, LPUSH, and RPUSH.
For ABA-safe memory allocation, the algorithm can be augmented with hazard pointers
(Michael 2004b). Alternatively, it can be modified to rely on counted pointers, but to fit
two of these plus the status flag in a single CAS-able anchor—even one of double width—
the “pointers” must be indices into a bounded-size pool of nodes. If this is unacceptable,
double-width LL / SC can be emulated with an extra level of indirection (Michael 2004a).
   Operations on the deque are illustrated in Figure 8.9. At any given point in time, the
structure will be in one of seven functionally distinct states. Blue arrows in the figure indicate
state transitions effected by push_left, pop_left, push_right, and pop_right operations
(arrows labeled simply “push” or “pop” cover both left and right cases).
   Three states are STABLE, as indicated by their status flag: they require no cleanup to
complete an operation. In S0 the dequeue is empty—the head and tail pointers are null. In
S1 there is a single node, referred to by both head and tail. In S2+ there are two or more
nodes, linked together with left and right pointers.

   Four states—those with status flags LPUSH and RPUSH—are transitory: their contents
are unambiguous, but they require cleanup before a new operation can begin. To ensure
nonblocking progress, the cleanup can be performed by any thread. In a push_right from
state S2 , for example, an initial CAS changes the status flag of the anchor from STABLE to
RPUSH and simultaneously updates the tail pointer to refer to a newly allocated node. (This
node has previously been initialized to contain the to-be-inserted value and a left pointer
that refers to the previous tail node.) These changes to the anchor move the deque to the
incoherent state Ri , in which the right pointer of the second-to-rightmost node is incorrect.
A second CAS fixes this pointer, moving the deque to the coherent state Rc ; a final CAS
updates the status flag, returning the deque to state S2+ .
   The actual code for the deque is quite complex. Various operations can interfere with one
another, but Michael proves that an operation fails and starts over only when some other
operation has made progress.

Obstruction-Free Bounded and Unbounded Deques
The principal shortcoming of Michael’s deque is the need to colocate the head and tail
pointers. This colocation not only raises issues of how many bits will fit in a CAS-able word:
it also implies that all operations on the deque interfere with one another. While nonblocking,
they must serialize on their access to the anchor word. Ideally, we should like to arrange for
operations on opposite ends of a nonempty deque to proceed in parallel.
    At about the same time that Michael was devising his algorithm, a group at Sun (now
Oracle) Labs in Boston was developing the notion of obstruction freedom (Herlihy et al.
2003a), which we introduced in Sec. 3.2.1. Where a lock-free algorithm (such as Michael’s)
guarantees that some thread will make progress within a bounded number of steps (of any
thread), an obstruction-free algorithm guarantees only that a thread that runs by itself (without
interference from other threads) will always make progress, regardless of the starting state.
In effect, Herlihy et al. argued that since a lock-free algorithm already requires some sort
of contention management (separate from the main algorithm) to avoid the possibility of
starvation, one might as well ask that mechanism to address the possibility of livelock as
well, thereby separating issues of safety and liveness entirely. By doing so, the authors argue,
one may be able to simplify the main algorithm considerably. Double-ended queues provide
an illustrative example. Nonblocking versions of transactional memory (Chapter 9) provide
another.
    Michael’s lock-free deque employs a linked list whose length is limited only by the range
of pointers that will fit in the anchor word. By contrast, the deque of Herlihy et al. employs
a fixed-length circular array. It is most easily understood by first considering a noncircular
version, illustrated in Figure 8.10. At any given time, reading from left to right, the array will
contain one or more LN (“left null”) values, followed by zero or more data values, followed
by one or more RN (“right null”) values. To perform a push_right, one must replace the
leftmost RN with a data value; to perform a pop_right, one must read the rightmost data

                                          left      right

                         LN LN    ...   LN v        ...      v RN   ...   RN RN

Figure 8.10 The HLM obstruction-free deque. Each ‘v’ represents a data value. ‘LN’ is a left null
value; ‘RN’ is a right null value. The left and right (head and tail) pointers are hints; they point at or
near the rightmost LN and leftmost RN slots in the array.

value and replace it with an RN. The left-hand cases are symmetric. To find the leftmost RN,
one can start at any entry of the array: if it’s an RN, scan left to find the last RN; it it’s an LN
or data value, scan right to find the first RN. To reduce the time consumed, it is helpful to
know approximately where to start looking, but the indication need not be exact.
    Given these observations, the only two really tricky parts of the algorithm are, first, how to
make sure that every operation maintains the LN…v…RN structural invariant, and, second,
how to join the ends of the array to make it circular.
    The first challenge is addressed by adding a count to every element of the array, and then
arranging for every operation to modify, in an appropriate order, a pair of adjacent elements.
A push_right operation, for example, identifies the index, k, of the leftmost RN value. If
k is the rightmost slot in the array, the operation returns a “deque is full” error message.
Otherwise, it performs a pair of CASes. The first increments the count in element k − 1; the
second replaces element k with a new data value and an incremented count. A pop_right
operation goes the other way: It identifies the index, j, of the rightmost data value (if any).
It then performs its own pair of CASes. The first increments the count in element j + 1;
the second replaces element j with RN and an incremented count. Left-hand operations are
symmetric.
    The key to linearizability is the observation that only the second CAS of a pair changes the
actual content of the deque; the first ensures that any conflict with a concurrent operation will
be noticed. Since we read both locations (k − 1 and k, or j + 1 and j) before attempting a
CAS on either, if both CASes succeed, no other operation modified either location in-between.
If the first CAS fails, no change has been made. If the second CAS fails, no substantive change
has been made. In either case, the operation can simply start over. Updates to the global left
and right pointers constitute cleanup. Because the pointers are just hints, atomicity with the
rest of the operation is not required. Moreover, updates to left and right need not interfere
with one another.
    It is easy to see that the algorithm is obstruction free: an operation that observes an
unchanging array will always complete in a bounded number of steps. It is also easy to see
that the algorithm is not lock free: if a push_right and a pop_right occur at just the right
time, each can, in principle, succeed at its first CAS, fail at the second, and start over again,
indefinitely. A push_right and a push_left on an empty deque can encounter a similar

cycle. In practice, randomized backoff can be expected to resolve such conflicts quickly and
efficiently.
    To make the deque circular (as indeed it must be if pushes and pops at the two ends are not
precisely balanced), Herlihy et al. introduce one new dummy null (DN) value. The structural
invariant is then modified to allow the empty portion of the circular array to contain, in order,
zero or more RN values, zero or one DN values, and zero or more LN values. At all times,
however, there must be null values of at least two different kinds—at least one RN or DN, and
at least one DN or LN. A push_right that finds only one RN value in the array must change
the adjacent DN value, if any, into an RN first. If there is no adjacent DN, the operation must
change the leftmost LN, if any, into a DN first. In all cases, changes are made with a pair of
CASes, the first of which increments a count and the second of which is substantive.
    But circularity is not the only option! Graichen et al. (2016) observe that the same two-
CAS protocol used to manipulate a data value and the adjacent dummy value can also be
used, in a linked list of arrays, to manipulate a data value at the end of a (non-circular)
array together with an adjacent pointer to another array. This adapted protocol can then be
used to add and remove arrays on demand, allowing the now unbounded deque to expand
or contract at either end.

Work-Stealing Queues
In parallel programming languages and libraries, it is commonplace to distinguish between
threads, which are often provided by the operating system in rough proportion to the degree
of hardware parallelism, and tasks, which are logically distinct units of work to be accom-
plished. Worker threads then execute logical tasks under the direction of a user-level sched-
uler.
    Originally developed for the Cilk programming language (Blumofe et al. 1995, Frigo et al.
1998), work stealing (Blumofe and Leiserson 1994) has become the scheduling discipline
of choice for tasks. To minimize contention and maximize locality, the scheduler maintains
a separate pool of tasks for each worker thread. Upon creation, tasks are inserted into the
pool of the creating thread and, when the current task completes, a new one is chosen from
this pool. Only when the local pool is empty does a thread go looking for work elsewhere.
Strategies here differ: in the simplest case, the thread chooses a random peer and attempts
to remove a task from that peer’s pool.
    Because tasks may be quite small, it is important that insertions and deletions from the
local pool be very fast. Toward that end, Arora et al. (1998) developed a special-purpose
deque that is carefully optimized for the work stealing case. It assumes that push_right and
pop_right operations are performed by a single thread (the local one), and thus need not
be synchronized with one another. It also assumes that push_left operations never occur.
Synchronization is required only among pop_left operations and, when a deque is nearly
empty, between those operations and any concurrent push_right or pop_right operations.

   The ABP algorithm, as it is sometimes known, is both simple and clever. It has very
low constant-time overhead in the common case, and is very widely used. It does, however,
have two important limitations. First, it uses a bounded array, which limits the number of
tasks that can be pushed into the deque at any given time. Second, when tasks are “stolen”
via pop_left operations, the space cannot be reclaimed until the deque is empty; that is,
the left end index resets to zero only when the local thread “bumps into it” in the course
of a pop_right operation. Chase and Lev (2005) present an ABP extension that addresses
both limitations: it treats the array as circular, avoiding the reset problem, and it allows the
array to be resized on overflow, much like an extensible hash table. In an attempt to improve
performance when workloads are unevenly distributed, Hendler and Shavit (2002) describe
another ABP extension in which a thread can, in a single operation, steal up to half the
elements from a peer’s deque. Many additional extensions and alternatives can be found in
the literature; work stealing remains an active topic of research.

8.4      Hash Tables

In his paper on nonblocking lists, Michael (2002b) presented a straightforward extension
of his code to yield a nonblocking hash table with external chaining and a fixed number of
buckets. Each bucket of the table is the head pointer of a nonblocking list; lookup, insert,
and delete simply apply the identically-named list method to the appropriate bucket.
   The problem with this approach is that the size of the table cannot easily change. If we
lack a good a priori estimate of the number of items that will eventually belong to our set,
we need an extensible hash table. We can obtain one by protecting the table with a single
sequence lock (Sec. 6.2), which ordinary lookup, insert, and delete methods access as
“readers,” and which a thread that chooses to enlarge the table acquires as a “writer.” This
strategy preserves safety but not nonblocking progress: when a resize is in progress, lookup,
insert, and delete operations must wait. If we use RCU (Sec. 6.3) to delay reclamation of
the older, smaller table, we can allow lookup operations to proceed in parallel with resizing,
but insert and delete will still need to wait.
   Ideally, we should like resizing to be a nonblocking operation that allows not only lookup
but also insert and delete operations to continue unimpeded. Shalev and Shavit (2006)
describe an algorithm that achieves precisely this objective. It is also incremental: the costs
of a resizing operation are spread over multiple insert, delete, and lookup operations,
retaining O(1) expected time for each. The basic idea is illustrated in Figure 8.11. Instead
of a separate list of nodes in each bucket, it maintains a single list of all nodes, sorted by order
number. Given a hash function h with a range of 0 . . 2n − 1, we obtain the order number of
a node with key k by reversing the n bits of h(k) and then adding an extra least-significant
1 bit.
   Fast access into the list of nodes is provided by a collection of 2 j lazily initialized buckets,
where j is initialized to some small positive integer value i, and may increase at run time

                   00

                             11

                                   00

                                            11

                                                         01

                                                                    00

                                                                              01
              00

                        00

                                  00

                                           00

                                                    10

                                                               00

                                                                         11
              00

                        00

                                  10

                                           10

                                                    10

                                                              11

                                                                         11
        (a)             16                 17        5                   15

               0    1    2    3    2 bit hash
                   00

                             11

                                   00

                                            11

                                                         01

                                                                    01

                                                                              00

                                                                                    01
              00

                        00

                                  00

                                           00

                                                    01

                                                               10

                                                                         00

                                                                                   11
              00

                        00

                                  10

                                           10

                                                    10

                                                              10

                                                                         11

                                                                                   11
        (b)             16                 17        9          5                  15

               0    1    2    3    2 bit hash
                   00

                             11

                                   00

                                            11

                                                         01

                                                                    01

                                                                              00

                                                                                    01
              00

                        00

                                  00

                                           00

                                                    01

                                                               10

                                                                         00

                                                                                   11
              00

                        00

                                  10

                                           10

                                                    10

                                                              10

                                                                         11

                                                                                   11
        (c)             16                 17        9          5                  15

               0    1    2    3    4   5    6   7        3 bit hash

                                                                                    11
                   00

                             11

                                   00

                                            11

                                                         01

                                                                    00

                                                                              01

                                                                                              00

                                                                                                    01
                                                                                   10
              00

                        00

                                  00

                                           00

                                                    01

                                                               10

                                                                         10

                                                                                         00

                                                                                                   11
                                                                                   10
              00

                        00

                                  10

                                           10

                                                    10

                                                              10

                                                                         10

                                                                                         11

                                                                                                   11
        (d)             16                 17        9                    5        21              15

               0    1    2    3    4   5    6   7        3 bit hash
                             11
                   00

                                   00

                                            00

                                                         00

                                                                    11

                                                                              01

                                                                                    00

                                                                                              01

                                                                                                    11

                                                                                                          00

                                                                                                                01
                        00
              00

                                  00

                                           10

                                                    00

                                                               00

                                                                         01

                                                                                   10

                                                                                         10

                                                                                                   10

                                                                                                         00

                                                                                                               11
                        00
              00

                                  01

                                           01

                                                    10

                                                              10

                                                                         10

                                                                                   10

                                                                                         10

                                                                                                   10

                                                                                                         11

                                                                                                               11
        (e)             16                                     17         9               5        21          15

               0    1    2    3    4   5    6   7        3 bit hash

Figure 8.11 The nonblocking, extensible S&S hash table. Dummy nodes are shaded. Data nodes
are labeled (for illustration purposes) with the hash of their key; order numbers are shown above.
Starting from the configuration shown in (a), we have inserted a data node with hash value 9 (b),
doubled the number of buckets (c), inserted a node with hash value 21 (d), and searched for a node
with hash value 30 (e).

(up to a limit of n) to accommodate increases in the length of the list. Each initialized bucket
contains a pointer to a so-called dummy node, linked into the list immediately before the
data nodes whose top j order number bits, when reversed, give the index of the bucket. To
ensure that it appears in the proper location, the dummy node for bucket b is given an order
number obtained by reversing the j bits of b, padding on the right with n − j zeros, and
adding an extra least-significant 0 bit.
   The point of all this bit manipulation is to ensure, when we decide to increment j (and
thus double the number of buckets), that all of the old buckets will still point to the right
places in the list, and the new buckets, once they are initialized, will point to new dummy

nodes interleaved with the old ones. We can see this dynamic at work in Figure 8.11. Part (a)
shows a table containing 4 elements whose keys are not shown, but whose hash values are 5,
15, 16, and 17. For simplicity of presentation, we have assumed that n = 5, so hash values
range from 0 to 31. Above each node we have shown the corresponding order number. The
node with hash value 5, for example, has order number (001012 ) R << 1 + 1 = 1010012 .
    Still in (a), we use the two low-order bits of the hash to index into an array of 22 = 4
buckets. Slots 0, 1, and 3 contain pointers to dummy nodes. All data whose hash values are
congruent to b mod 4 are contiguous in the node list, and immediately follow the dummy
node for bucket b. Note that bucket 2, which would not have been used in the process of
inserting the four initial nodes, is still uninitialized. In (b) we have inserted a new data node
with hash value 9. It falls in bucket 1, and is inserted, according to its order number, between
the nodes with hash values 17 and 5. In (c) we have incremented j and doubled the number
of buckets in use. The buckets themselves will be lazily initialized.
    To avoid copying existing buckets (particularly given that their values may change due
to lazy initialization), we employ noncontiguous bucket arrays of exponentially increasing
size. In a simplification of the scheme of Shalev and Shavit, we can access these arrays
through a single, second-level directory (not shown). The directory can be replaced with
a single CAS. It indicates the current value of j and the locations of j − 1 bucket arrays.
The first two arrays are of size 2i (here i = 2); the next is of size 2(i+1) , and so on. Given
a key k, we compute b = h(k) mod 2 j and d = b >> i. If d = 0, b’s bucket can be found
at directory[0][b mod 2i ]. Otherwise, let m be the index of the most significant bit in d’s
binary representation; b’s bucket can be found at directory[m+1][b mod 2m+i ].
    In (d) we have inserted a new data node with hash value 21. This requires initialization of
bucket (21 mod 23 ) = 5. We identify the “parent” of bucket 5 (namely, bucket 1) by zeroing
out the most significant 1 bit in 5’s binary representation. Traversing the parent’s portion of
the node list, we find that 5’s dummy node (with order number 1010002 ) belongs between
the data nodes with hash values 9 and 5. Having inserted this node, we can then insert the
data node with hash value 21. Finally, in (e), we search for a node with hash value 30. This
requires initialization of bucket (30 mod 23 ) = 6, which recursively requires initialization
of bucket 6’s parent—namely bucket 2. Shalev and Shavit prove that the entire algorithm is
correct and nonblocking, and that given reasonable assumptions about the hash function h,
the amortized cost of insert, delete, and lookup operations will be constant.
More Recent Developments Note that the S&S hash table can only increase in size, as it
offers no mechanism for contracting the table. This limitation is lifted by Liu et al. (2014),
who present two new resizable hashing algorithms, one lock free and one wait free. The key
idea is to implement each bucket as a freezable set, which offers operations to attempt an
insertion or deletion and to permanently freeze a bucket, preventing further modifications.
An auxiliary data structure such as a list or array is then used to index the buckets, and a
collaborative helping mechanism is used to resize the auxiliary data structure.
   More sophisticated hashing algorithms have also been implemented in a lock-free way,
such as hopscotch hashing (Kelly et al. 2020), which outperforms traditional probing-based

rehashing for high load factors by requiring inserts to reorganize keys in a way that reduces
probing. The algorithm uses a multi-location compare-and-swap (Sec. 8.10) to atomically
insert a key and possibly shift a sequence of keys to different buckets in the table.
    Another wait-free resizable hash table, by Fatourou et al. (2018), relies on a powerful
wait-free universal construction. We will discuss such constructions in Sec. 8.10; briefly,
they can be used to automatically transform a sequential object into a concurrent one. The
universal construction is used to implement each bucket of the hash table as a concurrent
object. This allows buckets to be accessed independently as long as resizing is not needed.
The universal construction is also used to resize the table while synchronizing accesses to
buckets to ensure linearizability.
    An alternative to resizing, which avoids a heavyweight table expansion routine altogether,
is to store the hash table buckets at the leaves of a trie (Prokopec et al. 2012). This approach
allows individual buckets to be expanded or contracted as needed (by splitting or joining
nodes). It might be expected to increase lookup times, as the tree must be traversed to locate
the appropriate bucket, but the authors prove that expected time can be kept constant by
cashing pointers to buckets (or to nearby nodes) in a hash table that captures the two densest
levels of the tree (Prokopec 2018).

8.5      Skip Lists

Implementations of sets and dictionaries with O(log n) search time are commonly based on
trees but, as we shall see in Sec. 8.6, these are notoriously difficult to parallelize, particularly
in a nonblocking fashion. A skip list (Pugh 1990) is an alternative structure that uses ran-
domness rather than rebalancing to achieve expected logarithmic time. While nonblocking
skip lists are still quite complex, they are substantially simpler than nonblocking trees.
    All the nodes in a skip list appear on a single, sorted, “level 0” list. With probability
p (typically 1/2 ), each node also appears on a level 1 list. In general, a node on a level i
list appears on a level i + 1 list with probability p. All nodes with a given key are linked
together in a “tower.” Searching begins by traversing the high-level lists, a process that
naturally “skips” over many nodes, moving down towers to “zero in” on the correct location
using the lower-level lists.
    Fraser (2003) is credited with the first nonblocking skip list implementation. Variants
of this implementation were developed by Doug Lea, who added them to the standard
concurrency library for Java (as the ConcurrentSkipListSet and ConcurrentSkipListMap)
in December 2006. Herlihy et al. (2021, Sec. 14.4) describe a further refinement.
    Concurrently with Fraser’s work, Fomitchev developed a lock-free skip list that appeared
in his master’s thesis (Fomitchev 2003), published just two months after Fraser’s technical
report. Techniques introduced by Fomitchev and Ruppert (2004) subsequently led to a lock-
free binary search tree by Ellen et al. (2010a) that we will discuss in Sec. 8.6.1.

   There have been many recent developments improving various properties of skip lists.
We discuss a few notable examples. Dick et al. (2016) replaced towers with wheels that
contain many keys for improved memory locality, and that allow the height of a skip list
to shrink if many keys are deleted, enabling more efficient searches. Crain et al. (2013)
proposed having a background thread lazily construct towers for inserted keys, allowing
insertions to proceed more quickly (at the cost of searches for those keys being temporarily
slower until the background thread finishes constructing towers as appropriate). Daly et al.
(2018) presented a practical skip list (NUMASK) that is especially efficient on systems with
multiple processor sockets. In NUMASK, the bottom level of the skip list is distributed across
sockets, and the top levels of the skip list are replicated (cached) on each socket to reduce
inter-socket communication during searches. Aksenov et al. (2020) introduced a distribution
aware skip list called a splay list in which operations dynamically move frequently accessed
keys closer to the top of the skip list where they can be accessed more efficiently.

8.6      Search Trees

   You might wonder why this doesn’t use some kind of search tree instead, which would support
   somewhat faster search operations. The reason is that there are no known efficient lock-free
   insertion and deletion algorithms for search trees.

— A comment by Doug Lea in the code for Java’s ConcurrentSkipListMap (2006).

8.6.1    The EFRB Tree

Four years after Doug Lea’s comment, the first provably correct (linearizable) lock-free
binary search tree (BST) with efficient insertions and deletions was published by Ellen et al.
(2010a). Even though lock-free linked list designs were published as early as 1995 (Valois
1995), it took 15 years for a binary search tree to appear. This might seem surprising, since
in the single-threaded context, it is not much more difficult to implement a BST (without
balancing) than it is a linked list.
New Challenges in BSTs There are two new challenges to overcome in BSTs that do not arise
in lists. First, in the traditional internal (or node-oriented) BST taught in most undergraduate
computer science curricula, deleting a leaf, or a node with one child, is straightforward.
However, deleting a node n with two children involves locating its successor s (the node
in the tree with the next larger key), and swapping the keys of n and s, so the key to be
deleted is now in s, which is either a leaf or has one child. Finally, s is deleted using the
simpler algorithms for deleting a leaf or node with one child. In a multithreaded setting,
swapping the keys of n and s atomically would require complex synchronization. Worse, as
Figure 8.12 illustrates, even atomically deleting a key while a search is running can cause
the search to return the wrong answer.

            thread T1           70         T1                  60                                60
                  zzZZ                           zzZZ

                      50             80              50                  80            50             80

                                                                                                       T1
                 40        60                   40        70                      40

              (a) T1 starts search(60)    (b) T2 starts delete(70)            (c) delete(70) finishes, then
                  and sleeps at 50            and swaps 60, 70                     search(60) returns false!

Figure 8.12 Example of an atomic delete causing a concurrent search to return an incorrect answer.
Nodes highlighted in gray indicate changes.

                               70                         70                                     70

                     50              80         50                  90                 50             90

                40        60              40         60        80        90       40        60

                 (a) initial tree          (b) after insert(90)                  (c) after delete(80)

Figure 8.13 Sequential operations on an external BST. Nodes highlighted gray indicate changes.

   Second, since a BST node has two child pointers, marking a single pointer (as in the
Harris & Michael list of Sec. 8.2.1) is not sufficient to prevent a node from being erroneously
modified by CAS after it has been deleted: marking only one child pointer would still allow
the other to be changed.
External Trees To overcome the first challenge (swapping an internal node with its succes-
sor), the Ellen et al. (EFRB) tree is external, or leaf-oriented—every key logically present
in the tree is stored in a leaf. Internal nodes also contain keys, but these are routing keys,
which serve only to direct searches to the appropriate leaf node. Deletions in an external
BST are simplified greatly, since a key to be deleted is always found in a leaf. The sequential
algorithms for insertion and deletion in an external BST are illustrated in Figure 8.13. Note
that each successful insert adds one leaf and one routing node, and each successful delete
removes one leaf and one routing node. Each new routing node contains a duplicate of some
leaf’s key. With duplicate keys, the search tree property must be relaxed slightly: a node’s
left subtree contains strictly smaller keys, but its right subtree contains keys that are greater
than or equal to its key. The number of nodes in an external BST is at most twice that of an
internal BST containing the same keys.
Lock-free “Locking” To overcome the second challenge (marking the pointers of a to-be-
deleted node), each node (not pointer) has a dedicated update field that behaves like a sort
of “lock-free lock,” synchronizing threads’ updates to the node. Crucially, these “lock-free
locks” grant exclusive access to the operation, rather than the thread. Whenever a node

is “locked,” its update field points to a descriptor that contains information about what
the operation holding the lock is trying to do. Whenever a thread encounters a node that is
“locked” in this way, instead of waiting (or blocking) until the node is “unlocked,” the thread
can instead help the operation that holds the “lock” to finish by performing steps outlined
in the descriptor, after which it can “unlock” the node.2 In the EFRB tree, a thread helps
another operation O only if its own operation is blocked by O.
    A single operation can potentially have many concurrent helpers. One might wonder why
inconsistencies cannot be caused by helpers performing important steps multiple times, or
out of order. The key ideas for consistent helping are (1) to perform modifications via a
sequence of CAS steps, and (2) to ensure that each CAS step can succeed only once (the first
time it is performed). This makes helping idempotent. Similar ideas underlie the steps of the
Michael deque of Sec. 8.3.2.
    The update field of an EFRB tree node conceptually stores two separate fields ⟨state, info⟩
within a single word. The state field can hold one of four possible values—Clean, IFlag,
DFlag or Mark; the info points to a descriptor.3 The Clean state indicates that the node
is “unlocked”. The IFlag and DFlag states indicate that the node is “locked” for an
insert or delete operation, respectively. We think of a node with state Mark as being
“locked” indefinitely by the operation that deleted it (so no other operation can “lock” it to
modify it).
    When a node is currently “locked” by an operation, the info field points to the descriptor
for that operation (an InsertFlag descriptor for insert or a DeleteFlag descriptor for delete).
Otherwise info points to the descriptor for the last operation that “locked” the node. A node
can have its child pointers changed by an operation only while the node is “locked” for that
operation, and a “locked” node can be changed only in accordance with the operation that
“locked” it. A node’s key is immutable once set: only its left and right pointers and update
field can change.
Lookup Operation A particularly surprising property of the EFRB tree is that lookup
operations do not need to perform any synchronization between threads. More specifically,
a lookup(key) operation behaves exactly as it would in a sequential external BST. It simply
does a binary search on the tree starting at the root, and continues until it reaches a leaf
(oblivious to the actions of other concurrent threads). If it reaches a leaf containing key,
then it returns true. Otherwise it returns false. Pseudocode appears in Figures 8.14 and 8.15.

2 The idea of “lock-free mutual exclusion” was introduced by Barnes (1993b) in his description of a
“cooperative technique” for lock-free synchronization. One could sensibly view the EFRB tree as a
specialization of Barnes’ approach that uses compare and swap instead of load-link/store-conditional,
and has several distinct descriptor types. More recently, Ben-David et al. (2022) generalized and
further formalized this idea. The specific flagging and marking techniques in the EFRB tree paper
were inspired by earlier work by Fomitchev and Ruppert (2004).
3 Note that if descriptors are word-aligned on a 32-bit architecture, then the two least significant bits
of any descriptor pointer are zero, so these two bits are conceptually free to store the state. On a
64-bit architecture, three bits are free.

 type node                                             enum state Clean, IFlag, DFlag, Mark
     const keytype key                                 type info = insertflag or deleteflag
      atomic<node*> left                               type updateptr = ⟨state, info*⟩
      atomic<node*> right
      atomic<updateptr> update                         type insertflag
          // initially ⟨Clean, null⟩                       node* const p
                                                           node* const target
 class tree                                                node* const newInternal
     node* const root = new node with key ∞,
           and two new children with key ∞             type deleteflag
                                                           node* const gp
 bool tree.lookup(keytype key):                            node* const p
     ⟨-, -, -, -, target⟩ := search(key)                   node* const target
     return (target→key = key)                             const updateptr pupdate

 bool tree.insert(keytype key):
     loop
          ⟨-, -, p, pupdate, target⟩ := search(key)
          if target→key = key then return false

           if pupdate.state ̸= Clean then help(pupdate)
           else
                node* newleaf := new node(key, null, null)
                node* newsibling := new node(target→key, null, null)
                node* n := (key < target→key)
                         ? new node(target→key, newleaf, newsibling)
                         : new node(key, newsibling, newleaf)

                updateptr update := ⟨IFlag, new insertflag(p, target, newinternal)⟩
                if p→update.CAS(pupdate, update)
                     help(update)
                     return true

 bool tree.delete(keytype key):
     loop
          ⟨gp, gpupdate, p, pupdate, target⟩ := search(key)
          if target→key ̸= key then return false

           if gpupdate.state ̸= Clean then help(gpupdate)
           else if pupdate.state ̸= Clean then help(pupdate)
           else
                updateptr update := ⟨DFlag, new deleteflag(gp, p, target, pupdate)⟩
                if gp→update.CAS(gpupdate, update)
                     help(update)
                     return true

Figure 8.14 EFRB BST: data types and public methods.

      private tuple tree.search(keytype key):
           node * gp := null
           updateptr gpupdate := null
           node* p := root
           updateptr pupdate := p→update.load()
           node* l := p→left.load()
           while l→left.load() ̸= null
                gp := p ; p := l ; gpupdate := pupdate
                pupdate := p→update.load() // must be read before l→left or l→right
                l := (key < l→key) ? l→left.load() : l→right.load()
           return ⟨gp, gpupdate, p, pupdate, l⟩

      private void tree.help(updateptr update)
           if update.state = DFlag then help delete(update.info)
           else if update.state = IFlag then help insert(update.info)
           else if update.state = Mark then help marked(update.info)

      private void tree.help insert(insertflag* desc)
           cas child(desc→p, desc→target, desc→newInternal)
           desc→p→update.CAS(⟨IFlag, desc⟩, ⟨Clean, desc⟩)

      private void tree.help delete(deleteflag* desc)
           desc→p→update.CAS(desc→pupdate, ⟨Mark, desc⟩)
           updateptr result := desc→p→update.load()
           if result.state = Mark or result.info = desc→pupdate
                 help marked(desc)
           else
                 help(result)
                 desc→gp→update.CAS(⟨DFlag, desc⟩, ⟨Clean, desc⟩)

      private void tree.help marked(deleteflag* desc)
           // identify the other child of p (that is not desc→target)
           node* other := desc→p→right.load()
           if other = desc→target then other := desc→p→left.load()
           cas child(desc→gp, desc→p, other)
           desc→gp→update.CAS(⟨DFlag, desc⟩, ⟨Clean, desc⟩)

      private void tree.cas child(node* parent, node* exp, node* newnode):
           if exp = parent→left.load() then parent→left.CAS(exp, newnode)
           else if exp = parent→right.load() then parent→right.CAS(exp, newnode)
           // note: can convert the else-if into an else (dropping the condition) if that is faster

Figure 8.15 EFRB BST: private methods.

    To build some intuitive understanding of why this lookup algorithm is linearizable,
consider the following. Suppose a lookup(key) finds a leaf containing key and returns
true. If that leaf is in the tree when lookup reads its key, then the lookup can be linearized
at that read. However, the leaf might have been deleted by the time lookup reads its key.
In this case, note that the leaf was in the tree at some point during the lookup (otherwise it
could not have been found). Since a node’s key is never changed, the key read by lookup is
the same key that was in the leaf when the leaf was last in the tree, and the lookup can be
linearized at that time.
    On the other hand, if the lookup does not find key, we need to argue that it is correct
to return false. This is where the difference between internal and external BSTs becomes
clear. In an internal BST, a lookup could miss the key it is looking for, even though that key
is present in the tree throughout the entire lookup, because that key is swapped to a higher
location in the tree. In an external BST, no such swap can occur. If a key is present in the
tree throughout an entire lookup, then the lookup will find the leaf that contains it. On the
other hand, if a key is present for part of a lookup, and is deleted during the lookup, we
can linearize a return value of false just after the key is deleted.
Insert Operation To perform an insert(key) operation, a thread first searches the tree for
key to determine the leaf, target, where the key should be inserted, as well as the parent
of that leaf. This search is similar to lookup(key), but before reading a node’s child pointer,
its update field is read. Let parentUpdate be the value read from the update field of the
parent during the search. This value will be used as the expected value of a CAS if/when
the insert attempts to “lock” the parent. By remembering parentUpdate, we will be able to
detect any changes to parent between the search and a subsequent “lock” attempt.
    If the search finds key in the tree already, insert returns false, and is linearized as a
lookup(key). Suppose, then, that the search does not find key. In this case, the thread
would like to “lock” parent so it can insert key. “Locking” parent involves creating a
new descriptor and storing it in parent.update, and we would like to avoid the overhead
of allocating that object if parent is already “locked.” So, if parent is already “locked” by
another operation O, then the thread helps O to complete, by using the information encoded
in O’s descriptor, and then restarts its own operation from the beginning.
    If parent is not already locked (either initially or after helping and restarting), insert uses
CAS to try to “lock” parent by changing parent.update from parentUpdate to ⟨IFlag, desc⟩.
If the CAS fails (insert is unable to “lock” parent), then the insert operation restarts from
the beginning.4 If the CAS succeeds, successfully “locking” parent, then parent has not
changed since its contents were read during the search. Briefly, this is because modifying
parent would have required “locking” it, changing the contents of parent.update to point
to a different descriptor and ensuring that the CAS would fail.

4 When the insert restarts, it can either free or reuse the InsertFlag descriptor that it allocated, since
the CAS failure means no other thread can have a pointer to that descriptor.

                                                                            InsertFlag               state IFlag

          parent 70                                parent 70                                                       70
                               target                                   target
              50              80        90 n           50              80         90 n                   50             80        90

         40        60              80     90      40        60               80     90              40        60             80        90

         (a) create three new nodes               (b) create new InsertFlag                        (c) “lock” parent using CAS

          state IFlag                                   state Clean

                         70                                            70

               50             80        90                   50              80          90

          40        60             80        90         40        60               80         90

        (d) replace target using CAS                   (e) “unlock” parent using CAS

Figure 8.16 EFRB algorithm to perform insert(90). Suppose the thread searches for 90, locating
the target node where 90 should be inserted, and its parent, and sees that parent is not “locked” by
another operation. After step (c) the insert might be helped.

   Once parent is “locked,” and the newly created descriptor can be reached from
parent.update, other threads might help this operation to complete. So, any of the steps
from this point on could be performed by different helper threads, making it more natural for
us to think of steps as being performed by the operation, rather than any particular thread.
The next step is to replace the target node with n using CAS. Where traditional locking
would allow this step to be accomplished with an ordinary store, we have potentially many
helper threads attempting to perform the step concurrently; we therefore use CAS to ensure it
happens only once (and specifically while this node is “locked” ). Finally, the operation uses
CAS to “unlock” parent by changing its update field from ⟨IFlag, desc⟩ to ⟨Clean, desc⟩.
   Note that all of the information needed by helpers to perform these last two steps (replac-
ing target with n and “unlocking” parent) can be found in desc. Helpers do not need
to perform any other, earlier steps, since prior to these two steps other threads cannot be
blocked by the insert.
Delete Operation The algorithm for a delete(key) operation begins much as insert(key). It
first searches for key to determine the target, parent, and also grandparent (or gparent)
nodes. Let parentUpdate and gparentUpdate be the values read from the update fields of
parent and gparent, respectively, during the search.
    If the search does not find key, delete returns false and is linearized as a lookup(key),
returning true. Suppose, then, that the search does find key. In this case, the thread would
like to “lock” gparent and parent, and replace parent and target with the sibling of target,
removing parent and target from the tree. If gparent or parent are already “locked” by

                                       gparentUpdate
                              Clean              parentUpdate

                        gparent        60           Clean                      60

                                                                                                           DeleteFlag
                             30                  90 parent           30                  90

                        20        50        70      90 target   20        50        70        90

                        (a) tree before delete(90)              (b) create new DeleteFlag descriptor

                          DFlag

                               60                                                 60

                     30                  90                             30                  90              Mark

                20        50        70        90                   20        50        70        90

                     (c) “lock” gparent using CAS                         (d) “lock” parent using CAS

                                                                           Clean

                             60                                                 60

                   30                  90                             30                  90

              20        50        70        90                   20        50        70        90

             (e) replace parent, target with sibling                 (f) “unlock” gparent using CAS

Figure 8.17 EFRB algorithm to perform delete(90). Suppose the thread searches for 90, locating
the target node containing 90, and its parent and gparent, and sees that neither node is “locked.”
After step (c) the delete might be helped.

another operation O, the thread helps O, then restarts its own delete. Otherwise, the thread
proceeds as in Figure 8.17.
   The steps are similar to those in insert, except here two nodes are “locked.” The first is
“locked” with state DFlag in step (c); the second is “locked” with state Mark in step (d),
since it is being removed from the tree. There is no need to “lock” (or Mark) the leaf target
that is being removed, since leaves cannot be changed. If the CAS in step (c) fails, the delete
restarts from the beginning. If the CAS in step (d) fails, the delete performs a CAS to try to
“unlock” gparent by changing gparent.update from ⟨DFlag, desc⟩ to ⟨Clean, desc⟩ before

restarting from the beginning.5 CAS steps (d) through (f) might be performed by helpers;
with some care, one can argue that only the first CAS executed in each step (by any helper,
including the thread that started the delete) can succeed. Once both nodes are “locked,” the
operation is guaranteed to succeed.
Helping Helping an insert operation O entails inspecting O’s descriptor and performing
steps (d) and (e) shown in Figure 8.16. Helping a delete operation O entails inspecting
O’s descriptor and performing steps (d), (e) and (f) shown in Figure 8.17.6 Note that help-
ing delete involves “locking” a node (parent), whereas helping insert does not. For a
given DeleteFlag descriptor, the parent node can be “locked” successfully by at most one
helper (including the thread that initially started the delete), because all helpers use the
parentUpdate value saved in the DeleteFlag descriptor as the expected value for their
“locking” CAS. This shared expected value avoids scenarios in which a slow helper might
wake up after sleeping for a long time, “lock” the parent, and inappropriately modify it,
long after the delete is over.
    Note that helping does not trivially guarantee lock-free progress. Helping an insert oper-
ation always results in forward progress, since an insert is guaranteed to succeed once it
successfully flags a node (and it cannot be helped until it has flagged a node). However,
delete operations might fail to mark the parent after successfully flagging the gparent.
The progress proof for the EFRB tree, which appears in the authors’ technical report (Ellen
et al. 2010b), is quite subtle. Intuitively, a delete can fail because a lock-free “lock” it wants
to acquire is already held by another operation deeper in the tree, but eventually, some thread
must hold the deepest lock in the tree and thus make progress.
Time Complexity Analyzing the worst-case time complexity of concurrent data structures
is extremely difficult, because the time taken by an operation may depend on the actions of
concurrent threads (which may in turn depend on how threads are scheduled to run). In fact,
in a lock-free data structure, the time to complete a given operation can be unbounded, if the
operation is starved by other operations (some of which do complete in bounded time). For
this reason, it often makes sense to amortize the worst-case time complexity over a sequence
of operations instead.
    The paper that introduced the EFRB tree did not present any complexity analysis, but
follow-up work by Ellen et al. (2014) showed that the original EFRB tree has a rather poor
worst-case amortized time complexity of O(hc) steps per operation, where h is the height
of the tree at the start of the operation, and c is the number of concurrent threads. The cause
of this poor complexity is the fact that operations search again from the root whenever they
encounter contention.

5 In this case, the descriptor cannot be immediately freed or reused once the delete restarts, since it
was made reachable from parent.update. Instead, it must be freed using a safe memory reclamation
algorithm for nonblocking data structures.
6 If a helper fails the CAS in step (d) because parent is “locked” by a different operation, the helper
also tries to “unlock” gparent using CAS. Only the first such CAS can succeed, and only if no helper
performed a successful CAS in step (d).

   Ellen et al. (2014) improved this result in a surprisingly simple variant of the EFRB tree.
Rather than searching again from the root, the idea is to have an operation search from a
nearby ancestor. Since the tree does not contain any parent pointers, each thread pushes the
nodes it visits during a traversal into a thread-local stack. This stack can then be used by an
operation to find a suitable ancestor from which to continue the search. This simple change
improved the worst-case amortized time complexity to O(h + c) per operation (replacing
the multiplicative contention term above with an additive term).
Practical Performance Complexity results like the above are, unfortunately, few and far
between. It is much more common for researchers working on concurrent data structures
to implement their algorithms and then make performance claims based on benchmarks on
real systems. A rigorous experimental performance comparison of concurrent BSTs can be
found in a study by Arbel-Raviv et al. (2018).

8.6.2     Other Advances in Nonblocking Trees

Helping without Descriptors Natarajan and Mittal (2014) showed that a lock-free external
BST could be implemented without using descriptor objects. The key ideas were to flag
pointers, rather than nodes, and to have helpers infer the steps that they should perform
by inspecting the fields of nearby nodes, rather than referring to a descriptor. Intuitively,
descriptors are unnecessary if the information needed to facilitate helping can be found
elsewhere. The resulting algorithm performs fewer memory allocations and fewer CAS
instructions than the EFRB BST.
Lock-free Internal BSTs Howley and Jones (2012) used techniques similar to those of the
EFRB BST, but implemented an internal BST (the HJ tree). In so doing, they had to tackle
the difficult two-child deletion case, in which a key must be relocated. Their solution was
to (1) flag both the node u whose key should be deleted and the successor v whose key will
be relocated; (2) copy v’s key into u; (3) unflag u; and (4) delete v. In contrast to the EFRB
tree, where searches did not help other operations, a search for key k in the HJ tree must help
any relocation it encounters, in order to determine whether k is the moving key. Searches
also remember the last ancestor whose right child they followed. Intuitively, that ancestor is
the predecessor pred of the final node that the search will visit, so if k is relocated after the
search visits pred, then k can be found by looking at pred.7
    Ramachandran and Mittal (2015) combined the techniques of the HJ tree and the Natara-
jan and Mittal tree, introducing a descriptor-free internal BST that flags edges instead of
nodes.

7 Technically, if k is subsequently deleted, or moved again, then it cannot be found by looking at pred;
to handle this possibility, the algorithm has a mechanism to determine whether pred has changed
since the search visited it, in which case the search will restart.

Lock-Free B+Trees Braginsky and Petrank (2012) introduced a lock-free balanced B+tree,
(a tree with fat nodes that contain many keys and child pointers). The design is modular:
Its nodes are implemented using a lock-free “chunk” mechanism that was previously used
by the same authors to build linked lists (2011a). Synchronization is based on CAS, and is
more complex than in the binary trees discussed above.
Trees Using Higher-Level Synchronization Higher-level synchronization constructs,
which we will explore in Sec. 8.10, have also been used to design many lock-free trees.
The k-CAS (Harris et al. 2002) construct, for example, allows k addresses to be compared
and modified atomically. It has been used to implement binary search trees and variants of
B-trees (see, e.g., Arulraj et al. (2018), Fraser (2003)).
   The LLX / SCX constructs of Brown et al. (2013) have been used to design a template that
can be followed to produce lock-free implementations of many tree-based data structures, in
which pointers are directed only from parents to children (i.e., without parent pointers, sibling
pointers, etc.) (Brown et al. 2014). Examples include a variety of balanced search trees,
including chromatic trees, relaxed AVL trees, relaxed (a, b)-trees and B-slack trees (Brown
2017b), as well as weak AVL trees (He and Li 2016). LLX / SCX-based chromatic trees
containing n keys have been shown by Ko (2020) to have worst-case amortized complexity
of O(log(n) + c), which is asymptotically optimal (Attiya and Fouren 2017). As of 2023,
Ko’s is the only amortized complexity result, to our knowledge, for a lock-free balanced
tree.
   Recently, a generalization of k-CAS, called PathCAS (Brown et al. 2022), has been used to
design many lock-free algorithms, including unbalanced and balanced external and internal
BSTs, variants of B-trees, skip-lists, hash tables, hash lists, and dynamic data structures for
graph connectivity.
Blocking Updates with (Mostly) Lock-free Searches Some data structures use locks to
synchronize updates, avoiding some of the complexity of fully nonblocking synchroniza-
tion, but try to avoid locking during searches. In read-mostly workloads, this intermedi-
ate approach can retain some (or even most) of the performance benefits of nonblocking
progress. Bronson et al. (2010), for example, used techniques from optimistic concurrency
control in databases to avoid taking locks during searches unless a node being read by the
search is undergoing concurrent modification. Despite having to resort to locking sometimes
during searches, this is one of the fastest concurrent binary search tree algorithms.
    Drachsler et al. (2014) introduced the logical ordering internal BST, which uses locks for
updates and has lock-free searches. The key idea is to thread the tree by placing all nodes
on a doubly linked list, ordered by their keys (so each node participates in both a search
tree and an ordered list). If a search in the tree observes an inconsistent state because of
concurrent modifications, and therefore ends up at the incorrect node, it can follow pointers
in the list to find where it ought to be.
Tries with Key Replacement Shafiei (2019) extended the flagging and marking technique
of the EFRB tree and designed a nonblocking Patricia trie. In contrast to a comparison-

based search tree, a trie stores a set of keys that are encoded as k-bit binary strings, and a
path from the root to a key is determined by the bits of the key. For example, in a binary
trie, where each node has up to two children, to find the key 17, which has bit encoding
10001, a search would move to the right child of the root, then move left, left, left and
finally right. Patricia tries implement a clever form of path compression, and can be used
to encode d-dimensional data. In addition to the usual concurrent set operations, a Patricia
trie offers a ReplaceKey(old, new) operation that can be used to, for example, update the
locations of objects in a spatial data set. As a single atomic operation, ReplaceKey checks
whether the old key is in the trie, and if so, inserts the new key and deletes the old key. If
not, ReplaceKey has no effect. The implementation of atomicity entails “locking” of the old
and new locations, with a helping scheme to ensure lock-free progress.
Doubly Logarithmic Search Recently, some sequential tree algorithms that offer doubly
logarithmic search times have been implemented in the concurrent setting. Brown et al.
(2020) presented a lock-free concurrent interpolation search tree (C-IST). In a C-IST con-
                                                             √
                                                             2
taining n keys, the root node contains an array of Θ( n) keys, the children of the root
             √4                                        √8
contain Θ( n) keys each, the grandchildren Θ( n) keys each, and so on, resulting in
a tree of height O(log log n). Within a given node of the tree, the search algorithm hunts
for the appropriate key using interpolation rather than, say, binary search. As an example,
suppose we are looking for key 200 in a node containing 500 keys, with minimum key 0
and maximum key 1000. If the keys in the node were distributed uniformly in [0, 1000], we
could expect to find our key about a fifth of the way through the array—at index 100 out of
500—so we would look there first, and scan left or right as appropriate. It turns out that linear
interpolation is effective for a large class of input key distributions dubbed smooth distribu-
tions by Mehlhorn and Tsakalidis (1993). For arbitrary distributions, the C-IST ensures that
operations complete in worst case time O(log n + c), where c is the number of concurrent
operations. For smooth distributions, its operations complete in amortized expected time
O(log log n + c).
    The SkipTrie of Oshman and Shavit (2013) combines ideas from x-fast tries and y-fast tries
(Willard 1983) to implement a lock-free trie with amortized expected time O(c log log U )
inserts and deletes, and amortized expected time O(log log U + c) searches, where U is
the size of the universe of keys (i.e., the number of keys that could possibly be inserted), and
c is the level of contention in the recent past. The algorithm is quite sophisticated, combining
concurrent hash tables, skip lists, doubly-linked lists, and an x-fast trie.

8.7      Safe Memory Reclamation (SMR)

Over the course of this chapter so far, we have made several references to the problem
of memory management in nonblocking data structures: in contrast to the situation with
lock-based structures, when a node is unlinked from a nonblocking structure, the unlinking
thread generally has no way to tell whether other active threads have references to that node.

Even if other threads will eventually notice the removal and recover (e.g., by restarting their
operations), until they do so it is generally unsafe to reclaim and reuse the node.
    As we noted in Sec. 8.1.1, the original Treiber stack used counted pointers and a type-
preserving allocator to ensure safety even in the event of reclamation and reuse. In the EFRB
tree, by contrast, Ellen et al. assumed that new nodes would always be allocated at addresses
that have never previously been used. Other authors have made similar assumptions. At
first glance, the need for unique addresses would seem to preclude freeing and then reusing
nodes, but it turns out that any algorithm that is correct under the uniqueness assumption
is also correct under the safe memory reclamation (SMR) assumption: an unlinked node
can be freed or reused only if no thread-local pointers still refer to it. Intuitively, if a node
is unlinked (so no pointers to it remain in the data structure proper), and no thread has a
pointer to it in a local variable, then no thread can tell the difference between the old node
and a newly allocated node that happens to lie at the same address. The SMR assumption is
satisfied by automatic garbage collection,8 and by various specialized memory reclamation
algorithms.

8.7.1    Hazard Pointers

Hazard Pointers (Michael 2002a, 2004b), also known as the “Pass the Buck” solution to
the Repeat Offenders Problem (Herlihy et al. 2002a, b, 2005), were the first truly general-
purpose approach to SMR. They remain the dominant approach today.
    The hazard pointer (HP) algorithm classifies accesses to nodes as either hazardous or
safe, and requires a thread to protect a node o with a hazard pointer before performing any
hazardous access to o. Intuitively, a read/write on a node o is hazardous if o might have
been freed prior to the read/write. It is also hazardous to use o as the old value of a CAS if o
may have been freed: an occurrence of the ABA problem might allow the CAS to succeed
incorrectly if the pointer now refers to a different node with the same address.
    As an illustrative example, consider an unsafe variant of the Treiber stack (Figure 8.18)
that allocates and frees nodes, rather than assuming type stable memory as we did in
Sec. 8.1.1. In this algorithm, reading the top pointer of the stack is safe, since the top
pointer is a member of the stack object, which cannot have been freed. However, derefer-
encing the top pointer and performing a read or write on the node to which it points is
hazardous, since that node could be freed at any time by a concurrent thread. In this algo-
rithm, there is only one hazardous access in push—the CAS, which is a hazardous access to
o. There are three hazardous accesses in pop, all of them accesses to o: the read of o→next,
the CAS, and the read of o→value.
    To safely perform a hazardous access to o, a thread must first store a pointer to o in an
announcement array that is shared with other threads. This array has k slots per thread,
where k is the (data structure specific) number of hazard pointers that a thread might need

8 Unfortunately, fully nonblocking automatic garbage collection remains an open problem.

        class unsafe stack                             value unsafe stack.pop():
             atomic<node*> top                             loop
        void unsafe stack.push(value v):                        o := top.load(∥)
             n := new node                                      if o = null return ⊥
             n→value := v                                       n := o→next.load(∥)
             repeat                                             if top.CAS(o, n, R∥)
                   o := top.load(∥)                                   value v := o→value
                   n→next := o                                        free o
             until top.CAS(o, n, W∥)                                  return v

Figure 8.18 Unsafe variant of the Treiber stack that allocates in push and frees in pop. (Compare
to the version in Figure 8.2, which passes nodes, rather than values, to and from its methods.).

to hold simultaneously to safely perform all of its hazardous accesses.9 Threads write only
to their own slots, but can read each others’ slots. After making its announcement, a thread
must re-verify that it is safe to access o, by demonstrating that o has not yet been removed
from the data structure. In the Treiber stack, verification can be performed by reading the
top pointer and seeing that it still points to o. If verification succeeds, the thread is permitted
to perform hazardous accesses to o until it releases its hazard pointer by writing null to the
appropriate slot in the announcement array. On the other hand, if verification fails, the thread
is not permitted to access o.
    Most algorithms require at least minor changes in order to use HPs—both to insert
the verification step and to recover when it fails. The HP paper suggests that it may be
reasonable in the failure case to take whatever actions would normally be taken when a
thread encounters contention. In the HP version of the Treiber stack (Figure 8.19), a single
HP per thread suffices. The loop in push uses this HP to protect the top node in the stack
while placing a new node above it; the loop in pop uses it to protect the node that is being
removed (and whose value is being read).
    Rather than directly freeing a node o that has been removed from the data structure, HP-
enabled code invokes a procedure called delayed_free(o), which delays reclamation until
no thread holds a hazard pointer to o. (In some papers, delayed_free is known as retire.)
Internally, delayed_free(o) scans the announcement array looking for any pointers to retired
nodes (o among them). Any retired node with no remaining HPs can be freed. Others (o
potentially among them) are kept in a shared buffer, so they can be freed during some later
call to delayed_free.
    The crux of the HP algorithm lies in the “handshake” that takes place between a thread
Tf that wants to free o and a thread Th that wants to perform a hazardous access to o. In
order to perform a hazardous access to o, Th must announce a hazard pointer to o, then
verify that o has not yet been removed from the data structure. In order to free o, Tf must

9 In the standard formulation, k must be statically known. Some HP implementations allow it to be
dynamically determined.

 class hp stack                                   value hp stack.pop():
      atomic<node*> top                               loop
      atomic<node*> announce[]                             o := top.load(∥)
                                                           if o = null return ⊥
 void hp stack.push(value v):
                                                           announce[self].store(o, ∥R)
      n := new node
                                                           if o = top.load(∥R) // verify
      n→value := v
                                                                 n := o→next.load(∥)
      loop
                                                                 if top.CAS(o, n, R∥)
           o := top.load(∥)
                                                                       v := o→value
           n→next := o
                                                                       announce[self].store(null, R∥W)
           announce[self].store(o, ∥)
                                                                       delayed free(o) // after storing null
           if top.CAS(o, n, W∥W) // also verifies
                                                                       return v
                 announce[self].store(null, ∥)
                 return

Figure 8.19 Hazard pointer-based variant of the lock-free Treiber stack. The ∥ RW and RW ∥ orderings
on hazard pointer announcements may not be required in all cases, but are needed in the general case to
ensure that intervening ordinary accesses are safe. In general, one announces a HP with a ∥ RW store,
then verifies it with a load and a branch. In this case, in push, the W ∥W on the following CAS suffices,
since verification is done by that CAS. A similar argument applies to clearing the announcement in
push, and to analogous operations in pop.

first remove it from the data structure, then scan the announcements of Th and see that Th
does not have a hazard pointer to o. Clearly, if Th actually performs its hazardous access to
o, it must announce its HP to o before Tf does its scan. So, Tf will see that Th has a HP to
o, and will not free o.
    In practice, the principal source of overhead when using hazard pointers is the need to
ensure that a store to the announcement array is visible to all threads before performing
a hazardous access. Even on a machine with a TSO memory model, the compiler must
typically issue a store-load fence instruction, which may take tens of cycles to complete.
Hazard Pointers and the EFRB Tree Hazard pointers satisfy the SMR assumption when
used correctly, but correct use turns out to be surprisingly difficult in certain algorithms,
including the EFRB tree (Brown 2015). Briefly, this is because the EFRB tree allows searches
to traverse marked nodes, which might already have been removed from the data structure,
whereas hazard pointers require one to verify that a node has not been removed from the
data structure before one can access it. These conflicting rules make it difficult to guarantee
progress, as a marked node forces the operation to restart, and if the thread that marked the
node stalled before unlinking it, then to avoid restarting forever one must help the marking
operation to complete. Helping in turn requires that one acquire several hazard pointers,
which may be difficult or impossible if one or more nodes are marked! Similar issues arise
with various descendants of hazard pointers, including hazard eras (Ramalhete and Correia
2017) and wait-free eras (Nikolaev and Ravindran 2020).

8.7.2    Epoch-Based Reclamation

One practical approach compatible with the EFRB tree is epoch-based reclamation (EBR).
The key to the approach is the assumption that a thread becomes quiescent between its
data structure operations, meaning it forgets any pointers in its local memory that point to
nodes in the data structure. With this assumption, if a thread removes a node from the data
structure, and every thread subsequently finishes any operation that was active at the time
of the removal, then all threads will have forgotten any pointers to the removed node, and
it can safely be freed. We call an interval during which each thread has been quiescent at
least once a grace period. Threads do not all have to be quiescent at the same time—it does
not matter whether they forget their pointers at the same time, or at different times. What
matters is that each thread has forgotten any pointer it holds to the node being freed.
    Our description of EBR focuses mainly on how the technique can be used, rather than
on how grace periods are identified. Some implementations use a global array, indexed
by thread, that indicates movement through quiescent intervals. Other implementations are
possible. One might even think of RCU (Sec. 6.3) as a variant of EBR.
    In the original incarnation of the global-array approach (Fraser 2003), a shared global
counter indicates the current epoch. Each thread, when it begins a data structure operation,
announces the current value of the counter in its slot of the global array. When all values are
equal to the counter, the counter can be incremented (via CAS) and nodes retired two epochs
in the past can safely be reclaimed. To accommodate situations in which a thread performs
no operation for an extended period of time (and thus fails to update its array slot, though it
may continue to run, doing other work), we can also require each thread to write a zero to
its slot at the end of each data structure operation. (The announcement at the beginning of
the operation requires expensive acquire ordering; the announcement at the end is a cheaper
release.) A thread that verifies that all array entries are equal to the epoch counter or to zero
knows that a grace period has elapsed and that old nodes can be freed. Of course, a thread
that stalls during a data structure operation can still block reclamation indefinitely.
Using EBR in the EFRB Tree Different implementations of EBR have slightly different
interfaces. DEBRA (Brown 2015), one of the fastest implementations of EBR, requires
a thread to call functions startOp and endOp at the start and end of each data structure
operation, respectively, and retire whenever a node is removed from the data structure.
We use this interface in our discussion. (In a pattern reminiscent of the lock_guard class
described in Sec. 7.3, one could, in a language like C++, use destructors to call endOp
implicitly at the end of an operation’s scope.)
   To use DEBRA in EFRB (Figures 8.14 and 8.15). in the code for insert, delete, and
lookup, we call startOp at the beginning of the operation and endOp just before each
return statement. To facilitate node reclamation, in help_insert, after the call to cas_child,
we call retire on desc→target, and in help_marked, after the call to cas_child, we call
retire on desc→p and desc→target. To facilitate InsertFlag descriptor reclamation, at the
end of help_insert we check if the unflagging CAS has succeeded, and if so call retire(desc).

In this case, we are retiring a node that is technically still pointed to by the data structure,
since the CAS stored ⟨Clean, desc⟩, but a thread that sees the Clean state will never access
any field of desc, so it is functionally the same as if we had removed the last pointer to desc.
   Finally, to facilitate DeleteFlag descriptor reclamation, at the end of help_marked we
check if the unflagging CAS has succeeded, and if so call retire(desc). As in the previous
case, technically desc is still pointed to by the data structure, but no thread will dereference
that pointer. Similarly, the deleted node still points to desc, but that pointer has state Mark,
and no thread will dereference a pointer with state Mark. These are the only two nodes that
can point to desc, so we have effectively removed all pointers. Note that retire does not
immediately free a node. Rather, a node will be freed at some later time when no thread has
(or will follow) a private pointer to it. Figure 8.20 depicts a simplified example execution of
the EFRB tree with EBR, showing how nodes are reclaimed.
Liveness of Reclamation EBR can be implemented without any locks or blocking, but it
reclaims memory only as long as all threads make progress. Performance is often excellent,
but when there are more threads than processor cores there may be long delays between the
times when certain threads participate in the EBR algorithm. If one thread stops participating,
then other threads can continue performing data structure operations, but memory will not
be reclaimed. Of course, if memory is not reclaimed, and threads continue to allocate new
nodes forever, eventually the system will run out of memory. This is the main drawback of
EBR: it does not bound the amount of unreclaimed garbage. Various improvements to EBR
have been proposed to tackle this issue.
DEBRA+ In DEBRA+ (Brown 2015), if a slow thread T is preventing reclamation, other
threads will neutralize T by sending POSIX signals to it. DEBRA+ bounds garbage and
would be lock-free in a hypothetical system with lock-free signals. Upon receipt of a sig-
nal, T will immediately forget all of its pointers and jump to special recovery code. This
recovery code is responsible for repairing any potential inconsistencies in the data structure
that were created by neutralizing T . The insight in DEBRA+ is that mechanisms for repair-
ing inconsistencies already exist in many lock-free data structures where threads help one
another.

Data structure compatibility with EBR
The assumption that threads are quiescent between operations precludes data structures in which,
for example, a thread remembers a pointer it read in one search operation, and uses that pointer in a
later search operation to speed up its traversal. For example, one could imagine a sorted linked list
in which a thread always remembers a pointer to the last node L that was visited by its last search.
When starting a new search for a key k, a thread can first check whether L is still in the list, and if
so, can compare k with the key of L. If k is greater than or equal to L’s key, then the search can start
at L instead of the head. Despite this limitation, EBR is one of the most widely applicable memory
reclamation techniques, and is usable with many popular data structures.

        T1: delete(1)                               T1: quiescent
                          Tree
        gparent                                       ...
        parent
        target
        ...                                5                                              5
        T2: search(3)                                T2: search(3)
        target                    3            8      target                3                 8
        ...                                           ...

        T3: search(8)    1             3             T3: search(8)     1              3
        target                                        target
        ...                                           ...

                                 (a)                                            (b)

        T1: quiescent                               T1: search(3)
        ...                                           target
                                           5          ...                                 5
       T2: quiescent                                 T2: quiescent
        ...                                          ...
                                  3            8                            3                 8
        T3: search(8)                                T3: search(8)
        target           1             3              target           1              3
        ...                                           ...

                                 (c)                                            (d)

        T1: search(3)                                  T1: free()
        target                                        ...
        ...                                5                                              5

        T2: quiescent                                T2: quiescent
        ...                       3            8     ...                                      8

       T3: quiescent                                 T3: quiescent
        ...              1             3             ...                              3

                                 (e)                                            (f)

Figure 8.20 Three-thread example execution for the EFRB tree with EBR. In (textbfa), we see an
ongoing delete and two ongoing searches. In (b), T1 finishes its delete, retires two nodes, and
becomes quiescent. In (c), T2 becomes quiescent. At this point, if T1 had full knowledge of the
system state, it could safely free the retired nodes. However, EBR does not yet free them. In (d),
T1 starts a new search. Note that this search cannot obtain pointers to the retired nodes, and does
not cause EBR to delay freeing them. In (e), T3 becomes quiescent. At this point, each thread has
forgotten its pointers since T1 retired its nodes, so in (f), T1 is allowed to free its nodes.

    To illustrate what recovery code might look like in the EFRB tree, suppose a thread is
neutralized while it is executing insert. If the insert has not yet flagged a node, then the
thread can simply restart the insert. On the other hand, if it already flagged a node, then it
should not restart the insert, since another thread may have already helped the insert and
the inserted key may even have been deleted since then, in which case restarting the insert
would erroneously insert the key a second time. Instead, the insert can call help to finish
its operation and return. Two challenges arise.
    First, in order to call help to finish its own operation, the thread must not have forgotten
all of its pointers into the data structure! This is solved in DEBRA+ by having a thread use

a limited form of hazard pointers to protect any nodes it will need to access during helping
before doing its first CAS. Thus, nodes can be freed only once both the EBR and hazard
pointer-inspired mechanisms in DEBRA+ say it is safe to do so.
    Second, there is a question of how to determine whether insert flagged a node before the
thread was neutralized. One cannot, for example, simply set a thread local bit just before
performing the CAS to flag a node, since the thread could be neutralized after setting the
bit but before performing the CAS, in which case, after being neutralized, the thread would
erroneously call help to finish its own operation, without having flagged a node in the first
place! Solving this problem requires some creativity and data structure-specific knowledge.
In EFRB insert, for example, before performing a flagging CAS, a thread can save a pointer
to its InsertFlag object in its local memory. Then, in the event the thread is neutralized, if it
finds this pointer in its local memory, it can go ahead and perform the flagging CAS. If the
flagging CAS was performed before the thread was neutralized, there is no harm in repeating
it, as it will simply fail the second time. On the other hand, if the thread did not save a pointer
to an InsertFlag object in its local memory, then it cannot have done a flagging CAS, so it
can simply retry. Additional modifications would be needed for delete.
IBR Interval-based reclamation (IBR) (Wen et al. 2018) is another technique that combines
the strengths of hazard pointers and epoch-based reclamation—namely, bounded garbage
and high performance. Unlike DEBRA+, it does so without requiring data structure-specific
recovery code. In IBR, each node has a birth epoch and a retire epoch. The birth epoch is
the epoch in which the node was allocated; the retire epoch is the epoch in which the node
was unlinked from the data structure. These two epochs can be used to determine whether
a specific node existed in a given epoch.
   IBR strikes a balance between HPs, in which threads protect precisely the nodes they
access, and EBR, in which threads protect all nodes in the data structure. In IBR, a thread
protects all nodes known to have existed in a bounded interval of time. Consequently, unlike
EBR, in which a stalled thread prevents all nodes from being freed, in IBR a stalled thread
can prevent only a bounded number of nodes from being freed (specifically, a subset of the
nodes allocated in the epochs leading up to the stall).
   In practice, the overhead of IBR is lower than that of HPs, because rather than announcing
each node being accessed, a thread need only announce the time interval it is protecting,
and this interval need not change every time a new node is encountered (since a newly
encountered node may lie in the interval that is already protected). IBR is easier to use than
DEBRA+, making it more practical to bound the amount of garbage a stalled thread can
prevent from freeing. However, DEBRA+ offers a known upper bound on the total amount of
unreclaimed garbage (and the bound can be tuned as desired), whereas IBR only guarantees
that such a bound exists (and it may be very large).
NBR More recently, the techniques of DEBRA+ were improved in neutralization-based
reclamation (NBR) (Singh et al. 2021). Like DEBRA+, NBR bounds garbage and would be
lock-free in any system with lock-free signals. NBR does not require data structure specific
recovery code, however, and also works for lock-based data structures (whereas DEBRA+

can cause deadlock by neutralizing a thread that holds a lock). At a high level, instead
of requiring neutralized threads to stop in the middle of modifying the data structure and
execute recovery node, NBR allows threads that have begun modifying the data structure
to continue. NBR assumes data structure operations can be partitioned into a read phase, in
which the thread visits nodes, a reservation phase, in which the thread reserves a subset of
the visited nodes, and a write phase, in which the thread can access only reserved nodes. If a
thread is neutralized in the read or reservation phases, it will restart its operation. However,
in the write phase, a thread will continue executing, even if it is neutralized, safe in the
knowledge that its reserved nodes will not be concurrently freed.
    NBR can easily be applied to data structures in which all nodes are first visited, then
a subset of them are locked (possibly using lock-free “locks”) and modified. However, it
cannot be applied directly to data structure operations that first visit nodes, then perform
modifications, then visit even more nodes. Such data structures must be rewritten so that
all required nodes are visited before modifications begin. In the EFRB tree, this makes the
help(result) call in the help_delete method problematic, since a delete can first perform a
flagging CAS and then call help on its own DeleteFlag descriptor. The help routine, in turn,
may call help_delete, fail the marking CAS, and then read result from desc→p→update,
in which case result will point to a node that has not been reserved. Calling help(result)
will entail accesses to fields of an unreserved node, which is not allowed. A data structure-
specific modification is thus required. In the EFRB tree, it turns out we can simply eliminate
the help(result) call, but this requires reproving the lock-free progress guarantee.
    Like DEBRA+, NBR offers a known bound on unreclaimed garbage, and the bound can
be tuned.

8.7.3    Other Approaches

The Free Access algorithm of Cohen (2018) applies to arbitrary lock-free data structures
implemented from loads, stores, and CAS, and provides lock-free memory reclamation with
bounded garbage.
    At a very high level, a technique similar to HPs is used when writing to nodes, and a
technique somewhat similar to EBR with neutralizing is used when reading from nodes.
Instead of using POSIX signals, each thread has a dirty bit that can be set by other threads,
invalidating the thread’s recent reads. More specifically, each thread regularly polls its dirty
bit (for example, after reads) and discards previously read values if it is set. However, there
can be a delay between when a node is reclaimed and when a thread polls its dirty bit. If the
thread were to access the node between these two times, a segmentation fault could occur. To
avoid this problem, Free Access assumes that nodes are never freed to the operating system
(they can only be reused).
    Free access requires significant programmer effort (although compilers could in principle
be modified to perform the modifications automatically) and is likely to be slower than epoch-

based approaches. The techniques in Free Access were further improved in Version-based
Reclamation (VBR) (Sheffi et al. 2021) to allow both reads and writes to proceed using
epoch-based techniques, rather than HP techniques.
   More detailed surveys of SMR algorithms can be found in the work of Brown (2017a)
and ?. The former has more extensive coverage of SMR algorithms; the latter includes more
recent algorithms and discusses, in detail, the compatibility of SMR algorithms with popular
data structures.

8.8      Dual Data Structures

Under even the weakest notion of nonblocking progress, a thread must be able to complete
an operation in a bounded number of steps in the absence of activity in other threads. This
implies that the operation must be total; that is, it must be valid and well defined given any
consistent state of the data structure, with no nontrivial preconditions. In defining operations
on containers (stacks, queues, etc.), we have assumed that a remove (pop, dequeue)
operation on an empty container returns a special null or ⊥ value to indicate its failure.
   But this is often not what we want. In many algorithms, a thread that encounters an empty
container (or a full bounded container, or an account with insufficient funds, or …) really
needs to wait (using condition synchronization) for activity in some other thread to make
the needed precondition true.
   How do we reconcile the need for condition synchronization with the desire for non-
blocking progress? The obvious option is to spin:
   datum v
   repeat
        v := my_container.remove()
   until v = ⊥
    In addition to wasting cycles and increasing contention (as spinning often does), this
option has the additional disadvantage that when a new datum is finally inserted into an
empty container, the thread that gets to remove it will be determined, more or less acciden-
tally, by the underlying scheduler, rather than by the code of the data structure’s methods.
To bring the choice under data structure control and, optionally, avoid the use of spinning,
Scherer and Scott (2004) developed the notion of nonblocking dual data structures.
    In addition to data, a dual data structure may also hold reservations. When an operation
discovers that a precondition does not hold, it inserts a reservation, with the expectation that
some subsequent operation (in another thread) will notify it when the precondition holds.
The authors describe a formal framework in which both the initial insertion of a reservation
and the eventual successful completion of an operation (once the precondition holds) are
nonblocking and linearizable, and any intermediate activity (spinning or blocking) results in
only a constant number of remote memory operations, and thus can be considered harmless.

    As examples, Scherer and Scott present nonblocking dual versions of the Treiber stack
(Sec. 8.1) and the M&S queue (Sec. 8.3.1). In both, a remove operation must determine
whether to remove a datum or insert a reservation; an insert operation must determine
whether to insert a datum or fulfill a reservation. The challenge is to make this decision
and then carry it out atomically, as a single linearizable operation. Among other things, we
must ensure that if operation x satisfies the precondition on which thread t is waiting, then
once x has linearized (and chosen t as its successor), t must complete its operation within
a bounded number of (its own) time steps, with no other linearizations in between.
    In the nonblocking dualqueue, atomicity requires a small extension to the consistent
snapshot mechanism and a convention that tags each next pointer with a bit to indicate
whether the next node in the queue contains a datum or a reservation. (The only tag that
is ever inspected is the one in the next pointer of the dummy node: one can prove that at
any given time the queue will consist entirely of data nodes or entirely of reservations.)
Fulfillment of reservations is straightforward: if a waiting thread spins on a field in the
reservation node, we can use a CAS to change that field from ⊥ to the fulfilling datum before
removing the node from the queue. (Alternatively, we could signal a single-use condition
variable on which the waiting thread was blocked.)
    In the nonblocking dualstack, next pointers are also tagged, but the lack of a dummy node,
and the fact that insertions and deletions occur at the same end of the list, introduces an extra
complication. To ensure nonblocking progress, we must fulfill a request before popping it
from the stack; otherwise, if the fulfilling thread stalled after the pop, the waiting thread could
execute an unbounded number of steps after the pop linearized, without making progress,
and other operations could linearize in-between. A push operation therefore pushes a data
node regardless of the state of the stack. If the previous top-of-stack node was a reservation,
the adjacent nodes then “annihilate each other”: any thread that finds a data node and an
underlying reservation at the top of the stack attempts to write the address of the former into
the latter, and then pop both nodes from the stack. In subsequent work, Izraelevitz and Scott
(2017) presented dual versions of the LCRQ of Morrison and Afek, together with a generic
construction that allows any nonblocking container for data to be paired with almost any
nonblocking container for reservations.
    Nonblocking dual data structures have proven quite useful in practice. In particular, the
Executor framework of Java 6 used dualstacks and dualqueues to replace the lock-based task
pools of Java 5, resulting in improvements of 2–10× in the throughput of thread dispatch
(Scherer et al. 2009).

8.9      Nonblocking Elimination

In Sec. 5.4 we described the notion of elimination, which allows operations in a fan-in tree
not only to combine (so that only one thread continues up the tree), but to “cancel each other
out,” so that neither thread needs to proceed.

    Hendler et al. (2004) use elimination in a nonblocking stack to “back off” adaptively in
the wake of contention. As in a Treiber stack (Sec. 8.1), a thread can begin by attempting a
CAS on the top-of-stack pointer. When contention is low, the CAS will generally succeed. If
it fails, the thread chooses a slot in (some subset of) a separate elimination array. If it finds
a matching operation already parked in that slot, the two exchange data and complete. If the
slot is empty, the thread parks its own operation in it for some maximum time t, in hopes
that a matching operation will arrive. Modifications to a slot—parking or eliminating—are
made with CAS to resolve races among contending threads.
    If a matching operation does not arrive in time, or if a thread finds a nonmatching operation
in its chosen slot (e.g., a push encounters another push), the thread attempts to access the
top-of-stack pointer again. This process repeats—back and forth between the stack and the
elimination array—until either a push/pop CAS succeeds in the stack or an elimination CAS
succeeds in the array. If recent past experience suggests that contention is high, a thread can
go directly to the elimination array at the start of a new operation, rather than beginning
with a top-of-stack CAS.
    To increase the odds of success, threads dynamically adjust the subrange of the elimination
array in which they operate. Repeated failure to find a matching operation within the time
interval t causes a thread to use a smaller prefix of the array on its next iteration. Repeated
failure to eliminate successfully given a matching operation (as can happen when some other
operation manages to eliminate first) causes a thread to use a larger prefix. The value of t,
the overall size of the array, the number of failures required to trigger a subrange change,
and the factor by which it changes can all be tuned to maximize performance.
    Similar techniques can be used for other abstractions in which operations may “cancel
out.” Scherer et al. (2005) describe an exchange channel in which threads must “pair up”
and swap information; a revised version of this code appears as the Exchanger class in the
standard Java concurrency library.
    With care, elimination can also be applied to abstractions like queues, in which operations
cannot naively eliminate in isolation. As shown by Moir et al. (2005), one can delay an
enqueue operation until its datum, had it been inserted right away, would have reached the
head of the queue: at that point it can safely combine with any arriving dequeue operation.
To determine when an operation is “sufficiently old,” it suffices to augment the nodes of
an M&S queue with monotonically increasing serial numbers. Each enqueue operation
in the elimination array is augmented with the count found at the tail of the queue on
the original (failed) CAS attempt. When the count at the head of the queue exceeds this
value, the enqueue can safely be eliminated. This “FIFO elimination” has the nontrivial
disadvantage of significantly increasing the latency of dequeue operations that encounter
initial contention, but it can also significantly increase scalability and throughput under load.
    Elimination has also been implemented in priority queues, allowing deleteMin operations
and insert operations on very small keys to eliminate one another (Braginsky et al. 2016,
Calciu et al. 2014).

    In all of the aforementioned examples, elimination is essentially implemented as a sort
of filtering step that sits on top of the data structure. Recently, a more fine-grained variant of
elimination called publishing elimination has been implemented in (a, b)-trees (Srivastava
and Brown 2022), which are a type of search tree with many keys per node. Publishing
elimination attempts to improve performance in skewed workloads, where some keys are
much more popular than others. When threads contend on the same key (and thus the same
node), they communicate with each other through an elimination record in the node, allowing
some concurrent inserts and deletes on the same key to be eliminated.

8.10     Higher-Level Constructions

In a perfect world, one could take a sequential implementation of some arbitrary data struc-
ture, run it through an automatic tool, and obtain a fast, nonblocking, concurrent implemen-
tation. Two of these properties (nonblocking and concurrent) are easy to obtain. Herlihy’s
original paper on wait-free synchronization (Herlihy 1991) included a universal construction
that would generate a wait-free concurrent implementation of any given sequential object.
    In a subsequent paper, Herlihy (1993) described alternative constructions for both wait-
free and lock-free implementations. The intuition behind the lock-free construction is par-
ticularly straightforward: access to the data structure is always made through a distinguished
root pointer. A read-only operation need only dereference the pointer, find what it needs,
and return. To modify the structure, however, a thread must create a copy, verify that it has
done so atomically (by double-checking the root pointer), modify the copy, and then attempt
to install the update by using LL / SC to swing the root pointer from the old version to the
updated copy. This construction is quite efficient for small data structures. It also works well
for small changes to large trees: since versions of the tree are immutable once installed,
portions that do not differ can be shared between the old version and the new. If the tree is
balanced, the overall cost of an update is only Θ(log n). Herlihy exploits this observation to
build an efficient concurrent skew heap (a priority queue implemented as an approximately
balanced tree). Many new universal constructions have since been proposed. An excellent
survey of these results is provided by Fatourou and Kallimanis (2020).
    Although universal constructions make it easy to obtain concurrent, nonblocking algo-
rithms, they often involve large overheads. The complexity of handcrafted lock-free syn-
chronization, and the relative inefficiency of universal constructions, motivated the devel-
opment of many synchronization constructs that strike a balance between speed and sim-
plicity. Notable examples include k-compare-single swap (k-CSS) (Luchangco et al. 2003),
k-word CAS (k-CAS) (Harris et al. 2002), load-link-extended/store-conditional-extended
(LLX / SCX) (Brown et al. 2013) and PathCAS (Brown et al. 2022). Each of these constructs
can be implemented using single word CAS. Once proven correct, they can be used to reduce
the relative complexity of many other concurrent algorithms.

    k-CSS takes k addresses, k expected values, and one new value; it then atomically checks
if all addresses contain their expected values and, if so, changes the first address to its new
value and returns true. Otherwise, it simply returns false. Unfortunately, because k-CSS
updates only a single location, it cannot easily be used to, say, remove a node and mark it
as deleted so it is not subsequently changed erroneously.
    The more expressive k-CAS operation takes k addresses, k expected values, and k new
values; it then atomically checks if all addresses contain their expected values and, if so,
changes each address to its new value and returns true. Otherwise, it simply returns false.
    LLX and SCX are slightly different in that they operate on nodes rather than individual
addresses. LLX(u) returns a snapshot of the contents of node u. SCX(D, F, f , n) takes a
sequence D of dependency nodes that LLX has been invoked on, a sequence F of nodes to
finalize, a field f and a value n; it then atomically checks whether any of the nodes in D have
been changed since LLX was last invoked on them and, if not, stores n in f and finalizes the
nodes in F, preventing them from being changed by future SCX operations. LLX and SCX
are less expressive than k-CAS, but can be implemented more efficiently. The algorithms for
LLX and SCX were inspired by the EFRB tree and generalized its ideas.
    Recently, a generalization of k-CAS, called PathCAS, was introduced to make it easier to
use k-CAS to design lock-free data structures. Note that using k-CAS to design, for example,
a lock-free tree is not trivial. Although k-CAS makes it easy to change multiple addresses
atomically, one still needs to reason about the atomicity of searches and, as we’ve seen in
Sec. 8.6.1, even atomic updates in an internal BST can foil naive searches. PathCAS provides
operations to visit a node; validate that no node has changed since it was visited (returning
true if there were no changes and false otherwise); and add a triple consisting of an address,
expected value, and new value to the accumulated path. It then provides an exec operation,
which performs a k-CAS using the added triples, and a vexec operation, which atomically
performs the combined operation {if validate( ) then exec( )}.
    Transactional memory (TM) is perhaps the most expressive synchronization primitive
yet to be proposed. It allows an arbitrary sequence of reads and writes to be encapsulated in
a transaction that either commits and takes effect atomically, or aborts and does not perform
any of its writes. The term software transactional memory (STM) was coined by Shavit and
Touitou (1995). Inspired by the hardware proposal of Herlihy and Moss (1993), the original
Shavit and Touitou-style STM is very similar to a lock-free software implementation of
k-CAS. Most subsequent STM systems have extended this functionality to accommodate
dynamic operations, in which the full set of locations to be accessed is not known in advance.
We will consider TM in more detail in Chapter 9. Most STM systems use locks “under the
hood”; a few, however, are lock free or obstruction free.
