Transactional Memory
                                                                                                   9

Transactional memory (TM) has been one of the most active areas of synchronization
research over the course of the past two decades, spanning literally hundreds of published
papers. The current chapter attempts to outline the shape of the TM design space, the current
state of the art, and the major open questions. For further details, readers may wish to consult
the encyclopedic monograph of Harris et al. (2010).
    At its core, TM represents the fusion of two complementary ideas: first, that we should
raise the level of abstraction for synchronization, allowing programmers to specify what
should be atomic without needing to specify how to make it atomic; second, that we should
employ (at least in many cases) an underlying implementation based on speculation. The
user-level construct is typically simply an atomic label attached to a block of code. The
speculative implementation allows transactions (executions of atomic blocks) to proceed
in parallel unless and until they conflict with one another (access the same location, with
at least one of them performing a write). At most one conflicting transaction is allowed to
continue; the other(s) abort, roll back any changes they have made, and try again.
    Ideally, the combination of atomic blocks and speculation should provide (much of) the
scalability of fine-grain locking with (most of) the simplicity of coarse-grain locking, thereby
sidestepping the traditional tradeoff between clarity and performance. The combination also
offers a distinct semantic advantage over lock-based critical sections, namely composability.
    An atomicity mechanism is said to be composable if it allows smaller atomic operations
to be combined into larger atomic operations without the possibility of introducing deadlock.
Critical sections based on fine-grain locks are not composable: if operations are composed
in different orders in different threads, they may attempt to acquire the same set of locks
in different orders, and deadlock can result. Speculation-based implementations of atomic
blocks break the “irrevocability” required for deadlock (Sec. 3.1.1): when some transactions
abort and roll back, others are able to make progress.
    As noted at the end of Chapter 2, TM was originally proposed by Herlihy and Moss (1993).
A similar mechanism was proposed concurrently by Stone et al. (1993), and precursors can

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2024             185
M. L. Scott and T. Brown, Shared-Memory Synchronization, Synthesis Lectures
on Computer Architecture, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-38684-8_9

be found in the work of Knight (1986) and Chang and Mergen (1988). Originally perceived as
too complex for technology of the day, TM was largely ignored in the hardware community
for a decade. Meanwhile, as mentioned at the end of Chapter 8, several groups in the theory
community were exploring the notion of universal constructions (Turek et al. 1992; Herlihy
1993; Barnes 1993a; Israeli and Rappoport 1994; Shavit and Touitou 1995; Anderson and
Moir 1999), which could transform a correct sequential data structure, mechanically, into a
correct concurrent data structure. Shortly after the turn of the century, breakthrough work
in both hardware (Rajwar and Goodman 2001; Rajwar and Goodman 2002; Martínez and
Torrellas 2002) and software (Herlihy et al. 2003b; Harris and Fraser 2003; Fraser and Harris
2007) led to a resurgence of interest in TM. This resurgence was fueled, in part, by the move
to multicore processors, which raised profound concerns about the ability of “ordinary”
programmers to write code (correct code!) with significant amounts of exploitable thread-
level parallelism.
   Much of the inspiration for TM, both originally and more recently, has come from the
database community, where transactions have been used for many years. Much of the theory
of database transactions was developed in the 1970s (Eswaran et al. 1976). Haerder and
Reuter (1983) coined the acronym ACID to describe the essential semantics: a transaction
should be
atomic –     it should happen exactly once (or not at all), even in the presence of crashes
consistent – it should maintain all correctness properties of the database
isolated – its internal behavior should not be visible to other transactions, nor should it
             see the effects of other transactions during its execution
durable – once performed, its effects should survive system crashes

   These same semantics apply to TM transactions, with two exceptions. First, there is an
(arguably somewhat sloppy) tendency in the TM literature to use the term “atomic” when
“isolated” would be more accurate. Second, most TM systems dispense with durability.

Composability
We also used the term “composability” in Sec. 3.1.2, where it was one of the advantages of lineariz-
ability over other ordering criteria. The meaning of the term there, however, was different from the
meaning here. With linearizability, we wanted to ensure, locally (i.e., on an object-by-object basis,
without any need for global knowledge or control), that the orders of operations on different objects
would be mutually consistent, so we could compose them into a single order for the program as a
whole. In transactional memory, we want to combine small operations (transactions) into larger, still
atomic, operations. In other words, we’re now composing operations, not orders.
Interestingly, the techniques used to implement linearizable concurrent objects do not generally
support the creation of atomic composite operations: a linearizable operation is designed to be visible
to all threads before it returns to its caller; its effect can’t easily be delayed until the end of some
larger operation. Conversely, the techniques used to implement composable transactions generally
involve some sort of global control—exactly what linearizability was intended to avoid.
9 Transactional Memory                                                                        187

Because they may encompass as little as two or three memory accesses, they cannot afford
the overhead of crash-surviving disk I/O. At the same time, because they are intended mainly
for synchronization among threads of a single program (which usually live and die together),
durability is much less important than it is in the database world.1
   Given a correct sequential implementation of a data structure (a tree-based set, for exam-
ple), TM allows the author of a parallel program to reuse the sequential code, with guaranteed
correctness, in an almost trivial fashion:
   class pset                               pset.insert(item x):
        set S                                    atomic
   bool pset.lookup(item x):                          S.insert(x)
       atomic                               pset.remove(item x):
            return S.lookup(x)                   atomic
                                                     S.remove(x)
   Moreover, unlike lock-based critical sections, transactions can safely be composed into
larger atomic operations:
   pset P, Q
   …
   atomic
        if P.lookup(x)
               P.remove(x)
               Q.insert(x)

   Here the fact that P.lookup, P.remove, and Q.insert contain nested transactions is entirely
harmless. Moreover, if some other thread attempts a concurrent, symmetric move from Q
to P, deadlock can never result.
   The original intent of TM was to simplify the construction of library-level concurrent
data abstractions, with relatively small operations. Current hardware (HTM) and (to a lesser
extent) software (STM) implementations serve this purpose well. How much larger trans-
actions can get before they conflict too often to scale is still an open question.
   The following two sections consider software and hardware transactions in turn; the
third takes a closer look at challenges—many of them initially unanticipated—that have
complicated the development of TM, and may yet determine the degree of its success.
   While early STM implementations were provided simply as library packages—with entry
points to begin a transaction, read or write a shared location transactionally, and (attempt to)
commit a transaction—experience suggests that such libraries are too cumbersome for most
programmers to use (Dalessandro et al. 2007). We assume through the rest of this chapter
that TM is embedded in a programming language, and that all necessary hooks (including
instrumentation of STM loads and stores) are generated by the compiler.

1 The prospect of byte-addressable nonvolatile memory (successor technologies to DRAM) has begun
to undermine this argument, leading concurrency and TM researchers to consider durable data struc-
tures and transactions. We do not consider such extensions here.

9.1      Software TM

If two TM implementations provide the same functionality—one in hardware and the other
in software—the hardware version will almost certainly be faster. Software implementations
have other advantages, however: they can run on legacy hardware, they are more flexible
(extensible), and they can provide functionality that is considered too complex to implement
in hardware. As of 2023, commercial hardware TM is limited to relatively simple “best
effort” systems from Intel, IBM, and Arm. The majority of research over the past 20 years
has taken place in a software context.

9.1.1    Dimensions of the STM Design Space

The variety of STM designs has proven to be something of a surprise: researchers in the early
2000s did not anticipate how large the design space would be. Principal design dimensions
include the following:

Progress guarantees – Most of the early universal constructions were nonblocking, and
  many of the original STM systems were likewise. The OSTM (object-based STM) of
  Fraser’s thesis work was lock free (Fraser 2003; Fraser and Harris 2007); several other
  systems have been obstruction free (Herlihy et al. 2003b; Harris and Fraser 2003; Marathe
  et al. 2005; Marathe et al. 2006; Marathe and Moir 2008; Tabba et al. 2009). Over time,
  however, most groups have moved to blocking implementations in order to obtain better
  expected-case performance.

Buffering of speculative updates – To be able to roll back aborted transactions, a TM sys-
  tem must maintain both the old and new versions of speculatively modified data. The two
  most common options are sometimes referred to as “undo logging” (Harris et al. 2006;
  Saha et al. 2006a), in which changes are made “in place,” but old values are buffered
  for write-back on abort, and “redo logging” (Harris and Fraser 2003; Dice et al. 2006),
  in which new values are buffered for write-back on commit. In either case, a secondary
  decision must be made regarding the granularity (byte, word, cache line, object) at which
  to buffer changes. In a system with redo logs, load instructions must be modified to
  first check the redo log, to make sure the transaction sees its own writes. Some object-
  based systems use a third, “cloning” option, in which multiple copies of a language-level
  object are globally visible, and threads choose among them based on metadata that tracks
  commits and aborts (Herlihy et al. 2003b; Fraser and Harris 2007; Marathe et al. 2005;
  Marathe et al. 2006; Tabba et al. 2009).

Access tracking and conflict resolution – When two transactions conflict, a TM system
  must ensure that they do not both commit. Some systems are eager: they notice as soon
  as a location already accessed in one transaction is accessed in a conflicting way by a

      second transaction. Other systems are lazy: they delay the detection and resolution of
      conflicts until one of the transactions has finished execution and is ready to commit. A
      few systems are mixed: they resolve write-write conflicts early but read-write conflicts
      late (Scott 2006; Shriraman and Dwarkadas 2009; Dragojević et al. 2009).
      To detect conflicts, a TM system must track the accesses performed by each transaction.
      In principle, with lazy conflict resolution, one could log accesses locally in each thread,
      and intersect, at commit time, the logs of transactions that overlap in time. RingSTM
      (Spear et al. 2008a), indeed, does precisely this. More commonly, TM systems employ
      some sort of shared metadata for access tracking. Some object-oriented systems include
      metadata in the header of each object. Most STM systems, however, use a hash function
      keyed on the address of the accessed location to index into a global table of “ownership”
      records (Orecs). By ignoring the low bits of the address when hashing, we can arrange
      for the bytes of a given block (word, cache line, etc.) to share the same Orec. Given
      many-to-one hashing, a single Orec will also, of course, be shared by many blocks: this
      false sharing means that logically independent transactions will sometimes appear to
      conflict, forcing us to choose among them.
      Lazy and mixed conflict resolution have the advantage that readers can avoid updating
      metadata to make themselves visible to writers. A system that skips these updates is
      said to have invisible readers. Because metadata updates tend to induce cache misses,
      eliminating them can dramatically improve the performance of read-only or read-mostly
      transactions.

Validation – It is straightforward to demonstrate that an STM system will guarantee strict
  serializability if it never commits conflicting transactions that overlap in time. In a sys-
  tem with invisible readers, we commonly distinguish between validation and the rest of
  conflict resolution. In a given transaction A, validation serves to ensure that no other trans-
  action B has made in-place updates (or committed updates) to locations read by A. When
  a read-only transaction (one that modifies no shared locations) completes its execution,
  successful validation is all that it requires in order to commit. When a writer transaction
  completes, it must also make its updates visible to other threads. In an Orec-based system
  with a redo-log (e.g., TL2 (Dice et al. 2006)), a transaction will typically lock the Orecs
  of all locations it wishes to modify, validate, write back the contents of its redo log, and
  then unlock the Orecs.
      In a system with lazy conflict resolution, validation must also be performed on occa-
      sion during transaction execution—not just at the end. Otherwise a transaction that has
      read mutually inconsistent values of memory locations (values that could not logically
      have been valid at the same time) may perform operations that would never occur in any
      sequential execution, possibly resulting in faults (e.g., divide-by-zero or segmentation
      fault), infinite loops, nontransactional (uninstrumented) stores to shared addresses, or
      branches to nontransactional (uninstrumented) code. A maximally pessimistic system

   may choose to validate immediately after every shared read; such a system is said to
   preserve opacity (Guerraoui and Kapałka 2008). A more optimistic system may delay
   validation until the program is about to execute a “dangerous” operation; such a system is
   said to be sandboxed (Dalessandro and Scott 2012) and to tolerate “zombie” transactions,
   which are doomed to abort but have not yet realized this fact (Scott 2014).

Contention management – To resolve conflicts among transactions, we must choose
  which of the contenders should continue and which should abort or wait. (Waiting may be
  a viable option if the transaction that continues is a reader, working with the original value
  of the conflicting datum, and we allow it to finish before the writer continues. Waiting
  may also be viable if there is a possibility that the transaction that continues may ulti-
  mately fail to commit.) If certain atomic blocks frequently access the same data, we may
  wish to alter system scheduling to reduce the likelihood that those blocks will execute
  concurrently. We may also wish to make choices, over time, that ensure some measure of
  fairness (Sec. 3.2.2) among transactions or threads. These concerns are all issues of live-
  ness (Sec. 3.2). In some systems—particularly those with eager conflict resolution—it
  may be useful, from a software engineering perspective, to separate liveness from safety
  (correctness) concerns, and address it in a separate contention management module.

   With the exception of progress guarantees, we will discuss each of these design space
dimensions in its own subsection below. Readers who are interested in exploring the alterna-
tives may wish to download the RSTM suite (RSTM 2023), which provides a wide variety
of interchangeable STM “back ends” for C++.
   The design space dimensions are largely but not fully orthogonal. When transactions
conflict, there is no way for a writer to defer to a reader it cannot see: invisible readers
reduce the flexibility of contention management. In a similar vein, private undo logs (not
visible to other threads) cannot be used in a nonblocking system, and private access logs
cannot be used for eager conflict resolution. Perhaps most important, there is no obvious way
to combine in-place update (undo logs) with lazy conflict resolution: Suppose transaction
A reads x, transaction B writes x (speculatively, in place), and transaction A is the first to
complete. Without knowing whether A’s read occurred before or after B’s write, we have
no way of knowing whether it is safe to commit A.

9.1.2    Buffering of Speculative State

Transactions mediate access to shared data, but they may also access thread-private data. On
an abort, these private data may need to be rolled back. In principle, one could treat all data
as shared, but this would induce unnecessary overhead in the private case. Variables that are
declared within the lexical scope of an atomic block require no load/store instrumentation:
because their lifetimes are bounded by that of the transaction (and their storage is typically
beyond the value of the stack pointer that will be restored on abort), there is nothing to

roll back to. Variables that are private but were created outside the transaction will need
to be rolled back. Because no other thread can modify them, it suffices to checkpoint their
values at the beginning of the transaction, and simply restore them on abort: no per-access
instrumentation is required.
    Compilers may use conservative static analysis to distinguish between private and shared
data. Any access that might be to shared data must be instrumented. Any pre-existing private
variable that might be modified in the transaction must be checkpointed (and restored on
abort)—unless every store that might access it is instrumented.
    Dynamically allocated data require special treatment. Malloc and free (or their equiva-
lents) can be made transaction-safe. Data malloced in an aborted transaction must be freed.
Data freed in a transaction must be kept in limbo until we know whether the transaction
will commit. With lazy conflict resolution, freed data is probably best kept in limbo until
all potentially concurrent transactions have completed.
    As noted above, most TM systems are prone to false sharing—accesses to disjoint data
that are covered by the same metadata. Here the mismatch between access and metadata
granularity may lead to unnecessary aborts. Granularity is also a problem for redo and undo
logging. Suppose that transaction A stores to byte b of word w, and that nontransactional
code stores to byte c. If the TM system logs accesses at full-word granularity, then the write-
back of w on commit (in a redo-log system) or abort (in an undo-log system) may overwrite
the nontransactionally updated value of c. Note that the example entails no data race between
transactional and nontransactional code: the problem is one of implementation. To maintain
correctness, either the compiler must ensure (via data structure layout) that transactional and
nontransactional instructions never access different pieces of a logging-granularity block,
or the TM system must log at the finest possible granularity. One possible optimization is
to log at word granularity, but tag each logged word with per-byte dirty bits.

9.1.3    Access Tracking and Conflict Resolution

Two concurrent transactions conflict if they both access the same location and at least one
of them writes it. Conflicts can be resolved by aborting either transaction or (in some cases)
by stalling the transaction that makes its access second. Without prior knowledge of read
and write sets (and without enforcing global mutual exclusion), a TM system must speculate
(and be prepared to roll back) at least up to the first conflict. It can speculate beyond that
point, but then write-write conflicts among transactions will eventually force all but one to
abort, and read-write conflicts will force the reader(s) to abort if a writer commits first.
    There is a fundamental tradeoff between eager and lazy conflict resolution. Let us say
that a conflict occurs at the time of the second of a pair of conflicting accesses. The conflict
is resolved when the TM system chooses which transaction will be given the chance to
commit. (In some systems, there may be a point in-between at which the conflict is detected
but not yet resolved.) With lazy conflict resolution, if transaction A eventually aborts, any

work it performs after the original occurrence of a conflict might be seen as “egregiously
wasted”: in hindsight, given the conflict, there is no way it could have been productive. With
eager conflict resolution, however, we may not know, at the time of the conflict, what other
conflicts may arise in the future. If transaction A aborts in deference to transaction B, but B
subsequently aborts in deference to some other transaction C, then in hindsight there was
no point in aborting A: its work has been wasted just as egregiously as it was in the lazy
case. There is no way, in general, to tell whether eager or lazy conflict resolution will result
in more wasted work. Mixed resolution exploits the observation that in a redo-log-based
system, both transactions can commit in the wake of a read-write conflict, if the reader does
so first.
    As noted above, invisible readers avoid the problem of “turning readers into writers” by
forcing them to update metadata. By introducing asymmetry between readers and writers,
however, we force conflict resolution to be performed by readers. Moreover, read-write
conflicts in which the read occurs first must be detected after the fact: a reader must revisit
and validate its reads before committing (Sec. 9.1.4). An intermediate option, explored in
the SkySTM system (Lev et al. 2009a), is to use a scalable non-zero indicator (SNZI) (Ellen
et al. 2007) to indicate the presence of one or more readers, without recording their individual
identities. As noted in Sec. 5.4, SNZI uses a tree-based representation to reduce contention

Generalizing the Notion of Conflict
Write-write and read-write conflicts interfere with serializability because the accesses don’t com-
mute: they can lead to different results if performed in the opposite order. Concurrent reads of the
same location by different transactions do not interfere with serializability because they do commute:
they produce the same results if performed in the opposite order.
With this observation in mind, one can raise the level of abstraction, generalize the notion of conflict,
decrease the overhead of conflict detection, and reduce the frequency with which transactions
conflict. We have already seen an example with malloc and free. Unless these are treated as a
special case, loads and stores to locations in the memory manager (e.g., a global free list) are
likely to be seen as conflicts, even though operations on separate blocks of memory are logically
independent. By special-casing malloc and free, we essentially add them to the list of primitive
operations (along with load and store), and we note that (as long as the memory manager is properly
synchronized internally), operations on separate blocks commute at the level of program semantics,
even if they result in different memory contents (different blocks in different places) at the level of
the implementation.
Herlihy and Koskinen (2008) have proposed a transactional boosting mechanism to add abstractions
to the TM system, so that conflicts on a set abstraction, for example, might be tracked at the level of
add, remove, and lookup operations, rather than individual loads and stores. Two add operations
would then commute—and fail to cause a conflict—even if they resulted in a different concrete
representation of the (abstract) set in memory. Boosting requires that every operation have an inverse
that can be used to undo its effects. It also benefits from an asymmetric generalization of the notion
of commutativity (Koskinen et al. 2010).

for the reader count, thereby reducing the overhead of read-only transactions while still
allowing writers to detect the existence of conflicts with one or more earlier readers.

9.1.4    Validation

As described in Sec. 3.1.2, two-phase locking provides a straightforward way to ensure
serializability. Each transaction, as it runs, acquires a reader-writer lock (in read or write
mode as appropriate) on the Orec of every location it wishes to access. (This implies eager
conflict detection.) If an Orec is already held in an incompatible mode, the transaction stalls,
aborts, or (perhaps) kills the transaction(s) that already hold the lock. (This implies eager
conflict resolution. To avoid deadlock, a transaction that stalls must do so provisionally;
if it waits too long it must time out and abort.) If all locks are held from the point of
their acquisition to the end of the transaction, serializability is ensured. As described in the
previous subsection, SNZI can be used to reduce the contention and cache misses associated
with lock updates by readers, at the expense, in a writer, of not being able to identify which
transactions have already acquired an Orec in read mode. Alternatively, Ramalhete et al.
(2023) have shown how to avoid metadata conflicts among readers of a given lock while
still providing complete information for contention management. Like most visible reader
schemes, their 2PLSF system devotes one bit to each ⟨lock, thread⟩ pair, but it packs these
into words associated with the threads instead of the locks. Acquiring a write lock now

Composing Already-concurrent Operations
As noted in the chapter introduction, TM allows a correct, sequential data structure to be converted,
mechanically, into a correct concurrent structure. Given a set of existing concurrent structures—
ideally with implementations that are not only correct but also very efficient—one might also wish
to compose operations, mechanically, into atomic transactions. For lock-based structures, two-phase
locking (2PL—Sec. 3.1.2) provides a natural means of doing so. The principal challenge is the need
to back out and retry if failure to acquire a lock within a reasonable amount of time suggests the
possibility of deadlock. Spiegelman et al. (2016) use ideas from STM to develop a methodology
whereby existing structures can be modified (by hand) to compose with one another seamlessly and
efficiently via 2PL.
In STM systems, transactional boosting (described in the box on page 196) similarly allows
programmers to leverage past investments in high-performance data structures, avoiding the need
for expensive instrumentation in boosted operations.
Several researchers have also explored the possibility of composing operations on existing nonblock-
ing structures, without the full machinery of STM (Zhang and Dechev 2016; LaBorde et al. 2019;
Elizarov et al. 2019). As in the algorithms of Sec. 8.6.1, operations typically “announce” them-
selves by appending descriptors to nodes of a linked data structure. More recently, Cai et al. (2023)
have presented a technique that increases generality and reduces overhead by instrumenting only
the linearization points and other “critical” memory accesses of nonblocking operations. A universal
construction based on those of Sec. 8.10 then effects these accesses together, atomically.

requires a separate read for every thread (rather than one for every wordsize threads), but
readers never write the words of other threads, and contention is dramatically reduced in
read-heavy workloads.
    If we dispense with visible readers, we can use sequence locks (Sec. 6.2) to replace the
reader-writer locks on Orecs. A reader makes no change to the (shared) lock, but does keep
a (private) record of the value of the lock at the time it reads a covered location. The record
of lock values constitutes a read log, analogous to the write log already required for redo on
commit or undo on abort. Using its read log, a transaction can validate its reads by double-
checking the values of Orec locks: if a lock has changed, then some other transaction has
acquired the Orec as a writer, and the covered data can no longer be assumed to be consistent;
the reader must abort.
    To reduce the impact of false sharing, a transaction can choose to keep the values of
loaded locations in its read log, instead of—or in addition to—the values of Orec locks. It
can then perform value-based validation (Olszewski et al. 2007; Ding et al. 2007), verifying
that previously-read locations still (or again) contain the same values. Some mechanism—
typically a check of Orec lock values—must still be used, of course, to guarantee that the
verified values are all present at the same time.
    In the degenerate case, Dalessandro et al. (2010c) use a single global Orec to provide this
guarantee. Their “NOrec” system allows a read-only transaction to validate—and commit—
without acquiring any locks: the transaction reads the global sequence lock, uses value-
based-validation to verify the consistency of all read locations, and then double-checks the
sequence lock to make sure that no other transaction committed writes during the validation.
As in any system with invisible readers, they employ a redo log rather than an undo log, and
they validate during the transaction immediately after every shared read or (with sandboxing
(Dalessandro and Scott 2012)) immediately before every “dangerous” operation. NOrec
forces transactions to write back their redo logs one at a time, in mutual exclusion, but it
allows them to create those logs—to figure out what they want to write—in parallel. At the
time of testing in 2013, no known STM system was found to consistently outperform NOrec
for realistic workloads on single-chip multicore machines, though both TML (Dalessandro
et al. 2010a) and FastLane (Wamhoff et al. 2013) were better in important cases.

Avoiding Redundant Validation
If a transaction reads n different locations, and validates its previous reads after each new
read (to guarantee opacity), Orecs will need to be consulted O(n 2 ) times over the course
of the transaction. For large transactions, the overhead of this incremental validation can
be prohibitive. To reduce it, Spear et al. (2006) observe that in a redo-log-based system,
transaction T must validate its reads only if some other transaction has committed writes
since T ’s last validation. Absent a very large number of cores and a very high transaction
completion rate, many validations can be avoided if we maintain a global count of the number

of committed writer transactions, and elide validation whenever the count has not changed.
NOrec uses the global sequence lock to effect the same optimization.

Time-Based Validation
By validating its previous reads immediately after reading a new location x, transaction T
ensures that even if x has been modified very recently, all of T ’s work so far is still valid,
because the other locations have not been modified since they were originally read. An
alternative approach, pioneered by the TL2 system of Dice et al. (2006), is to verify that the
newly read location x has not been modified since T began execution. That is, instead of
ensuring that all of T ’s work so far is correct as of the current moment, we ensure that it
is correct as of T ’s start time. To implement this approach, TL2 employs a global “clock”
(actually, just a global count of committed transactions). It then augments each Orec with a
version number that specifies the value of the global clock as of the most recent write to any
location covered by the Orec. At the beginning of each transaction, TL2 reads and remembers
the global clock. On each read, it verifies that the version number in the corresponding Orec
is less than or equal to the remembered clock value. If not, the transaction aborts.
    If a read-only transaction completes its execution successfully, we know its behavior is
correct as of its start time. No additional work is necessary; it trivially commits. A writer
transaction, however, must validate its read set. It locks the Orecs of all locations it wishes
to write, atomically increments the global clock, checks the version numbers of (the Orecs
of) all locations it has read, and verifies that all are still less than its start time (so the
covered locations have not been modified since). If it is unable to acquire any of the Orecs
for the write set, or if any of the Orecs for the read set have too-recent version numbers, the
transaction aborts. Otherwise, it writes back the values in its redo log and writes the (newly
incremented) global clock value into each locked Orec. By colocating the lock and version
number in a single word, TL2 arranges for these writes to also unlock the Orecs.
    When a transaction T in TL2 reads a location x that has been modified since T ’s start
time, the transaction simply aborts. Riegel et al. (2006) observe, however, that just as a
writer transaction must validate its reads at commit time, effectively “extending” them to
its completion time, a reader or writer transaction can update its reads incrementally. If T
began at time t1 , but x has been modified at time t2 > t1 , T can check to see whether any
previously read location has been modified since t2 . If not, T can pretend it began at time t2
instead of t1 , and continue. This extensible timestamp strategy is employed in the TinySTM
system of Felber et al. (2008), which has invisible readers but eager conflict detection. It is
also used in SwissTM (Dragojević et al. 2009), with mixed conflict detection, and NOrec
(Dalessandro et al. 2010c), with lazy detection.

Bloom Filters as an Alternative to Read Logs
While NOrec is easily described as a single-Orec STM system with value-based validation,
its inspiration came not from Orec-based systems but from an earlier system known as

RingSTM (Spear et al. 2008a). RingSTM uses redo logs and lazy conflict detection, but
its validation is based not on the write log and a full read set but rather on Bloom filter
approximations of these.
    The behavior of RingSTM is most easily understood by imagining an unbounded global
list whose entries represent committed transactions, in serialization order. Each entry of the
list contains the write set of the transaction, summarized as a Bloom filter. When it begins
execution, a transaction reads and remembers a pointer to the head of the list. While running,
it builds Bloom filters that represent its reads and writes. To validate, it intersects its read
and write filters with the write filters of any transactions that have been added to the global
commit list since the last validation (or the start of the transaction). If all intersections are
empty, the transaction updates its pointer to the head of the list. If some intersection is
nonempty, a conflict (true or false) has occurred, and the transaction aborts. To commit, a
transaction reads the current head pointer, validates, and then uses CAS to add its own Bloom
filter to the head of the list. A successful CAS constitutes serialization. The transaction then
writes back its redo log, waits until all previously-committed transactions have finished
doing the same (as indicated in their entries of the global list) and finally marks its own
write-back as finished.
    While an unbounded global list is clearly impractical, we really only need the portion
that was created after the start time of the oldest running transaction. In practice, the list
is replaced with a bounded circular buffer (a ring—hence the name); modest extra checks
avoid any problems with wrap-around.
    In comparison to NOrec, RingSTM has higher costs for load/store instrumentation but
lower costs for validation (at least in large transactions). It also allows concurrent write-back.

Bloom Filters
For readers not familiar with the notion, a Bloom filter (Bloom 1970) is a bit vector representation
of a set that relies on one or more hash functions. Bit i of the vector is set if and only if for some set
member e and some hash function h j , h j (e) = i. Element e is inserted into the vector by setting bit
h j (e) for all j. The lookup method tests to see if e is present by checking all these bits. If all of them
are set, lookup will return true; if any bit is unset, lookup will return false. These conventions allow
false positives (an element may appear to be present when it is not) but not false negatives (a present
element will never appear to be absent). In the basic implementation, deletions are not supported.
Note that Bloom filters do not introduce a qualitatively different problem for TM: Orec-based STM
systems already suffer from false sharing. The actual rate of false positives in RingSTM depends on
the application and the choice of Bloom filter size.

9.1.5    Contention Management

In a system with lazy conflict resolution, contention management is more or less straight-
forward: since one transaction is ready to commit, and cannot encounter further problems at
this point, it should generally win out over any partially-completed transactions with which
it conflicts (Spear et al. 2009a). In particular, letting it do so ensures livelock freedom:
whenever a conflict is resolved, some transaction is guaranteed to commit, and the system
as a whole makes progress. Starvation may still be a problem, especially for long-running
transactions that read a large number of locations. Spear et al. report good results with a
simple heuristic: any transaction that aborts repeatedly will eventually acquire a global lock
that blocks other transactions from committing and makes completion of the previously
starving transaction inevitable.
    It is much less clear what strategy to use for systems with eager conflict resolution.
Possibilities include favoring the transaction that started earlier, or has read or written a
larger number of shared locations, or has been forced to abort more often, or has already
killed off a larger number of competitors. In general, these strategies attempt to recognize
and preserve the investment that has already been made in a transaction. There was a flurry
of papers on the subject back around 2005 (Guerraoui et al. 2005a; Guerraoui et al. 2005b;
Scherer and Scott 2005a), and follow-on projects continued for some time. No one strategy
appears to work best in all situations.

9.2      Hardware TM

While (as we have seen) TM can be implemented entirely in software, hardware implemen-
tations have several compelling advantages. They are faster, of course, at least for equivalent
functionality. Most can safely (and speculatively) call code in unmodified (uninstrumented)
binary libraries. Most guarantee that transactions will serialize not only with other transac-
tions but also with individual (non-transactional) loads, stores, and other atomic instruc-
tions. (This property is sometimes known as strong atomicity or strong isolation (Blundell
et al. 2005).) Finally, most provide automatic, immediate detection of inconsistency, elimi-
nating the need for explicit validation.
    Most of the design decisions discussed in Sec. 9.1, in the context of STM, are relevant
to HTM as well, though hardware may impose additional restrictions. Contention manage-
ment, for example, will typically be quite simple, or else deferred to software handlers. More
significantly, buffer space for speculative updates is unlikely to exceed the size of on-chip
caches: transactions that exceed the limit may abort even in the absence of conflicts. Trans-
actions may also abort for any of several “spurious” reasons, including context switches and
external interrupts.
    In any new hardware technology, there is a natural incentive for vendors to leverage
existing components as much as possible, and to limit the scope of changes. Several HTM

implementations have been designed for plug-compatibility with traditional cross-chip cache
coherence protocols. In the IBM Blue Gene/Q (Wang et al. 2012), designers chose to use an
unmodified processor core, and to implement HTM entirely within the memory system.
   To accommodate hardware limitations, most HTM systems require software backup. In
the simple case, one can always fall back to a global lock. More ambitiously, one can consider
hybrid TM systems in which compatible STM and HTM implementations coexist.
   In the first subsection below we discuss aspects of the TM design space of particular
significance for HTM. In Sec. 9.2.2 we consider speculative lock elision, an alternative
programming strategy (possibly supported by a separate ABI) that uses TM-style speculation
to execute traditional lock-based critical sections. In 9.2.3 we consider alternative ways in
which to mix hardware and software support for TM.
   HTM work to date includes a large number of academic designs and several commer-
cial implementations. The latter include the Azul Systems Vega 2 and 3 (Click 2019); the
experimental Sun/Oracle Rock processor (Dice et al. 2009); three independently developed
systems—for the Blue Gene/Q (Wang et al. 2012), zEC12 mainframe (Jacobi et al. 2012),
and Power 8 (IBM 2012; Le et al. 2015)—from IBM; the Transactional Synchronization
Extensions (TSX) of Intel’s x86 processors starting with the “Haswell” generation (Intel
2021a); and the Transactional Memory Extension (TME) of Arm’s v9-A instruction set
(Mann 2019).
   Unfortunately, as of early 2023, the future of commercial HTM appears unclear. The
Azul, Sun, and Blue Gene implementations are of historical interest only. IBM has retained
TM support in z15 but discontinued it in Power 10 (IBM 2020). AMD published an early
HTM proposal (AMD 2009) but never implemented it, nor did they pick up Intel’s TSX.
Intel, for its part, has disabled TSX by default on recent x86 processors to forestall side-
channel information leaks (Intel 2021b; Mott 2021). And Arm’s TME design is too new to
have acquired any real-world experience.

9.2.1    Dimensions of the HTM Design Space

ABI
Most HTM implementations include instructions to start a transaction, explicitly abort the
current transaction, and (attempt to) commit the current transaction. (In this chapter, we
refer to these, generically, as tx_start, tx_abort, and tx_commit.) Some implementations
include additional instructions, e.g., to suspend and resume transactions, or to inspect their
status.
   While a transaction is active, load and store instructions are considered speculative: the
hardware automatically buffers updates and performs access tracking and conflict detection.
Some systems provide special instructions to access memory nonspeculatively inside of a
transaction—e.g., to spin on a condition or to save information of use to a debugger or

performance analyzer.2 Because these instructions violate isolation and/or atomicity, they
must be used with great care.
   On an abort, a transaction may retry automatically (generally no more than some fixed
number of times), retry the transaction under protection of an implicit global lock, or jump
to a software handler that figures out what to do (e.g., retry under protection of a software
lock). In Intel’s RTM (Restricted Transactional Memory—part of TSX), the address of the
handler is an argument to the tx_start instruction. In IBM’s z and Power TM, and in Arm
TME, tx_start sets a condition code, in the style of the POSIX setjmp routine, to indicate
whether the transaction is beginning or has just aborted; this code is typically checked by the
following instruction. With either style of abort delivery, any speculative updates performed
so far will be discarded.
   In the IBM Blue Gene/Q, HTM operations were triggered not with special instructions
but with stores to special locations in I/O space. Conflicts would raise an interrupt, which
was fielded by the OS kernel.

Buffering of Speculative Updates
There are many ways in which a processor can buffer speculative updates. Herlihy and
Moss’s original proposal called for a special transactional cache located alongside the L1
data cache. Sun’s prototype Rock processor (never brought to market) allowed only a very
small number of speculative stores, which it kept in the core’s store buffer (Dice et al.
2009). A few academic systems have proposed keeping logs in virtual memory (Ananian
et al. 2005; Yen et al. 2007; Bobba et al. 2008), but by far the most common approach is to
buffer speculative updates at some level of the normal cache hierarchy, and to “hide” them
from the coherence protocol until the transaction is ready to commit. In some systems (e.g.,
Blue Gene/Q and the original Herlihy and Moss proposal), the cache holds both the original
and the speculative version of a line, but most systems buffer only the speculative version;
the original can always be found in some deeper level of cache or memory.
    Whatever the physical location used to buffer speculative updates, there will be a limit on
the space available. In most HTM systems, a transaction will abort if it overflows this space,
or exceeds the supported degree of associativity (footnote, Sec. 2.1.2). Several academic
groups have proposed mechanisms to “spill” excess updates to virtual memory and continue
to execute a hardware transaction of effectively unbounded size (Rajwar et al. 2005; Blundell
et al. 2007; Chuang et al. 2006; Ceze et al. 2006; Chung et al. 2006; Shriraman et al. 2010),

2 Among commercial machines (as of 2023), z TM provides nontransactional stores (ordered at com-
mit or abort time), but not loads. Sun’s Rock provided both, with stores again ordered at commit/abort.
Intel’s TSX originally provided neither, but Sapphire Rapids processors introduced a “Suspend Load
Address Tracking” mechanism that supports nontransactional loads. Power TM allows transactions
to enter a “suspended” state (see Sec. 9.2.1) in which both loads and stores will happen immediately
and “for real.” Blue Gene/Q facilities could be used to similar ends, but only with kernel assistance. On
both the Power 8/9 and Blue Gene/Q, the programmer must be aware of the potential for paradoxical
memory ordering.

but such mechanisms seem unlikely to make their way into commercial systems anytime
soon.
   In addition to the state of memory, a TM system must consider the state of in-core
resources—registers in particular. In most HTM systems, tx_begin checkpoints all or most
of the registers, and restores them on abort. In a few systems (including Blue Gene/Q and
the Azul Vega processors (Click 2019)), software must checkpoint the registers prior to
tx_begin, and restore them manually on abort.

Access Tracking and Conflict Resolution
By far the most common way to identify conflicts in an HTM system is to leverage the
existing cache coherence protocol. Consider a basic MESI protocol of the sort described in
Sec. 2.1.2. Suppose, in addition to the tag bits used to indicate whether a line is modified,
exclusive, shared, or invalid, we add an additional speculative bit. The speculative modified
state indicates a line that has been written in the current transaction; the speculative exclusive

Buffering in the Cache
Though most commercial HTM implementations buffer speculative updates (and tag speculative
reads) in the cache hierarchy, they do so in different ways. Azul’s implementation was entirely in the
(private) L1 caches; its shared L2 was oblivious to speculation. Blue Gene/Q, by contrast, kept its
buffering and tags in a 32 MB L2 cache, with very little support from the L1 caches (each of which is
shared by as many as 4 threads). In so-called “short-running” mode, a transaction needed to bypass
the L1 on every access (suffering an L1 miss penalty), so that speculative accesses could be tracked
in the L2, and loads could see the stores. Alternatively, in “long-running” mode, the operating
system would flush the L1 at the beginning of a transaction, and then manipulate virtual-to-physical
mappings so that separate threads used separate physical addresses in the L1 (the bits in which these
addresses differed were stripped by hardware on the L1-to-L2 path).
The zEC12 took yet another approach. It tracked and buffered speculative accesses in the L1, but
both the L1 and L2 were normally write-through. To hide speculative stores from the L2 and L3,
designers introduced a 64-cache line (8 KB) gathering store cache on the L1-to-L2 path. During
a transaction, stores were held in the gathering cache until commit time; stores that targeted the
same cache line were coalesced. Given that the L3 was shared by 6 cores, each of which could (in
bursts) execute two stores (and 5 other instructions) per cycle at 5.5 GHz, the gathering cache served
the important additional function of reducing incoming bandwidth to the L3, even during normal
operation.
Like the Azul machines, Intel’s Haswell processor and its successors perform access tracking and
update buffering in the L1 cache, at cache line granularity. Conflicts are detected using the existing
coherence protocol. Intriguingly, speculative loads (but not stores) that exceed the capacity or asso-
ciativity of the L1 cache are summarized in a hardware structure (widely assumed to be some sort of
Bloom filter) that is then checked against incoming coherence requests. As a result, Intel’s machines
can often accommodate transactions with very large read sets. The IBM Power 8 buffered speculative
state in the L2 cache, with a separate set of 64 tags that were dynamically associated with speculative
lines.

and shared states indicate lines that have been read (but not written) in the current transaction.
Any incoming coherence message requesting shared access to a line in speculative modified
state constitutes a conflict, as does any request for exclusive access to a speculative line of
any kind.
   Most HTM systems perform eager conflict detection. The TCC proposal of Hammond
et al. (2004) delayed detection until a transaction was ready to commit. Shriraman et al.
(2010) proposed to detect conflicts as they occurred but resolve them only at commit time.
Blue Gene/Q’s TM hardware could in principle be used to construct a lazy system, but its
software runtime was designed to resolve conflicts eagerly. Even so, it was distinctive in its
ability to choose, dynamically, which transaction should continue and which should wait or
abort in the event of a conflict.
   In an eager system, the most straightforward response to a conflict (detected via incom-
ing coherence traffic) is to abort the current transaction. This strategy, known as “responder
loses,” has the advantage of full compatibility with existing coherence protocols. After abort-
ing, the local (responding) core can provide the conflicting line to the remote (requesting)
core in precisely the same way it would on a machine without HTM.
   The disadvantage of “responder loses” is the potential for livelock: if the local transaction
restarts and attempts to access the conflicted line before the remote transaction has com-
pleted, the roles of requester and responder will be reversed, and the remote transaction will
abort. Various contention management strategies (e.g., randomized exponential backoff)
can be used to minimize the problem. In the IBM zEC12 (Jacobi et al. 2012), the coherence
protocol already included a NAK message, used to (temporarily) refuse to downgrade a
line for which writeback is currently in progress. The TM system leveraged this message
to “stiff-arm” requests for a transactional line, in hopes of completing the active transaction
before the requester tried again. Le et al. suggest that Power 8 arranged for the responder to
win when its copy of the requested line had been speculatively written (2015, first bullet,
p. 8:4).
   Several proposals for “unbounded” HTM use hardware-implemented Bloom filter signa-
tures to summarize read and write sets that overflow the cache (Ceze et al. 2006; Yen et al.
2007; Shriraman et al. 2010). An incoming request from the coherence protocol will trigger
conflict management not only due to conflict with a speculative line in the local cache but
also due to conflict with an overflowed line, as captured by the read or write set signature.
Other proposals control access to overflowed data using page-level memory protections
(Chuang et al. 2006) or distributed ownership tokens (Bobba et al. 2008).

Potential Causes of Aborts
In all TM systems, transactions must sometimes abort in response to conflicts with other
transactions. Most HTM systems will also abort a transaction for various other reasons,
including conflicts due to false sharing, overflow of the capacity or associativity of the spec-
ulative cache, exceptions (interrupts and faults) of various kinds, and attempts to execute

instructions not supported in speculative mode. Exactly which instructions and exceptions
will trigger an abort differs from machine to machine. Transactions on Sun’s Rock pro-
cessor were particularly fragile: most subroutine calls or mispredicted branches would end
the current transaction (Dice et al. 2009). Blue Gene/Q was particularly robust: uncached
memory accesses and DMA requests were the only program behaviors that would force
the TM system to interrupt a transaction (the operating system would also abort the current
transaction on various interrupts and faults).
    Most of the proposals for “unbounded” hardware transactions have addressed not only
the possibility of inadequate space for buffered updates but also inadequate time: the system
generally provides a way to save the state of a transaction to memory at the end of a scheduling
quantum and resume it the next time its thread gets to run. Among the HTM systems that
have actually been built, only Blue Gene/Q allows transactions to survive a context switch.
Most others abort the current transaction on any of the interrupts (e.g., timer expiration,
device completion) that might end the current quantum.
    Power 8 (IBM 2012; Le et al. 2015) introduced a distinctive mechanism to suspend and
resume the current transaction. While a transaction is suspended, loads and stores proceed
nontransactionally. Most exceptions cause the current transaction to be suspended rather
than aborted. The operating system can choose whether to resume the transaction after
servicing the exception. If it decides to effect a context switch, a special instruction allows
it to reclaim the processor state that was checkpointed at the beginning of the transaction.
At the start of the next quantum, another special instruction allows the OS to re-checkpoint
and resume the transaction, whereupon it will immediately abort and fall into its software
handler (which can then retry, fall back to a software lock, etc., as appropriate).
    For mission-critical applications, IBM’s z TM (Jacobi et al. 2012) provided a special
constrained transaction mode that was guaranteed to succeed, eventually, in hardware, with
no software handler or fallback path. Constrained transactions are limited to a small total
number of instructions (32 on the zEC12) with no backward branches, no subroutine calls,
and a small (128 bytes on the zEC12) memory access footprint. They are intended for small
data structure updates—the sorts of things for which Herlihy and Moss TM (or Oklahoma
Update) was originally intended. AMD’s Advanced Synchronization Facility (ASF) (AMD
2009; Diestelhorst et al. 2010) envisioned a similar guarantee for small transactions.

9.2.2    Speculative Lock Elision

While proponents typically argue for TM as a way to simplify the construction of scalable
parallel programs, this is not necessarily a compelling argument from the perspective of
hardware vendors. Given the investment needed to add TM to an existing ISA—and to
propagate it through all future generations—potential improvements in the performance
of existing programs provide a much more compelling argument. Speculative lock elision
(SLE) (Rajwar and Goodman 2001; Rajwar and Goodman 2002) is a use case that promises

precisely this sort of improvement. It retains the traditional lock-based programming model,
but attempts to execute critical sections as transactions whenever possible. Doing so has at
least two potential benefits:

1. Particularly for code with medium- to coarse-grain locks, it is common for critical sec-
   tions protected by the same lock to encounter no actual conflicts. SLE may allow such
   critical sections to execute in parallel.

2. Even when data conflicts are relatively rare, it is common for a thread to find that a lock
   was last accessed on a different core. By eliding acquisition of the lock (i.e., simply
   verifying that it is not held), SLE may avoid the need to acquire the lock’s cache line
   in exclusive mode. By leaving locks shared among cores, a program with many small
   critical sections may suffer significantly fewer cache misses.

Both of these benefits may improve performance on otherwise comparable machines. They
also have the potential to increase scalability, allowing programs in which locks were becom-
ing a bottleneck to run well on larger numbers of cores.
   Azul has indicated that lock elision was the sole motivation for their HTM design (Click
2019), and the designers of most other commercial systems, including z (Jacobi et al. 2012),
Power (IBM 2012), and TSX (Intel 2021a), cite it as a principal use case. On z, SLE is
simply a programming idiom, along the following lines:
               really_locked := false
               tx_begin
               if failure goto handler
               read lock value               // add to transaction read set
               if not held goto cs
               abort
      handler: really_locked := true
               acquire lock
      cs:      …                             // critical section
               if really_locked goto release
               tx_commit
               goto over
      release: release lock
      over:
This idiom may be enhanced in various ways—e.g., to retry a few times in hardware if the
abort appears to be transient—but the basic pattern is as shown. One shortcoming is that
if the critical section (or a function it calls) inspects the value of the lock (e.g., if the lock
is reentrant, and is needed by a nested operation), the lock will appear not to be held. The
obvious remedy—to write a “held” value to the lock—would abort any similar transaction
that is running concurrently. An “SLE-friendly” solution would require each transaction to
remember, in thread-local storage, the locks it has elided.

   Power TM provides a small ISA enhancement in support of SLE: the tx_commit instruc-
tion can safely be called when not in transactional mode, in which case it sets a condition
code. The idiom above then becomes:
            tx_begin
            if failure goto handler
            read lock value           // add to transaction read set
            if not held goto cs
            abort
   handler: acquire lock
   cs:      …                         // critical section
            tx_commit
            if commit_succeeded goto over
            release lock
   over:
   Originally proposed in the thesis work of Ravi Rajwar (2002), SLE plays a significantly
more prominent role in Intel’s Transactional Synchronization Extensions (TSX), of which
Rajwar was a principal architect. In its original release, TSX actually provided two separate
ABIs, called Hardware Lock Elision (HLE) and Restricted Transactional Memory (RTM).3
RTM’s behavior, to first approximation, is similar to that of z or Power TM. There are
instructions to begin, commit, or abort a transaction, and to test whether one is currently
active.

Lock Subscription
The pseudocode shown in this section (without Intel’s special ABI) is of course quite similar to what
a compiler or library would use for best-effort implementation of atomic blocks with fallback to a
global lock. In both cases, a fallback transaction that writes to a location read or written by a hardware
transaction will cause the latter to abort. Unfortunately, we must also consider the possibility that a
fallback transaction might read a pair of locations X and Y that are updated together, atomically, by
a hardware transaction that runs after the read of X but before the read of Y. To prevent the fallback
transaction from seeing the resulting inconsistency, both SLE and atomic-block code arrange for a
hardware transaction to “subscribe” to the fallback lock by reading its value and aborting if the lock
is held.
Unfortunately, subscription to a global lock (or to a coarse-grain SLE lock) forces a hardware transac-
tion to defer to software transactions with which it does not logically conflict. To reduce the window
of vulnerability, several researchers have suggested that subscription should be delayed until the very
end of the hardware transaction, allowing it to commit if the software transaction has already finished.
While tempting, this lazy subscription is safe only in the presence of very careful sandboxing on the
hardware side (Dice et al. 2014). Without it, the hardware transaction may see inconsistent values
that end up defeating the eventual subscription—e.g., by inducing a logically impossible branch,
overwriting a return address, or corrupting the lock itself. As we shall see in Sec. 9.2.3, similar issues
arise in hybrid TM systems.

3 As of early 2020, Intel appears to have deprecated the HLE ABI (Intel 2023, Vol. 1, Sec. 2.5).

Figure 9.1 The Ticket lock of         class lock
Figure 4.7, modified to make               atomic<int> next ticket := 0
use of hardware lock elision.              atomic<int> now serving := 0
                                          const int base = ...               // tuning parameter
                                      lock.acquire():
                                           int my ticket := XACQUIRE next ticket.FAI()
                                           loop
                                                int ns := now serving.load()
                                                if ns = my ticket
                                                      break
                                                pause(base × (my ticket − ns))
                                           fence(R∥RW)
                                      lock.release():
                                           int ns := now serving.load()
                                           if ¬ XRELEASE next ticket.CAS(ns+1, ns, RW∥)
                                                 now serving.store(ns + 1)

    On legacy machines, RTM instructions will cause an unsupported instruction exception.
To facilitate the construction of backward-compatible code, HLE provides an alternative
interface in which traditional lock acquire and release instructions (typically CAS and store)
can be tagged with an XACQUIRE or XRELEASE prefix byte. The prefixes were carefully chosen
from among codes that function as nops on legacy machines; when run on such a machine,
HLE-enabled code will acquire and release its locks “for real.” On a TSX machine, the
hardware will refrain from acquiring exclusive ownership of the cache line accessed by
an XACQUIRE -tagged instruction. Rather, it will enter speculative mode, add the lock to its
speculative update set, and remember the lock’s original value and location. If the subsequent
XRELEASE -tagged instruction restores the original value to the same location (and no conflicts
have occurred in the interim), the hardware will commit the speculation. Crucially, any loads
of the lock within the critical section will see its value as “locked,” even though its line is
never acquired in exclusive mode. The only way for code in a critical section to tell whether
it is speculative or not is to execute a (non-backward-compatible) explicit XTEST instruction.
    Because an XRELEASE -tagged instruction must restore the original value of a lock, several
of the lock algorithms in Chapter 4 must be modified to make them HLE-compatible. The
ticket lock (Figure 4.7), for example, can be rewritten as shown in Figure 9.1. Speculation
will succeed only if ns = next_ticket on the first iteration of the loop in acquire, and no
other thread increments next_ticket during the critical section. Note in particular that if
now_serving ̸ = next_ticket when a thread first calls acquire, the loop will continue to
execute until the current lock holder updates either now_serving or next_ticket, at which
point HLE will abort and retry the FAI “for real.” More significantly, if no two critical sections
conflict, and if no aborts occur due to overflow or other “spurious” reasons, then an arbitrary
number of threads can execute critical sections on the same lock simultaneously, each of
them invisibly incrementing and restoring next_ticket, and never changing now_serving.

9.2.3    Hybrid TM

While faster than the all-software TM implementations of Sec. 9.1, HTM systems seem
likely, for the foreseeable future, to have limitations that will sometimes lead them to abort
even in the absence of conflicts. It seems reasonable to hope that a hardware/software hybrid
might combine (most of) the speed of the former with the generality of the latter.
    Several styles of hybrid have been proposed. In some, hardware serves only to accelerate
a TM system implemented primarily in software. In others, hardware implements complete
support for some subset of transactions. In this latter case, the hardware and software may be
designed together, or the software may be designed to accommodate a generic “best effort”
HTM.
    “Best effort” hybrids have the appeal of compatibility with near-term commercial HTM.
If transactions abort due to conflicts, the only alternative to rewriting the application would
seem to be fallback to a global lock. If transactions abort due to hardware limitations,
however, fallback to software transactions would seem to be attractive.

Hardware-Accelerated STM
Experimental results with a variety of STM systems suggest a baseline overhead (single-
thread slowdown) of 3–10× for atomic operations. Several factors contribute to this over-
head, including conflict detection, the buffering of speculative writes (undo or redo logging),
validation to ensure consistency, and conflict resolution (arbitration among conflicting trans-
actions). All of these are potentially amenable to hardware acceleration.
    Saha et al. (2006b) propose to simplify conflict detection by providing hardware mark
bits on cache lines. Set and queried by software, these bits are cleared when a cache line is
invalidated—e.g., by remote access. To avoid the need to poll the bits, Spear et al. (2007) pro-
pose a general-purpose alert-on-update mechanism that triggers a software handler when a
marked line is accessed remotely. Minh et al. (2007) propose an alternative conflict detection
mechanism based on hardware read and write signatures (Bloom filters).
    Shriraman et al. (2007) propose to combine in-cache hardware buffering of speculative
cache lines with software conflict detection and resolution; alert-on-update provides imme-
diate notification of conflicts, eliminating the need for validation. In subsequent work, the
authors add signatures and conflict summary tables; these support eager conflict detection
in hardware, leaving software responsible only for conflict resolution, which may be lazy
if desired (Shriraman et al. 2010). As suggested by Hill et al. (2007), the “decoupling” of
mechanisms for access tracking, buffering, notification, etc. serves to increase their gen-
erality: in various other combinations they can be used for such non-TM applications as
debugging, fine-grain protection, memory management, and active messaging.

Hardware/Software TM Codesign
In hardware-assisted STM, atomicity remains a program-level property, built on multiple
(non-atomic) hardware-level operations. To maximize performance, one would presumably
prefer to implement atomicity entirely in hardware. If hardware transactions are sometimes
unsuccessful for reasons other than conflicts, and if fallback to a global lock is not considered
acceptable, the challenge then becomes to devise a fallback mechanism that interoperates
correctly with hardware transactions.
   One possible approach is to design the hardware and software together. Kumar et al.
(2006) propose an HTM to complement the object-cloning DSTM of Herlihy et al. (2003b).
Baugh et al. (2008) assume the availability of fine-grain memory protection (Zhou et al.
2004), which they use in software transactions to force aborts in conflicting hardware trans-
actions. A more common approach assumes that the hardware is given, and designs software
to go with it.

Best-Effort Hybrid TM
An HTM implementation is termed “best effort” if it makes no guarantees of completion,
even in the absence of conflicts, and makes no assumptions about the nature of software trans-
actions that might be running concurrently. All of the commercial HTM systems discussed in
Sec. 9.2.1—with the exception of constrained transactions in z TM—fit this characterization.
    If “spurious” aborts are common enough to make fallback to a global lock unattractive,
one is faced with a generalization of the problem that arose in that simpler case: how do
we ensure mutual isolation between the hardware and software code paths? In Sec. 9.2.2
we arranged for each hardware transaction to subscribe to the fallback lock—either at the
beginning of the transaction or, with sandboxing, at the end. This arrangement ensured that
a hardware transaction would always abort when a software transaction (implemented as a
critical section, which could not, itself, abort) was active. For hybrid TM, we should like
to do better—to enable significant concurrency not only among nonconflicting hardware
transactions but also with respect to concurrent software transactions.
    A hardware transaction, of course, will abort automatically if a concurrent software
transaction writes—either eagerly or at commit time—a location that the hardware has
written or read. But this is not enough. If hardware transaction H executes in the middle
of software transaction S–perhaps when S is stalled—then H may see inconsistent state.
Conversely, H may perform writes that subsequently cause S to see inconsistent state. We
must detect such conflicts.
    Perhaps the most straightforward solution, suggested by Damron et al. (2006), is to
add extra instructions to the code of hardware transactions, so they inspect and update
software metadata. Hardware transactions can then determine whether reads are mutually
compatible, and software transactions can validate as they would in an all-software system.
Unfortunately, while hardware transactions need not re-validate at commit time (as software
transactions must), the metadata operations they still must perform have significant run-time

cost. Vallejo et al. (2011) move much of this instrumentation inside if (hw_txn) conditions,
thereby reducing the overhead when calling shared routines from nontransactional code. For
object-oriented languages, Tabba et al. (2009) show how instrumented hardware transactions
can safely make in-place updates to objects that are cloned by software transactions.
    To obviate instrumentation on the hardware path entirely, Lev et al. (2007) suggest switch-
ing between hardware and software phases on a global basis, so the two types of transactions
never run concurrently. Performance can be excellent, but also somewhat brittle: unless soft-
ware phases are rare, global phase changes can introduce significant delays.
    Arguably the most appealing approach to best-effort hybrid TM is to employ an STM
algorithm that can detect the execution of concurrent hardware transactions without the
need to instrument HTM loads and stores. Dalessandro et al. (2011) achieve this goal by
using NOrec (Sec. 9.1.4) on the software path, to leverage value-based validation. Hardware
transactions must still subscribe to the global NOrec sequence lock, ensuring that they will
abort if a software transaction is currently in its commit phase. Significantly, however, the
scalability limitation imposed by NOrec’s serial write-back is mitigated in the hybrid version
by counting on most transactions to finish in hardware—STM is only a fallback. In addition,
if the hardware supports nontransactional loads within transactions, the compiler can use
these to implement safe and precise sandboxing, enabling lazy subscription without false
conflicts. Riegel et al. (2011) suggest an alternative approach that relies on nontransactional
read and FAI instructions.
    Matveev and Shavit (2013) propose a three-level system that avoids both the need for
nontransactional instructions and (when many transactions fail to commit in hardware) the
potential scalability problems of Hybrid NOrec. Their approach is named for the middle
level: reduced hardware transactions. In this middle level, the bulk of the transaction is
executed in software, building read and write sets using an algorithm like TL2 or TinySTM
(Sec. 9.1.4). The reads are then validated—and the writes effected—in a single hardware
transaction whose memory footprint is likely to be much smaller than that of the transaction
as a whole and whose instruction stream is almost certain to be free of anything that would
deterministically abort best-effort HTM. In the rare event that a middle-level transaction fails
to commit, its thread reverts to a third-level, all-software code path that precludes concurrent
execution of hardware transactions. Top- and middle-level transactions must update the per-
Orec version numbers that all-software transactions use for conflict detection, but they do not
need to instrument loads: because all-software transactions are rare, top- and middle-level
transactions can simply read a global count of committed software transactions, secure in
the knowledge that they will abort if such a transaction has been active.

9.3      Challenges

To serve its original purpose—to facilitate the construction of small, self-contained concur-
rent data structures—TM need not be exposed at the programming language level. Much

as expert programmers use CAS and other atomic hardware instructions to build library-
level synchronization mechanisms and concurrent data structures, so might they use HTM
to improve performance “under the hood,” without directly impacting “ordinary” program-
mers. Much of the appeal of TM, however, is its potential to help those programmers write
parallel code that is both correct and scalable. To realize this potential, TM must be inte-
grated into language semantics and implementations. In this final section of the monograph,
we discuss some of the issues involved in this integration. Note that the discussion raises
more questions than it answers: 30 years after its original conception, language support for
TM is still a work in progress.

9.3.1    Semantics

The most basic open question for TM semantics is “what am I allowed to do inside?” Some
operations—interactive I/O in particular—are incompatible with speculation. (We cannot
tell the human user “please forget I asked you that.”) Rollback of other operations—many
system calls among them—may be so difficult as to force a nonspeculative implementa-
tion. The two most obvious strategies for such irreversible (irrevocable) operations are to
(1) simply disallow them in transactions, or (2) force a transaction that performs them to
become inevitable—i.e., guaranteed to commit. While Spear et al. (2008b) have shown that
inevitability does not always necessitate mutual exclusion, it nonetheless imposes severe
constraints on scalability.
    In its role as a synchronization mechanism, language-level TM must be integrated into the
language memory model (Sec. 3.3). Some researchers have argued that since locks already
form the basis of many memory models, the behavior of transactions should be defined in
terms of implicit locking (Menon et al. 2008). Others have suggested that transactions should
be defined along with locks and other synchronization primitives, in a co-equal fashion—all
varieties of synchronization will then contribute to a program’s ordering. This approach
was taken by the developers of the 2014 “technical specification” (draft feature set) for
transactional memory in C++ (Wong et al. 2015), based on an earlier proposal from Intel,
Oracle, IBM, and Red Hat (Adl-Tabatabai et al. 2012). As of 2023, a simpler version of that
specification (Boehm et al. 2021) is under consideration for inclusion in C++’26.
    At the same time, given that TM is often promoted as a higher-level, more intuitive
alternative to locks, there is something conceptually unsatisfying about defining transactional
behavior in terms of (or even in concert with) the thing it is supposed to replace. Clearly
any language that allows transactions and locks in the same program must explain how
the two interact. Considering that locks are typically implemented using lower-level atomic
operations like CAS, a potentially appealing approach is to turn the tables, as it were, and
define locks in terms of atomic blocks (Dalessandro et al. 2010b). In the framework of
Sec. 3.3, a global total order on transactions provides a trivial synchronization order, which
combines with program order to yield the overall notion of happens-before. In the resulting

framework, one can easily show that a data-race-free program is transactionally sequentially
consistent: all memory accesses appear to happen in a global total order that is consistent
with program order in each thread, and that keeps the accesses of any given transaction
contiguous.
    Some challenges of language integration are more pedestrian: If there are limits on the
operations allowed inside transactions, should these be enforced at compile time or at run
time? If the former, how do we tell whether it is safe to call a subroutine that is defined in
a different compilation unit? Must the subroutine interface explicitly indicate whether it is
“transaction safe”?
    Other challenges involve “surprise” interactions with other language features. Exceptions
are particularly problematic. If an exception arises in a transaction and is not caught inter-
nally, what should happen when its propagation reaches the transaction boundary? Should
the transaction commit or abort? If the exception represents an error, committing may not
be safe: the transaction may not have restored program invariants. On the other hand, if the
transaction aborts, and “never happened,” how can it raise an exception? The answer may
depend, at least in part, on whether speculation is part of the language semantics. Some
researchers argue “no”—transactions should simply be atomic, and speculation (if any)
should be an implementation detail. Other researchers argue that not only exceptions but
also inevitability, explicit aborts, and condition synchronization (the latter two of which we
consider in Sec. 9.3.2 below) are easier to understand if the programmer thinks in terms of
speculation.
    Finally, there is the issue of forward progress (absence of deadlock or livelock). Guerraoui
and Kapałka (2009) formalize this issue in terms of a property they call progressiveness,
with two key variants. A TM system is said to be weakly progressive if a transaction that
encounters no conflicts is always able to commit. A system is said to be strongly progressive
if whenever a set of transactions conflict on only a single variable (or perhaps a single Orec),
at least one of them is able to commit. Language semantics based on progressiveness would
presumably require not only an explicit acknowledgment of speculation but also a formal
definition of conflict. The latter would appear to be challenging, given issues of granularity
and of false conflicts due to collisions in object-to-Orec mappings.

Strong and Weak Isolation
As we noted at the beginning of Sec. 9.2, most HTM systems are strongly atomic—their transactions
serialize not only with other transactions but also with individual loads and stores. Some researchers
have argued (Blundell et al. 2005; Schneider et al. 2008; Baugh et al. 2008; Abadi et al. 2009;
Shpeisman et al. 2007) that language-level TM should guarantee strong atomicity as well, though this
is difficult to implement in software. The difference between strong and weak atomicity, however,
can be seen only in programs with data races—races between transactional and non-transactional
accesses in particular (Dalessandro and Scott 2009). If data races are considered to be bugs, then
strong atomicity serves only to make the behavior of buggy programs easier to diagnose—race-free
programs can never tell the difference.

   Interestingly, progressiveness is largely orthogonal to nonblocking progress. A nonblock-
ing TM system, as discussed in Sec. 9.1.1, may allow a thread to make progress within the
STM implementation while still not providing progressiveness at the level of complete
transactions. Perhaps the strongest argument for nonblocking STM is its ability to accom-
modate event-based code, in which a handler may need to make progress (again, within the
STM implementation) even when a main-program thread is in the middle of a conflicting
transaction.

9.3.2    Extensions

When adding transactions to a programming language, one may want—or need—to include
a variety of features not yet discussed in this chapter.

Nesting
In the chapter introduction we argued that one of the key advantages of transactions over
lock-based critical sections was their composability. Composability requires that we allow
transactions to nest. The simplest way to do so is to “flatten” them—to subsume the inner
transaction(s) in the outer and allow the entire unit to commit or abort together. All cur-
rent commercial HTM implementations provide subsumption nesting, generally with some
maximum limit on depth. Several STM systems do likewise.
   For performance reasons, it may sometimes be desirable to allow an inner transaction to
abort and retry while retaining the work that has been done so far in the outer transaction.
This option, known as “true” or closed nesting, will also be required in any system that
allows a transaction to abort and not retry. We have already considered such a possibility
for exceptions that escape transactions. It will also arise in any language that provides the
programmer with an explicit abort command (Harris et al. 2005).
   For the sake of both performance and generality, it may also be desirable to allow concur-
rency within transactions—e.g., to employ multiple threads to cooperate in a computationally
demanding operation and commit their results together, atomically (Agrawal et al. 2008).
   In some cases it may even be desirable to allow an inner transaction to commit when
the surrounding transaction aborts (Ni et al. 2007; Moss and Hosking 2006). This sort of
open nesting may violate serializability, and must be used with care. Possible applications
include the preservation of semantically neutral but performance-advantageous operations
like garbage collection, memoization, and rebalancing; the collection of debugging or per-
formance information; and the construction of “boosted” abstractions (Sec. 9.1.3).

Condition Synchronization
Like lock-based critical sections, transactions sometimes depend on preconditions, which
may or may not hold. In Chapter 5 we considered a variety of mechanisms whereby a thread

could wait for a precondition in a critical section. But a transaction cannot wait: because it
is isolated, changes to the state of the world, made by other threads, will not be visible to it.
    There is an analogy here to nonblocking operations, which cannot wait and still be
nonblocking. The analogy suggests a potential solution: insist that transactions be total—
that their preconditions always be true—but allow them to commit “reservation” notices in
the style of dual data structures (Sec. 8.8). If, say, a dequeue operation on a transactional
queue finds no data to remove, it can enqueue a reservation atomically instead, and return
an indication that it has done so. The surrounding code can then wait for the reservation to
be satisfied in normal, nontransactional code.
    A second alternative, suggested by Smaragdakis et al. (2007), is to suspend (“punctuate”)
a transaction at a conditional wait, and to make the sections of the transaction before and
after the wait individually (but not jointly) atomic. This alternative requires, of course, that
any invariants maintained by the transaction be true at the punctuation point. If a wait may
be nested inside called routines, the fact that they may wait probably needs to be an explicit
part of their interface.
    Perhaps the most appealing approach to transactional condition synchronization is the
retry primitive of Harris et al. (2005). When executed by a transaction, it indicates that the
current operation cannot proceed, and should abort, to be retried at some future time. Exactly
when to retry is a question reminiscent of conditional critical regions (Sec. 7.4.1). There is
a particularly elegant answer for STM: The transaction is sure to behave the same the next
time around if it reads the same values from memory. Therefore, it should become a visible
reader of every location in its read set, and wait for one of those locations to be modified by
another transaction. (Modification by nontransactional code would imply the existence of
a data race.) The wakeup mechanism for condition synchronization is then essentially the
same as the abort mechanism for visible readers, and can share the same implementation.

Other Uses of Speculation
Transactional memory is not the only potential use of speculation. Given a speculation and
rollback mechanism implemented for TM, we may consider using it for other things as well.
Possibilities include

• try blocks that roll back to their original state instead of stopping where they are when an
  exception arises. Shinnar et al. (2004) refer to such blocks as “try-all.” They are supported
  explicitly in hardware on Power 8, as “rollback-only” (non-isolated) transactions (Le et al.
  2015).
• automatic or semi-automatic (programmer-hint-driven) parallelization of semantically
  sequential loops (Ding et al. 2007; Berger et al. 2009). In such a loop, each iteration is
  essentially a transaction, but conflicts are always resolved in favor of the earlier iteration,
  and no iteration is permitted to commit until all its predecessors have done so. Blue
  Gene/Q provided explicit hardware support for such ordered speculation. It can also

  be implemented on HTM systems (e.g., Power TM and recent Intel RSX) that allow
  nontransactional loads inside transactions.
• safe futures (Sec. 7.4.2) (Welc et al. 2005), which abort and roll back their continuation
  in the event of conflict, and can thus be used in languages with side effects, without
  changing program semantics. Like ordered speculation, safe futures can be implemented
  with an HTM system that supports nontransactional loads inside transactions.

9.3.3    Implementation

The discussion of STM in Sec. 9.1 conveys some sense of the breadth of possible implemen-
tation strategies. It is far from comprehensive, however. Drawing inspiration from database
systems, several groups have considered multi-version STM systems, which increase the
success rate for long-running read-only transactions by keeping old versions of modified
data (Riegel et al. 2006; Cachopo and Rito-Silva 2006; Perelman et al. 2011; Lu and Scott
2013; Wei et al. 2023). Instead of requiring that all loaded values be correct as of commit
time (and then aborting every time a location in the read set is updated by another transac-
tion), multi-version TM systems arrange for a reader to use the values that were current as
of its start time, and thus to “commit in the past.” To increase concurrency, it is conceivable
that TM might also adopt the ability of some database systems to forward updates from
one (still active) transaction to another, making the second dependent on the first (Ramadan
et al. 2008).

Privatization
Informally, a transaction is said to privatize a data structure X if, prior to the transaction,
X may be accessed by more than one thread, but after the transaction program logic guar-
antees that X is private to some particular thread. The canonical example of privatization
arises with shared containers through which threads pass objects to one another. In a pro-
gram with such a container, the convention may be that once an object has been removed
from the container, it “belongs” to the thread that removed it, which can safely operate on
it without any synchronization. If the thread returns the object to the same or a different
container at a later time, it is said to publish the object. Publication of most shared objects
also occurs at creation time: a thread typically allocates an object and initializes it before
making it visible (publishing it) to other threads. Prior to publication, no synchronization is
required. Dalessandro et al. (2010b) have observed that privatization is semantically equiv-
alent to locking—it renders a shared object temporarily private. Publication is equivalent to
unlocking—it makes the private object shared again.
   In their usual form, publication and privatization are race-free idioms, at least at the
level of the programming model: any accesses by different threads are always ordered by an
intervening transaction. Unfortunately, in many STM systems, privatization is not race-free

at the implementation level, and may require compiler support for correctness (Rodriguez
and Spear 2020). Races arise for two reasons, and may lead to incorrect behavior in programs
that seem logically correct. First, completed transactions may perform “cleanup” operations
(write-back of redo or undo logs) after their serialization point. These cleanup writes may
interfere with nontransactional reads in the thread that now owns the privatized data. Second,
“zombie” transactions, which are doomed to abort but have not yet realized this fact, may
read locations that are written nontransactionally by the thread that now owns the privatized
data; such transactions must be carefully sandboxed to avoid erroneous, externally visible
behavior.
    Early STM systems did not experience the “privatization problem” because they assumed
(implicitly or explicitly) that any datum that was ever accessed by more than one thread was
always accessed transactionally. One solution to the privatization problem is thus to stati-
cally partition data into “always private” and “sometimes shared” categories. Unfortunately,
attempts to enforce this partition via the type system lead to programs in which utility rou-
tines and data structures must be “cloned” to create explicitly visible transactional and
nontransactional versions (Dalessandro et al. 2007).
    Absent a static partition of data, any modern STM system must be “privatization safe”
to be correct. Systems that serialize cleanup—RingSTM and NOrec among them—are nat-
urally so. Others can be made so with extra instrumentation. Marathe et al. (2008) describe
and evaluate several instrumentation alternatives. They identify an adaptive strategy whose
performance is stable across a wide range of workloads. Dice et al. (2010) describe an
additional mechanism that can be used to reduce the cost of privatization when the num-
ber of active transactions is significantly smaller than the number of extant threads. Even
so, the overheads remain significant—enough so that one must generally dismiss reported
performance numbers for any prototype STM system that is not privatization safe.
    Publication, it turns out, can also lead to unexpected or erroneous behavior, but only in
the presence of program-level data races between transactional and nontransactional code
(Menon et al. 2008). If data races are viewed as bugs, the “publication problem” can safely
be ignored.

Compilation
While many researchers once expected that TM might be successfully implemented in a
library/run-time system, most now agree that it requires language integration and compiler
support if it is to be used by non-experts. Compilers can be expected to instrument transac-
tional loads and stores; clone code paths for nontransactional, STM, and HTM execution;
and insert validation where necessary to sandbox dangerous operations. They can also be
expected to implement a variety of performance optimizations:

• Identify accesses that are sure to touch the same location, and elide redundant instrumen-
  tation (Harris et al. 2006).

• Identify loads and stores that are certain to access private variables, and refrain from
  instrumenting them (Shpeisman et al. 2007). (This task is rather tricky: if an access may
  touch either a shared datum or a private datum, then it must be instrumented. If the
  system uses redo logs, then any other accesses to the same private datum must also be
  instrumented, to ensure that a transaction always sees its own writes.)
• For strings of successive accesses, infer the minimum number of synchronizing instruc-
  tions required to maintain sequential consistency (Spear et al. 2009b).

More exotic optimizations may also be possible. Olszewski et al. (2007) have proposed
dynamic binary rewriting to allow arbitrary library routines to be instrumented on the fly,
and called from within transactions. More ambitiously, if subroutine foo is often called inside
transactions, there may be circumstances in which some subset of its arguments are known
to be private, or to have already been logged. To exploit these circumstances, a compiler
may choose to generate a custom clone of foo that elides instrumentation for one or more
parameters.
   As of this writing, compilers have been developed for transactional extensions to a vari-
ety of programming languages, including Java (Adl-Tabatabai et al. 2006), C# (Harris et al.
2006), C (Wang et al. 2007), C++ (Afek et al. 2010; Free Software Foundation 2012),4 Clo-
jure (Hickey 2022), and Haskell (HaskellWiki 2012; Yates and Scott 2019). Language-level
semantics are currently the most mature in Clojure and Haskell. Among more “mainstream”
languages, C++ is likely to be the first to incorporate TM extensions into the language
standard (Boehm et al. 2021).

9.3.4    Debugging and Performance Tuning

TM also raises significant issues for debugging and for performance analysis and tuning.
The most obvious issue for debugging is the tension between the desire on the one hand to
support debugging at the level of statements or machine instructions and, on the other hand,
the need for transactions to effect their memory updates as a single indivisible operation.
    Zyulkyarov et al. (2011, 2010) propose to differentiate, explicitly, between debugging
an application, debugging the code inside atomic blocks, and debugging the TM implemen-
tation. For the first task, transactions should appear to be atomic. When single-stepping, for
example, they should execute “all at once.” For the second task, the debugger should ensure
that threads other than the one in the transaction are quiescent, and that the values of all
variables not under modification by the transaction should appear to be consistent. The third
task is then akin to conventional debugging of library and runtime code.
    Without new tools, programmers are likely to find it very difficult to debug transactional
programs—in effect, a conventional debugger supports only the third of the TM debugging

4 Intel also developed a prototype edition of its ICC compiler with software transactional memory
support in 2010, but it was discontinued.

tasks. Properly supported, however, debugging of transactional programs may actually be
easier than conventional debugging.
    Herlihy and Lev (2009, 2010) propose a standard API for communication between a
transactional debugger and the underlying STM system. Their work can be seen as focusing
on the second of the TM debugging tasks. It requires that transactions execute in software,
even if production runs employ an HTM. It also requires that the debugger differentiate,
explicitly, between the state of the transaction and that of the rest of the program: if focus
shifts from the transaction to that of some other thread, memory should appear to be con-
sistent.
    Unlike a lock-based critical section, a transaction never sees changes caused by other
threads. A programmer who single-steps a thread through a transaction can therefore be sure
that all observed changes were caused by the active thread. The STM system, moreover,
can be expected to maintain extensive information of use to the debugging task, including
read and write sets, both speculative and prior (consistent) versions of modified data, and
conflicts between threads. In particular, if a conflict forces a thread to wait or to abort, a
transactional debugger can see and report the cause.
    Similar information can be expected to be of use to performance analysis tools. Conven-
tional tools, again, are unlikely to be adequate: aborted transactions can be expected to have
a major impact on performance, but isolation, if naively implemented, will leave no trace of
their activity (Porter and Witchel 2010). Clearly some sort of information needs to “leak”
out of aborted transactions. HTM designers (e.g., for Power and x86) have devoted con-
siderable attention to the interaction of transactions with hardware performance counters.
Systems software can, to a large extent, control which counters track events of committed
instructions only, and which include (or also include) events performed and then elided by
aborted speculation.
    With traditional lock-based critical sections, performance analysis tools typically focus
on acquire operations with long wait times. These identify conflicts between critical sec-
tions, which then prompt the programmer to explore more fine-grain locking alternatives.
With transactions, programmers may begin, analogously, with large atomic blocks. When
a performance analysis tool discovers that these often abort, it can identify the conflicts
among them, prompting the programmer to search for ways to express the algorithm with
smaller, more fine-grain transactions. Extensions to the programming model, such as the
early release of Herlihy et al. (2003b) or the elastic transactions of Felber et al. (2009)
may also allow the programmer to reduce conflicts among large transactions by explicitly
evicting certain locations from the read set (e.g., if they were used only during a search
phase, which can be independently verified).
    The need to break transactions into smaller atomic pieces, in order to minimize conflicts,
raises correctness issues: the programmer must somehow verify that decomposed operations
still serialize and that the individual transactions maintain (now presumably somewhat more
complex) program invariants. By continuing to use transactions instead of locks, however,
the programmer can be sure (at least in the absence of condition synchronization) that the

decomposition process will never introduce deadlock, and that the program will remain data-
race free if shared objects are accessed only in transactions. These observations suggest that
time spent diagnosing correctness bugs in lock-based programs may be replaced by time
spent diagnosing performance bugs in transactional code. This change alone may prove to
be a compelling benefit of transactional synchronization.
