The high priority of structured software development and the low priority of program
efficiency is reflected, first and foremost, in the choice of programming language and
interface frameworks. This is often a disadvantage for the end user who has to invest in
ever more powerful computers to keep up with the ever bigger software packages and who
is still frustrated by unacceptably long response times, even for simple tasks.

Sometimes, it is necessary to compromise on the advanced principles of software develop-
ment in order to make software packages faster and smaller. This manual discusses how to
make a sensible balance between these considerations. It is discussed how to identify and
isolate the most critical part of a program and concentrate the optimization effort on that
particular part. It is discussed how to overcome the dangers of a relatively primitive
programming style that does not automatically check for array bounds violations, invalid
pointers, etc. And it is discussed which of the advanced programming constructs are costly
and which ones are cheap, in relation to execution time.

2 Choosing the optimal platform
2.1 Choice of hardware platform
The choice of hardware platform has become less important than it used to be. The
distinctions between RISC and CISC processors, between PC's and mainframes, and
between simple processors and vector processors are becoming increasingly blurred as the
standard PC processors with CISC instruction sets have got RISC cores, vector processing
instructions, multiple cores, and a processing speed exceeding that of yesterday's big
mainframe computers.

Today, the choice of a hardware platform for a given task is often determined by
considerations such as price, compatibility, second source, and the availability of good
development tools, rather than by the processing power. Connecting several standard PC's
in a network may be both cheaper and more efficient than investing in a big mainframe
computer. Big supercomputers with massively parallel vector processing capabilities still
have a niche in scientific computing, but for most purposes the standard PC processors are
preferred because of their superior performance/price ratio.

The CISC instruction set (x86) of the standard PC processors is not optimal from a techno-
logical point of view. This instruction set is maintained for the sake of backwards
compatibility with a lineage of software that dates back to around 1980 where RAM memory
and disk space were scarce resources. However, the CISC instruction set is better than its
reputation. The compactness of the code makes caching more efficient today where cache
size is a limited resource. The CISC instruction set may actually be better than RISC in
situations where code caching is critical. A further advantage of the CISC instruction set is
that it needs fewer instructions to do the same job. A serious problem with the original x86
instruction set is the scarcity of registers. This problem has been alleviated in the 64-bit
extension to the x86 instruction set where the number of general purpose registers has
been doubled, and the number of vector register has been quadrupled with the AVX512
instruction set extension.

Thin clients that depend on network resources are not recommended for critical applications
because the response times for network resources cannot be controlled.

Small hand-held devices are becoming more popular and used for an increasing number of
purposes such as email and web browsing that previously required a PC. Similarly, we are
seeing an increasing number of devices and machines with embedded microcontrollers. I
am not making any specific recommendation about which platforms and operating systems
are most efficient for such applications, but it is important to realize that such devices
typically have much less memory and computing power than PCs. Therefore, it is even
more important to economize the resource use on such systems than it is on a PC platform.
However, with a well optimized software design, it is possible to get a good performance for
many applications even on such small devices, as discussed on page 172.

This manual is based on the standard PC platform with an Intel, AMD, or VIA processor and
a Windows, Linux, BSD, or Mac operating system running in 32-bit or 64-bit mode. Much of
the advice given here may apply to other platforms as well, but the examples have been
tested only on PC platforms.

Graphics accelerators
The choice of platform is obviously influenced by the requirements of the task in question.
For example, a heavy graphics application is preferably implemented on a platform with a
graphics coprocessor or graphics accelerator card. Some systems also have a dedicated
physics processor for calculating the physical movements of objects in a computer game or
animation.

It is possible in some cases to use the high processing power of the processors on a
graphics accelerator card for other purposes than rendering graphics on the screen.
However, such applications are highly system dependent and therefore not recommended if
portability is important. This manual does not cover graphics processors.

Programmable logic devices
A programmable logic device is a chip that can be programmed in a hardware definition
language, such as Verilog or VHDL. Common devices are CPLDs and FPGAs. The
difference between a software programming language, e.g. C++, and a hardware definition
language is that the software programming language defines an algorithm of sequential
instructions, where a hardware definition language defines hardware circuits consisting of
digital building blocks such as gates, flip-flops, multiplexers, arithmetic units, etc. and the
wires that connect them. The hardware definition language is inherently parallel because it
defines electrical connections rather than sequences of operations.

A complex digital operation can often be executed faster in a programmable logic device
than in a microprocessor because the hardware can be wired for a specific purpose.

It is possible to implement a microprocessor in an FPGA as a so-called soft processor. Such
a soft processor is much slower than a dedicated microprocessor and therefore not
advantageous by itself. But a solution where a soft processor activates critical application-
specific instructions that are coded in a hardware definition language in the same chip can
be a very efficient solution in some cases. An even more powerful solution is the
combination of a dedicated microprocessor core and an FPGA in the same chip. Such
hybrid solutions are now used in some embedded systems.

A look in my crystal ball reveals that similar solutions may someday be implemented in PC
processors. The application program will be able to define application-specific instructions
that can be coded in a hardware definition language. Such a processor will have an extra
cache for the hardware definition code in addition to the code cache and the data cache.

2.2 Choice of microprocessor
The benchmark performance of competing brands of microprocessors are very similar
thanks to heavy competition. Processors with multiple cores are advantageous for
applications that can be divided into multiple threads that run in parallel. Small lightweight
processors with low power consumption are actually quite powerful and may be sufficient for
less intensive applications.

2.3 Choice of operating system
All newer microprocessors in the x86 family can run in both 16-bit, 32-bit, and 64-bit mode.

16-bit mode was used in the old operating systems DOS and Windows 3.x. These systems
use segmentation of the memory if the size of program or data exceeds 64 kbytes. This is
quite inefficient for bigger programs. The modern microprocessors are not optimized for 16-
bit mode and some operating systems are not backwards compatible with 16-bit programs.
It is not recommended to make 16-bit programs, except for small embedded systems.

64-bit operating systems are common today. These system are capable of running both 32-
bit and 64-bit programs. The 64-bit systems can improve the performance by 5-10% for
some CPU-intensive applications with many function calls and for applications that use
large amounts of RAM memory. If the bottleneck is elsewhere, then there is no difference in
performance between 32-bit and 64-bit systems. Applications that use large amounts of
memory will benefit from the larger address space of the 64-bit systems.

The Windows and Linux operating systems give almost identical performance for 32-bit
software because the two operating systems are using the same function calling
conventions. Everything that is said here about Linux also applies to BSD systems.

The Intel-based Mac OS X operating system is based on BSD, but the compiler uses
position-independent code and lazy binding by default, which makes it less efficient. The
performance can be improved by using static linking and by not using position-independent
code (option -fno-pic).

64 bit systems have several advantages over 32 bit systems:

•   The number of registers is doubled. This makes it possible to store intermediate data
    and local variables in registers rather than in memory. The number of vector registers in
    64-bit mode is even larger if the AVX512 instruction set is enabled.

•   Function parameters are transferred in registers rather than on the stack. This makes
    function calls more efficient.

•   The size of the integer registers is extended to 64 bits. This is an advantage in
    applications that use 64-bit integers.

•   The allocation and deallocation of big memory blocks is more efficient.

•   The SSE2 instruction set is supported on all 64-bit CPUs and operating systems.

•   The 64 bit instruction set supports self-relative addressing of data. This makes position-
    independent code more efficient.

64 bit systems have the following disadvantages compared to 32 bit systems:

•   Pointers, references, and stack entries use 64 bits rather than 32 bits. This makes data
    caching less efficient.

•   Access to static or global arrays require a few extra instructions for address calculation
    in 64 bit mode if the image base is not guaranteed to be less than 231.

•   Address calculation is more complicated in a large memory model where the combined
    size of code and data can exceed 2 Gbytes. This large memory model is hardly ever
    used, though.

•   Some instructions are one byte longer in 64 bit mode than in 32 bit mode.

In general, you can expect 64-bit programs to run a little faster than 32-bit programs if there
are many function calls, if there are many allocations of large memory blocks, or if the
program can take advantage of 64-bit integer calculations. It is necessary to use 64-bit
systems if the program uses more than 2 gigabytes of data.

The similarity between the operating systems disappears when running in 64-bit mode
because the function calling conventions are different. 64-bit Windows allows only four
function parameters to be transferred in registers, whereas 64-bit Linux, BSD and Mac allow
up to fourteen parameters to be transferred in registers (6 integer and 8 floating point).
There are also other details that make function calling more efficient in 64-bit Linux than in
64-bit Windows (See page 50 and manual 5: "Calling conventions for different C++
compilers and operating systems"). An application with many function calls may run slightly
faster in 64-bit Linux than in 64-bit Windows. The disadvantage of 64-bit Windows may be
mitigated by making critical functions inline or static or by using a compiler that can do
whole program optimization.

2.4 Choice of programming language
Before starting a new software project, it is important to decide which programming
language is best suited for the project at hand. Low-level languages are good for optimizing
execution speed or program size, while high-level languages are good for making clear and
well-structured code and for fast and easy development of user interfaces and interfaces to
network resources, databases, etc.

The efficiency of the final application depends on the way the programming language is
implemented. The highest efficiency is obtained when the code is compiled and distributed
as binary executable code. Most implementations of C++, Pascal, and Fortran are based on
compilers.

Several other programming languages are implemented with interpretation. The program
code is distributed as it is and interpreted line by line when it is run. Examples include
JavaScript, PHP, ASP, and UNIX shell script. Interpreted code is very inefficient because
the body of a loop is interpreted again and again for every iteration of the loop.

Some implementations use just-in-time compilation. The program code is distributed and
stored as it is, and is compiled when it is executed. An example is Perl.

Several modern programming languages use an intermediate code (byte code). The source
code is compiled into an intermediate code, which is the code that is distributed. The
intermediate code cannot be executed as it is, but must go through a second step of
interpretation or compilation before it can run. Some implementations of Java are based on
an interpreter which interprets the intermediate code by emulating the so-called Java virtual
machine. The best Java machines use just-in-time compilation of the most used parts of the
code. C#, managed C++, and other languages in Microsoft's .NET framework are based on
just-in-time compilation of an intermediate code.

The reason for using an intermediate code is that it is intended to be platform-independent
and compact. The biggest disadvantage of using an intermediate code is that the user must
install a large runtime framework for interpreting or compiling the intermediate code. This
framework typically uses much more resources than the code itself.

Another disadvantage of intermediate code is that it adds an extra level of abstraction which
makes detailed optimization more difficult. On the other hand, a just-in-time compiler can
optimize specifically for the CPU it is running on, while it is more complicated to make CPU-
specific optimizations in precompiled code.

The history of programming languages and their implementations reveal a zigzag course
that reflects the conflicting considerations of efficiency, platform independence, and easy
development. For example, the first PC's had an interpreter for Basic. A compiler for Basic
soon became available because the interpreted version of Basic was too slow. Today, the
most popular version of Basic is Visual Basic .NET, which is implemented with an
intermediate code and just-in-time compilation. Some early implementations of Pascal used
an intermediate code like the one that is used for Java today. But this language gained
remarkably in popularity when a genuine compiler became available.

It should be clear from this discussion that the choice of programming language is a
compromise between efficiency, portability, and development time. Interpreted languages
are out of the question when efficiency is important. A language based on intermediate code
and just-in-time compilation may be a viable compromise when portability and ease of
development are more important than speed. This includes languages such as C#, Visual
Basic .NET and the best Java implementations. However, these languages have the
disadvantage of a very large runtime framework that must be loaded every time the program
is run. The time it takes to load the framework and compile the program are often much
more than the time it takes to execute the program. The runtime framework may use more
resources than the program itself when running. Programs using such a framework
sometimes have unacceptably long response times for simple tasks like pressing a button
or moving the mouse. The .NET framework should definitely be avoided when speed is
critical.

The fastest execution is no doubt obtained with a fully compiled code. Compiled languages
include C, C++, D, Pascal, Fortran, and several other less well-known languages. My
preference is for C++ for several reasons. C++ is supported by some very good compilers
and optimized function libraries. C++ is an advanced high-level language with a wealth of
advanced features rarely found in other languages. But the C++ language also includes the
low-level C language as a subset, giving access to low-level optimizations. Most C++
compilers are able to generate an assembly language output, which is useful for checking
how well the compiler optimizes a piece of code. Furthermore, most C++ compilers allow
assembly-like intrinsic functions, inline assembly, or easy linking to assembly language
modules when the highest level of optimization is needed. The C++ language is portable in
the sense that C++ compilers exist for all major platforms. Pascal has many of the
advantages of C++ but is not quite as versatile. Fortran is also quite efficient, but the syntax
is very old-fashioned.

Development in C++ is quite efficient thanks to the availability of powerful development
tools. One popular development tool is Microsoft Visual Studio. This tool can make two
different implementations of C++, directly compiled code and intermediate code for the
common language runtime of the .NET framework. Obviously, the directly compiled version
is preferred when speed is important.

An important disadvantage of C++ relates to security. There are no checks for array bounds
violation, integer overflow, and invalid pointers. The absence of such checks makes the
code execute faster than other languages that do have such checks. But it is the responsi-
bility of the programmer to make explicit checks for such errors in cases where they cannot
be ruled out by the program logic. Some guidelines are provided below, on page 14.

C++ is definitely the preferred programming language when the optimization of performance
has high priority. The gain in performance over other programming languages can be quite
substantial. This gain in performance can easily justify a possible minor increase in develop-
ment time when performance is important to the end user.

There may be situations where a high level framework based on intermediate code is
needed for other reasons, but part of the code still needs careful optimization. A mixed
implementation can be a viable solution in such cases. The most critical part of the code
can be implemented in compiled C++ and the rest of the code, including user interface etc.,
can be implemented in the high level framework. The optimized part of the code can
possibly be compiled as a dynamic link library (DLL) or shared object which is called by the
rest of the code. This is not an optimal solution because the high level framework still
consumes a lot of resources, and the transitions between the two kinds of code gives an
extra overhead. But this solution can still give a considerable improvement in performance if
the time-critical part of the code can be completely contained in a compiled DLL or shared
object.

2.5 Choice of compiler
C++ compilers have become more and more complicated in recent decades. With the
AVX512 instruction set extensions for advanced vector operations, we now have thousands
of different machine instructions. Many new advanced features in the C++ language
standard have also added to the complexity. In the same period, the number of C++
compilers on the market has decreased, and some old compilers that were popular in the
past are now either obsolete or discontinued. I suspect that the number of compilers on the
market may decrease further in the future.

Some of the best up-to-date compilers for x86 and x86-64 platforms are mentioned below.
These compilers all support 32-bit and 64-bit code and automatic vectorization.

Microsoft Visual Studio
This is a very user friendly compiler with many features and a good debugger. The full
version is very expensive, but a limited non-commercial version is available for free. Visual
Studio can build code with various programming languages (C++, C#, Visual Basic) for
various platforms. Visual Studio is not the best compiler in terms of code optimization, but it
can be very useful during the development phase of a project. You may use a different
compiler for the release version of your code if performance is important. It is possible to
use the Visual Studio integrated development environment (IDE) with a different compiler.
The plugin for using the Clang compiler can be recommended.

Gnu
The gcc or Gnu compiler is among the best optimizing compilers available. It is less user
friendly than Visual Studio, and sometimes you have to be a real nerd to understand the
many command line options. This compiler is free and open source, and it is available for
almost any platform. The stand-alone compiler is run from the command line, but several
IDE's (integrated development environments) are available, including Eclipse, NetBeans,
CodeBlocks, and many more.

Clang
The Clang compiler is a very good optimizing compiler. In many cases, it is actually the best
one. Clang is very similar to the Gnu compiler with the same features and options. Clang is
the most common compiler on the x86-based Mac platform, but it also supports Linux and
Windows platforms.

The Clang compiler for Windows comes in different versions. The best version is currently
the one that is available as a plugin to Microsoft Visual Studio version 17 or later.

The Cygwin64 version of Clang is using a medium memory model by default. This is quite
wasteful because it will use 64-bit absolute addresses rather than 32-bit relative addresses
for static variables and constants. You can improve performance by
specifying -mcmodel=small. The medium memory model is needed only if you are making
a direct link to a variable inside an external DLL (which is bad programming practice
anyway). Another disadvantage of the Cygwin version is that you have to include the
Cygwin DLL when distributing the executable.

Intel C++ compiler
This compiler does not have its own IDE. It is intended as a plug-in to Microsoft Visual
Studio when compiling for Windows or to Eclipse when compiling for Linux. It can also be
used as a stand-alone compiler when called from a command line or a make utility. It
supports Windows and Linux as well as Intel-based Mac OS.

The current Intel compiler named Intel oneAPI or icx is based on the open source LLVM
project, which is the same as Clang is based on. The performance is very similar to Clang,
but not identical. Certain cases have been found where the Intel compiler is optimizing
better than Clang.

The Intel compiler was previously an independent project, now named “Classic”. The
Classic version, which was discontinued in 2024, was tuned to specific Intel processor
versions and gave poor performance on AMD processors.

Comments
The open source compilers - Clang and Gnu - are the best ones in terms of code
optimization according to my tests. See page 76 for a detailed test of the compilers
mentioned above.

All of the compilers can be used as command-line versions without an IDE. Free trial
versions or reduced versions are available for the commercial compilers.

Mixing object files from different compilers is often possible if they have been compiled for
the same platform and with similar options. The Intel compiler produces object files that are
compatible with either Microsoft Visual Studio or the Gnu compiler, depending on the
platform. Object files from Gnu and Clang compilers are also mutually compatible. Other
combinations of compilers require that the linking functions are declared extern "C".
Some older compilers use a different object file format that is not compatible with the
compilers mentioned above.

The choice of compiler may in some cases be determined by the requirements of compati-
bility with legacy code, specific preferences for the IDE, for debugging facilities, easy GUI
development, database integration, web application integration, mixed language program-
ming, etc. It may be useful to make the most critical modules with a different compiler in
cases where the chosen compiler does not provide the best optimization. If the main project
is written in a different programming language, then it may be necessary to put the
optimized C++ code in a dynamic link library (.DLL or .so). Otherwise, static linking is
preferred.

2.6 Choice of function libraries
Some applications spend most of their execution time on executing library functions. Time-
consuming library functions often belong to one of these categories:

   •   File input/output

   •   Graphics and sound processing

   •   Memory and string manipulation

   •   Mathematical functions

   •   Encryption, decryption, data compression

Most compilers include standard libraries for many of these purposes. Unfortunately, the
standard libraries are not always fully optimized.

Library functions are typically small pieces of code that are used by many users in many
different applications. Therefore, it is worthwhile to invest more efforts in optimizing library
functions than in optimizing application-specific code. The best function libraries are highly
optimized, using automatic CPU-dispatching (see page 135) for the latest instruction set
extensions.

If a profiling (see page 16) shows that a particular application uses a lot of CPU-time in
library functions, or if this is obvious, then it may be possible to improve the performance
significantly simply by using a different function library. If the application uses most of its
time in library functions then it may not be necessary to optimize anything else than finding
the most efficient library and economize the library function calls. It is recommended to try
different libraries and see which one works best.

Some common function libraries are discussed below. Many libraries for special purposes
are also available.

Microsoft
Comes with Microsoft compiler. Some functions are optimized well, others are not. Supports
32-bit and 64-bit Windows.

Gnu
Comes with the Gnu compiler. The 64-bit version is better than the 32-bit version. The Gnu
compiler often inserts built-in code instead of the most common memory and string
instructions. The built-in code is not always optimal. Use option -fno-builtin to get
library versions instead.

Mac
The libraries included with the Gnu compiler for Mac OS X (Darwin) are part of the Xnu
project. Some of the most important functions are included in the operating system kernel in
the so-called commpage. These functions are highly optimized for the Intel Core and later
Intel processors. AMD processors and earlier Intel processors are not supported at all. Can
only run on Mac platform.

Intel
The Intel compiler includes standard function libraries. Several special purpose libraries are
also available, such as the "Intel Math Kernel Library" and "Integrated Performance
Primitives". These function libraries are highly optimized for large data sets. The Intel
libraries are optimized for best performance on Intel processors, but they often give
satisfactory performance on AMD processors as well, unless they are used with the
“Classic” version of the Intel compiler. See page 143 for a discussion of the use of Intel
compilers and libraries on non-Intel processors.

AMD
AMD core Math library contains optimized mathematical functions. It also works on Intel
processors. The performance is inferior to the Intel libraries.

Asmlib
My own function library made for demonstration purposes. Available from
www.agner.org/optimize/asmlib.zip. Currently includes optimized versions of memory and
string functions and some other functions that are difficult to find elsewhere. Faster than
many other libraries when running on the newest processors. Supports all x86 and x86-64
platforms.

Comparison of function libraries

                                     Microsoft

                                                 CodeGear

                                                            Intel

                                                                    Mac

                                                                          Gnu 32-bit

                                                                                       -fno-builtin
                                                                                       Gnu 32-bit

                                                                                                      -fno-builtin
                                                                                                      Gnu 64 bit

                                                                                                                     Asmlib
  Test                Processor
 memcpy 16kB        Intel          0.12 0.18 0.12 0.11 0.18 0.18 0.18 0.11
 aligned            Core 2
 operands
 memcpy 16kB        Intel          0.63 0.75 0.18 0.11 1.21 0.57 0.44 0.12
 unaligned op.      Core 2
 memcpy 16kB        AMD            0.24 0.25 0.24 n.a.          1.00 0.25 0.28 0.22
 aligned            Opteron K8
 operands
 memcpy 16kB        AMD            0.38 0.44 0.40 n.a.          1.00 0.35 0.29 0.28
 unaligned op.      Opteron K8
 strlen 128         Intel          0.77 0.89 0.40 0.30 4.5            0.82 0.59 0.27
 bytes              Core 2
 strlen 128         AMD            1.09 1.25 1.61 n.a.          2.23 0.95 0.6      1.19
 bytes              Opteron K8
 Table 2.1. Comparing performance of different function libraries.
 Numbers in the table are core clock cycles per byte of data (low numbers mean good
 performance). Aligned operands means that source and destination both have addresses
 divisible by 16.
 Library versions tested (not up to date!):
 Microsoft Visual studio 2008, v. 9.0
 CodeGear Borland bcc, v. 5.5
 Mac: Darwin8 g++ v 4.0.1.
 Gnu: Glibc v. 2.7, 2.8.
 Asmlib: v. 2.00.
 Intel C++ compiler, v. 10.1.020. Functions _intel_fast_memcpy and
 __intel_new_strlen in library libircmt.lib. Function names are undocumented.

2.7 Choice of user interface framework
Most of the code in a typical software project goes to the user interface. Applications that
are not computationally intensive may very well spend more CPU time on the user interface
than on the essential task of the program.

Application programmers rarely program their own graphical user interfaces from scratch.
This would not only be a waste of the programmers' time, but also inconvenient to the end
user. Menus, buttons, dialog boxes, etc. should be as standardized as possible for usability
reasons. The programmer can use standard user interface elements that come with the
operating system or libraries that come with compilers and development tools.

A popular user interface library for Windows and C++ is Microsoft Foundation Classes
(MFC). Several graphical interface frameworks are available for Linux systems. The user
interface library can be linked either as a runtime DLL or a static library. A runtime DLL
takes more memory resources than a static library, except when several applications use
the same DLL at the same time.

A user interface library may be bigger than the application itself and take more time to load.
A light-weight alternative is the Windows Template Library (WTL). A WTL application is
generally faster and more compact than an MFC application. The development time for
WTL applications can be expected to be higher due to poor documentation and lack of
advanced development tools.

There are several cross-platform user interface libraries, such as Qt and wxWidgets. These
are useful for applications that may run on multiple platforms and operating systems.

The simplest possible user interface is obtained by dropping the graphical user interface
and making a console mode program. The inputs for a console mode program are typically
specified on a command line or an input file. The output goes to the console or to an output
file. A console mode program is fast, compact, and simple to develop. It is easy to port to
different platforms because it does not depend on system-specific graphical interface calls.
The usability may be poor because it lacks the self-explaining menus of a graphical user
interface. A console mode program is useful for calling from other applications such as a
make utility.

The conclusion is that the choice of user interface framework must be a compromise
between development time, usability, program compactness, and execution time. No
universal solution is best for all applications.

2.8 Overcoming the drawbacks of the C++ language
While C++ has many advantages when it comes to optimization, it does have some
disadvantages that make developers choose other programming languages. This section
discusses how to overcome these disadvantages when C++ is chosen for the sake of
optimization.

Portability
C++ is fully portable in the sense that the syntax is fully standardized and supported on all
major platforms. However, C++ is also a language that allows direct access to hardware
interfaces and system calls. These are of course system-specific. In order to facilitate
porting between platforms, it is recommended to place the user interface and other system-
specific parts of the code in a separate module, and to put the task-specific part of the code,
which supposedly is system-independent, in another module.

The size of integers and other hardware-related details depend on the hardware platform
and operating system. See page 29 for details.

Development time
Some developers feel that a particular programming language and development tool is
faster to use than others. While some of the difference is simply a matter of habit, it is true
that some development tools have powerful facilities that do much of the trivial programming
work automatically. The development time and maintainability of C++ projects can be
improved by consistent modularity and reusable classes.

Security
The most serious problem with the C++ language relates to security. Standard C++ imple-
mentations have no checking for array bounds violations and invalid pointers. This is a
frequent source of errors in C++ programs and also a possible point of attack for hackers. It
is necessary to adhere to certain programming principles in order to prevent such errors in
programs where security matters.

Problems with invalid pointers can be avoided by using references instead of pointers, by
initializing pointers to zero, by setting pointers to zero whenever the objects they point to
become invalid, and by avoiding pointer arithmetics and pointer type casting. Linked lists
and other data structures that typically use pointers may be replaced by more efficient
container class templates, as explained on page 97. Avoid the function scanf.

