CPU, but it is possible to start one or more new floating point additions every clock cycle.
Assume, for example, that the first addition starts at time T and ends at time T +3. Another
addition may then start at time T +1 and end at time T +4 if it does not depend on the result
of the first addition. But if each addition depends on the result of the preceding addition then
you will have only one addition every three clock cycles. If all the additions are independent
then you can start one or more new additions every clock cycle.

The highest performance that can possibly be obtained in a computationally intensive
program is achieved when none of the time-consumers mentioned in the above sections are
dominating and there are no long dependency chains. In this case, the performance is
limited by the throughput of the execution units rather than by the latency or by memory
access.

The execution core of modern microprocessors is split between several execution units.
Typically, there are two or more integer units, two floating point addition units, and two
floating point multiplication units. This means that it is possible to do integer additions,
floating point additions, and floating point multiplications at the same time.

A code that does floating point calculations should therefore preferably have a balanced mix
of additions and multiplications. Subtractions use the same unit as additions. Divisions take
longer time. It is possible to do integer operations in-between the floating point operations
without reducing the performance because the integer operations use different execution
units. For example, a loop that does floating point calculations will typically use integer
operations for incrementing a loop counter, comparing the loop counter with its limit, etc. In
most cases, you can assume that these integer operations do not add to the total
computation time.

4 Performance and usability
A better performing software product is one that saves time for the user. Time is a precious
resource for many computer users and much time is wasted on software that is slow,
difficult to use, incompatible, or error prone. All these problems are usability issues, and I
believe that software performance should be seen in the broader perspective of usability.

This is not a manual on usability, but I think it is necessary here to draw the attention of
software programmers to some of the most common obstacles to efficient use of software.
For more on this topic, see my free E-book Usability for Nerds at Wikibooks.

The following list points out some typical sources of frustration and waste of time for
software users as well as important usability problems that software developers should be
aware of.

•   Big runtime frameworks. The .NET framework and the Java virtual machine are
    frameworks that typically take much more resources than the programs they are
    running. Such frameworks are frequent sources of resource problems and compatibility
    problems and they waste a lot of time both during installation of the framework itself,
    during installation of the program that runs under the framework, during the frequent
    updates, during start of the program, and while the program is running. The main reason
    why such runtime frameworks are used at all is for the sake of cross-platform portability.
    Unfortunately, the cross-platform compatibility is not always as good as expected. I
    believe that the portability could be achieved more efficiently by better standardization of
    programming languages, operating systems, and API's.

•   Memory swapping. Software developers typically have more powerful computers with
    more RAM than end users have. The developers may therefore fail to see the excessive
    memory swapping and other resource problems that cause the resource-hungry
    applications to perform poorly for the end user.

•   Installation problems. The procedures for installation and uninstallation of programs
    should be standardized and done by the operating system rather than by individual
    installation tools.

•   Automatic updates. Automatic updating of software can cause problems if the network is
    unstable or if the new version causes problem that were not present in the old version.
    Updating mechanisms often disturb the users with nagging pop-up messages saying
    please install this important new update or even telling the user to restart the computer
    while he or she is busy concentrating on important work. The updating mechanism
    should never interrupt the user, but only show a discrete icon signaling the availability of
    an update, or update automatically when the program is restarted anyway. Software
    distributors are often abusing the update mechanism to advertise new versions of their
    software. This is annoying to the user.

•   Compatibility problems. All software should be tested on different platforms, different
    screen resolutions, different system color settings, and different user access rights.
    Software should use standard API calls rather than self-styled hacks and direct
    hardware access. Available protocols and standardized file formats should be used.
    Web systems should be tested in different browsers, different platforms, different screen
    resolutions, etc. Accessibility guidelines should be obeyed.

•   Copy protection. Some copy protection schemes are based on hacks that violate or
    circumvent operating system standards. Such schemes are frequent sources of
    compatibility problems and system breakdown. Many copy protection schemes are
    based on hardware identification. Such schemes cause problems when the hardware is
    updated. Most copy protection schemes are annoying to the user and prevent legitimate
    backup copying without effectively preventing illegitimate copying. The benefits of a
    copy protection scheme should be weighed against the costs in terms of usability
    problems and necessary support.

•   Hardware updating. The change of a hard disk or other hardware often requires that all
    software be reinstalled and user settings are lost. It is not unusual for the reinstallation
    work to take a whole workday or more. Many software applications need better backup
    features, and current operating systems need better support for hard disk copying.

•   Security. The vulnerability of software with network access to virus attacks and other
    abuse is extremely costly to many users. Firewalls, virus scanners, and other protection
    means are among the most frequent causes of compatibility problems and system
    crash. Furthermore, it is not uncommon for virus scanners to consume more time than
    anything else on a computer. Security software that is part of the operating system is
    often more reliable than third party security software.

•   Background services. Many services that run in the background are unnecessary for the
    user and a waste of resources. Consider running the services only when activated by
    the user.

•   Feature bloat. It is common for software to add new features to each new version for
    marketing reasons. This may cause the software to be slower or require more
    resources, even if the user never uses the new features.

•   Take user feedback seriously. User complaints should be regarded as a valuable source
    of information about bugs, compatibility problems, usability problems, and desired new
    features. Customer support should not be outsourced because this makes it more
    difficult to utilize this information source for improving the product. User feedback should
    be handled in a systematic manner to make sure this information is utilized

