   appropriately. Users should get a reply about investigation of the problems and planned
   solutions. Patches should be easily available from a website.

5 Choosing the optimal algorithm
The first thing to do when you want to optimize a piece of CPU-intensive software is to find
the best algorithm. The choice of algorithm is very important for tasks such as sorting,
searching, and mathematical calculations. In such cases, you can obtain much more by
choosing the best algorithm than by optimizing the first algorithm that comes to mind. In
some cases you may have to test several different algorithms in order to find the one that
works best on a typical set of test data.

That being said, I must warn against overkill. Do not use an advanced and complicated
algorithm if a simple algorithm can do the job fast enough. For example, some programmers
use a hash table for even the smallest list of data. A hash table can improve search times
dramatically for very large databases, but there is no reason to use it for lists that are so
small that a binary search, or even a linear search, is fast enough. A hash table increases
the size of the program as well as the size of data files. This can actually reduce speed if
the bottleneck is file access or cache access rather than CPU time. Another disadvantage of
complicated algorithms is that it makes program development more expensive and more
error prone.

A discussion of different algorithms for different purposes is beyond the scope of this
manual. You have to consult the general literature on algorithms and data structures for
standard tasks such as sorting and searching, or the specific literature for more complicated
mathematical tasks.

Before you start to code, you may consider whether others have done the job before you.
Optimized function libraries for many standard tasks are available from a number of
sources. For example, the Boost collection contains well-tested libraries for many common
purposes (www.boost.org). The "Intel Math Kernel Library" contains many functions for
common mathematical calculations including linear algebra and statistics, and the "Intel
Performance Primitives" library contains many functions for audio and video processing,
signal processing, data compression and cryptography (www.intel.com). If you are using an
Intel function library then make sure it works well on non-Intel processors, as explained on
page 143.

It is often easier said than done to choose the optimal algorithm before you start to program.
Many programmers have discovered that there are smarter ways of doing things only after
they have put the whole software project together and tested it. The insight you gain by
testing and analyzing program performance and studying the bottlenecks can lead to a
better understanding of the whole structure of the problem. This new insight can lead to a
complete redesign of the program, for example when you discover that there are smarter
ways of organizing the data.

A complete redesign of a program that already works is of course a considerable job, but it
may be quite a good investment. A redesign can not only improve the performance, it is also
likely to lead to a more well-structured program that is easier to maintain. The time you
spend on redesigning a program may in fact be less than the time you would have spent
fighting with the problems of the original, poorly designed program.

