Vectorized code is more difficult for the programmer to make and therefore more error
prone. The vectorized code should therefore preferably be put aside in reusable and well-
tested library modules and header files.

13 Making critical code in multiple versions for different
   instruction sets
Microprocessor producers keep adding new instructions to the instruction set. These new
instructions can make certain kinds of code execute faster. The most important addition to
the instruction set is the vector operations mentioned in chapter 12.

If the code is compiled for a particular instruction set, then it will be compatible with all CPUs
that support this instruction set or any higher instruction set, but not with earlier CPUs. The
sequence of backwards compatible instruction sets is as follows:

  Instruction set            Important features
 80386                     32 bit mode
 SSE                       128 bit float vectors
 SSE2                      128 bit integer and double vectors
 SSE3                      horizontal add, etc.
 SSSE3                     a few more integer vector instructions
 SSE4.1                    some more vector instructions
 SSE4.2                    string search instructions
 AVX                       256 bit float and double vectors
 AVX2                      256 bit integer vectors
 FMA3                      floating point multiply-and-add
 AVX512F                   512 bit integer and floating point vectors
 AVX512 BW, DQ, VL         More 512-bit vector instructions
 AVX512-FP16               Vectors of half-precision floating point numbers
  Table 13.1. Instruction sets

A more detailed explanation of the instruction sets is provided in manual 4: "Instruction
tables". There are certain restrictions on mixing code compiled for AVX or later with code
compiled without AVX, as explained on page 117.

A disadvantage of using the newest instruction set is that the compatibility with older
microprocessors is lost. This dilemma can be solved by making the most critical parts of the
code in multiple versions for different CPUs. This is called CPU dispatching. For example,
you may want to make one version that takes advantage of the AVX512 instruction set,
another version for CPUs with only the AVX2 instruction set, and a generic version that is
compatible with old microprocessors without any of these instruction sets. The program
should automatically detect which instruction set is supported by the CPU and choose the
appropriate version of the subroutine for the critical innermost loops.

13.1 CPU dispatch strategies
It is quite expensive – in terms of development, testing and maintenance – to make a piece
of code in multiple versions, each carefully optimized and fine-tuned for a particular set of
CPUs. These costs can sometimes be justified for general function libraries that are used in
multiple applications, but not for application-specific code. If you consider making highly
optimized code with CPU dispatching, then it is advisable to make it in the form of a re-
usable library if possible. This also makes testing and maintenance more manageable.

I have done a good deal of research on CPU dispatching and discovered that many
common programs use inappropriate CPU dispatch methods.
The most common pitfalls of CPU dispatching are:

   •   Optimizing for present processors rather than future processors. Consider the time it
       takes to develop and publish a function library with CPU dispatching. Add to this the
       time it takes before the application programmer gets the new version of the library.
       Add to this the time it takes to develop and market the application program that uses
       the updated function library. Add to this the time before the end user gets the latest
       version of the application program. All in all, it will often take several years before
       your code is running in the majority of end user's computers. At this time, any
       processor that you optimized for is likely to be obsolete. Programmers very often
       underestimate this time lag.

   •   Thinking in terms of specific processor models rather than processor features. The
       programmer typically thinks "what works best on processor X?" rather than "what
       works best on processors with this instruction set?". A list of which code branch to
       use for each processor model is going to be very long and difficult to maintain. And it
       is unlikely that the end user will have an up-to-date version of the program. The CPU
       dispatcher should not look at CPU brand names and model numbers, but on what
       instruction sets and other features it has.

   •   Assuming that processor model numbers form a logical sequence. If you know that
       processor model N supports a particular instruction set, then you cannot assume
       that model N+1 supports at least the same instruction set. Neither can you assume
       that model N-1 is inferior. A model with a higher number is not necessarily newer.
       The CPU family and model numbers are not always sequential, and you cannot
       make any assumption about an unknown CPU based on its family and model
       number.

   •   Failure to handle unknown processors properly. Many CPU dispatchers are
       designed to handle only known processors. Other brands or models that were
       unknown at the time of programming will typically get the generic branch, which is
       the one that gives the worst possible performance. We must bear in mind, that many
       users will prefer to run a speed-critical program on the newest CPU model, which
       quite likely is a model that was unknown at the time of programming. The CPU
       dispatcher should give a CPU of unknown brand or model number the best possible
       branch if it has an instruction set that is compatible with that branch. The common
       excuse that "we do not support processor X" is simply not appropriate here. It
       reveals a fundamentally flawed approach to CPU dispatching.

   •   Underestimating the cost of keeping a CPU dispatcher updated. It is tempting to fine-
       tune the code to a specific CPU model and then think that you can make an update
       when the next new model comes on the market. But the cost of fine-tuning, testing,
       verifying and maintaining a new branch of code is so high that it is unrealistic that
       you can do this every time a new processor enters the market for years to come.
       Even big software companies often fail to keep their CPU dispatchers up to date. A
       more realistic goal is to make a new branch only when a new instruction set opens
       the possibility for significant improvements.

   •   Making too many branches. If you are making branches that are fine-tuned for
       specific CPU brands or specific models, then you will soon get a lot of branches that
       take up code space and are difficult to maintain. Any specific bottleneck or any
       particularly slow instruction that you are dealing with in a particular CPU model is
       likely to be irrelevant within a year or two. Often, it is sufficient to have just two
       branches: one for the latest instruction set and one that is compatible with CPUs that
       are up to five or ten years old. The CPU market is developing so fast that what is
       brand new today will be mainstream next year.

   •   Ignoring virtualization. The time when the CPUID instruction was certain to truly
       represent a known CPU model is over. Virtualization is quite common today. A
       virtual processor may have a reduced number of cores in order to reserve resources
       for other virtual processors on the same machine. The virtual processor may be
       given a false model number to reflect this or for the sake of compatibility with some
       legacy software. It may even have a false vendor string. In the future, we may also
       see emulated processors and FPGA soft cores that do not correspond to any known
       hardware CPU. These virtual processors can have any brand name and model
       number. The only CPUID information that we can surely rely on is the feature
       information, such as supported instruction sets and cache sizes.

Fortunately, the solution to these problems is quite simple in most cases: The CPU
dispatcher should have only a few branches, and the dispatching should be based on which
instruction sets the CPU supports, rather than its brand, family, and model number.

I have seen many examples of poor CPU dispatching. For example, Mathcad (v. 15.0) is
using a six years old version of Intel's Math Kernel Library (MKL v. 7.2). This library has a
CPU dispatcher that does not handle current CPUs optimally. The speed for certain tasks
on current Intel CPUs can be increased by more than 33% when the CPUID is artificially
changed to the old Pentium 4. The reason is that the CPU dispatcher in the Intel MKL library
relies on the CPU family number, which is 15 on the old Pentium 4, while all newer Intel
CPUs have family number 6. The speed on non-Intel CPUs was more than doubled for this
task when the CPUID was manipulated to fake an Intel Pentium 4. Even worse, many
software products fail to recognize VIA processors because this brand was less popular at
the time the software was developed.

A CPU dispatch mechanism that treats different brands of CPUs unequally can become a
serious legal issue, as you can read about in my blog. Here, you can also find more
examples of bad CPU dispatching.

Obviously, you should apply CPU dispatching only to the most critical part of the program -
preferably isolated into a separate function library. The radical solution of making the entire
program in multiple versions should be used only when instruction sets are mutually
incompatible. A function library with a well-defined functionality and a well-defined interface
to the calling program is more manageable and easier to test, maintain, and verify than a
program where the dispatch branches are scattered everywhere in the source files.

13.2 Model-specific dispatching
There may be cases where a particular code implementation works particularly bad on a
particular processor model. You may ignore the problem and assume that the next
processor model will work better. If the problem is too important to ignore, then the solution
is to make a negative list of processor models on which this code version performs poorly. It
is not a good idea to make a positive list of processor models on which a code version
performs well. The reason is that a positive list needs to be updated every time a new
processor appears on the market. Such a list is almost certain to become obsolete within
the lifetime of the software. A negative list, on the other hand, does not need updating in the
likely case that the next generation of processors is better. Whenever a processor has a
particular weakness or bottleneck, it is likely that the producer will try to fix the problem and
make the next model work better.

Remember again, that most software runs most of the time on processors that were
unknown at the time the software was coded. If the software contains a positive list of which
processor models to run the most advanced code version on, then it will run an inferior
version on the processors that were unknown at the time it was programmed. But if the
software contains a negative list of which processor models to avoid running the advanced

version on, then it will run the advanced version on all newer models that were unknown at
the time of programming.

13.3 Difficult cases
In most cases, the optimal branch can be chosen based on the CPUID information about
supported instruction sets, cache size, etc. There are a few cases, however, where there
are different ways of doing the same thing and the CPUID instruction does not give the
necessary information about which implementation is best. These cases are sometimes
dealt with in assembly language. Here are some examples:

   •   strlen function. The string length function scans a string of bytes to find the first
       byte of zero. A good implementation uses vector registers to test 16 bytes or more at
       a time and afterwards a BSF (bit scan forward) instruction to localize the first byte of
       zero within a block of 16 bytes. Some older CPUs have particularly slow
       implementations of this bit scan instruction. Programmers that have tested the
       strlen function in isolation have been unsatisfied with the performance of this
       function on CPUs with a slow bit scan instruction and have implemented a separate
       version for specific CPU models. However, we must consider that the bit scan
       instruction is executed only once for each function call so that you have to call the
       function billions of times before the performance even matters, which few programs
       do. Hence, it is hardly worth the effort to make special versions of the strlen
       function for CPUs with slow bit scan instructions. My recommendation is to use the
       bit scan instruction and expect this to be the fastest solution on future CPUs.

   •   Half size execution units. The size of vector registers has been increased from 64-bit
       MMX to 128-bit XMM, 256-bit YMM, and 512-bit ZMM registers. The first processors
       that supported 128-bit vector registers had in fact only 64-bit execution units. Each
       128-bit operation was split into two 64-bit operations so that there was hardly any
       speed advantage in using the larger vector size. Later models had the full 128-bit
       execution units and hence higher speed. In the same way, the first processors that
       supported 256-bit instructions were splitting 256-bit read operations into two 128-bit
       reads. It is possible that we will see something similar with further expansions of the
       register size in the future. Often, the full advantage of a new register size comes only
       in the second generation of processors that support it. There are situations where a
       vector implementation is optimal only on CPUs with full-size execution units. The
       problem is that it is difficult for the CPU dispatcher to know whether the largest
       vector register size is handled at half speed or full speed. A simple solution to this
       problem is to use a new register size only when the next higher instruction set is
       supported. For example, use AVX only when AVX2 is supported in such
       applications. Alternatively, use a negative list of processors on which it is not
       advantageous to use the newest instruction set.

   •   High precision math. Libraries for high precision math allow addition of integers with
       a very large number of bits. This is usually done in a loop of ADC (add with carry)
       instructions where the carry bit must be saved from one iteration to the next. The
       carry bit can be saved either in the carry flag or in a register. If the carry bit is kept in
       the carry flag then the loop branch must rely on instructions that use the zero flag
       and do not modify the carry flag (e.g. DEC, JNZ). This solution can incur a large
       delay due to the so-called partial flags stall on some processors because the CPU
       has problems separating the flags register into the carry and zero flags on older Intel
       CPUs, but not on AMD CPUs (See manual 3: "The microarchitecture of Intel, AMD
       and VIA CPUs"). This is one of the few cases where it makes sense to dispatch by
       CPU model. The version that works best on the newest CPU of a particular brand is
       likely to be the optimal choice for future models of the same brand. Newer
       processors support the ADX instructions for high precision math.

       Memory copying. There are several different ways of copying blocks of memory.
       These methods are discussed in manual 2: "Optimizing subroutines in assembly
       language", section 17.9: "Moving blocks of data", where it is also discussed which
       method is fastest on different processors. In a C++ program, you should choose an
       up-to-date function library that has a good implementation of the memcpy function.
       There are so many different cases for different microprocessors, different alignments
       and different sizes of the data block to copy that the only reasonable solution is to
       have a standard function library that takes care of the CPU dispatching. This function
       is so important and generally used that most function libraries have CPU dispatching
       for this function, though not all libraries have the best and most up-to-date solution.
       The compiler is likely to use the memcpy function implicitly when copying a large
       object, unless there is a copy constructor specifying otherwise.

In difficult cases like these, it is important to remember that your code is likely to run most of
its time on processors that were unknown at the time it was programmed. Therefore, it is
important to consider which method is likely to work best on future processors, and choose
this method for all unknown processors that support the necessary instruction set. It is rarely
worth the effort to make a CPU dispatcher based on complicated criteria or lists of specific
CPU models if the problem is likely to go away in the future due to general improvements in
microprocessor hardware design.

The ultimate solution would be to include a performance test that measures the speed of
each version of the critical code to see which solution is optimal on the actual processor.
However, this involves the problems that the clock frequency may vary dynamically and that
measurements are unstable due to interrupts and task switches, so that it is necessary to
test the different versions alternatingly several times in order to make a reliable decision.

13.4 Test and maintenance
There are two things to test when software uses CPU dispatching:

   1. How much you gain in speed by using a particular code version.

   2. Check that all code versions work correctly.

The speed test should preferably be done on the type of CPU that each particular branch of
code is intended for. In other words, you need to test on several different CPUs if you want
to optimize for several different CPUs.

On the other hand, it is not necessary to have many different CPUs to verify that all code
branches works correctly. A code branch for a low instruction set can still run on a CPU with
a higher instruction set. Therefore, you only need a CPU with the highest instruction set in
order to test all branches for correctness. It is therefore recommended to put a test feature
into the code that allows you to override the CPU dispatching and run any code branch for
test purposes.

If the code is implemented as a function library or a separate module, then it is convenient
to make a test program that can call all code branches separately and test their
functionality. This will be very helpful for later maintenance. However, this is not a textbook
on test theory. Advice on how to test a software module for correctness must be found
elsewhere.

13.5 Implementation
The CPU dispatch mechanism can be implemented in different places making the dispatch
decision at different times:

   •   Dispatch on every call. A branch tree or switch statement leads to the appropriate
       version of the critical function. The branching is done every time the critical function
       is called. This has the disadvantage that the branching takes time.

   •   Dispatch on first call. The function is called through a function pointer which initially
       points to a dispatcher. The dispatcher changes the function pointer and makes it
       point to the right version of the function. This has the advantage that it does not
       spend time on deciding which version to use in case the function is never called.
       This method is illustrated in example 13.1 below.

   •   Make pointer at initialization. The program or library has an initialization routine that
       is called before the first call to the critical function. The initialization routine sets a
       function pointer to the right version of the function. This has the advantage that the
       response time is consistent for the function call.

   •   Load library at initialization. Each code version is implemented in a separate
       dynamic link library (*.dll or *.so). The program has an initialization routine that
       loads the appropriate version of the library. This method is useful if the library is very
       large or if different versions have to be compiled with different compilers.

   •   Dispatch at load time. The program uses a procedure linkage table (PLT) that is
       initialized when the program is loaded. This method requires OS support and is
       available in newer versions of Linux and perhaps Mac OS. See page 142 below.

   •   Dispatch at installation time. Each code version is implemented in a separate
       dynamic link library (*.dll or *.so). The installation program makes a symbolic
       link to the appropriate version of the library. The application program loads the
       library through the symbolic link.

   •   Use different executables. This method can be used if instruction sets are mutually
       incompatible. You may make separate executables for 32-bit and 64-bit systems.
       The appropriate version of the program may be selected during the installation
       process or by an executable file stub.

If different versions of the critical code are compiled with different compilers then it is
recommended to specify static linking for any library functions called by the critical code so
that you do not have to distribute all the dynamic libraries (*.dll or *.so) that belong to
each compiler with the application.

The availability of various instruction sets can be determined with system calls (e.g.
IsProcessorFeaturePresent in Windows). Alternatively, you may call the CPUID
instruction directly, or use the InstructionSet()in the library
www.agner.org/optimize/asmlib.zip or the instrset_detect() function from
https://github.com/vectorclass/version2/blob/master/instrset_detect.cpp.
The following example shows how to implement the dispatch on first call method using the
function InstructionSet(). See also example 12.6 page 128 for CPU dispatching with
the vector class library.

    // Example 13.1
    // CPU dispatching on first call

    // Header file for InstructionSet()
    #include "asmlib.h"

    // Define function type with desired parameters
    typedef int CriticalFunctionType(int parm1, int parm2);

    // Function prototype
    CriticalFunctionType CriticalFunction_Dispatch;

    // Function pointer serves as entry point.
    // After first call it will point to the appropriate function version
    CriticalFunctionType * CriticalFunction = &CriticalFunction_Dispatch;

    // Lowest version
    int CriticalFunction_386(int parm1, int parm2) {...}

    // SSE2 version
    int CriticalFunction_SSE2(int parm1, int parm2) {...}

    // AVX version
    int CriticalFunction_AVX(int parm1, int parm2) {...}

    // Dispatcher. Will be called only first time
    int CriticalFunction_Dispatch(int parm1, int parm2)
    {
       // Get supported instruction set, using asmlib library
       int level = InstructionSet();

        // Set pointer to the appropriate version (May use a table
        // of function pointers if there are many branches):
        if (level >= 11)
        { // AVX supported
           CriticalFunction = &CriticalFunction_AVX;
        }
        else if (level >= 4)
        { // SSE2 supported
           CriticalFunction = &CriticalFunction_SSE2;
        }
        else
        { // Generic version
           CriticalFunction = &CriticalFunction_386;
        }

        // Now call the chosen version
        return (*CriticalFunction)(parm1, parm2);
    }

    int main()
    {
       int a, b, c;
       ...

        // Call critical function through function pointer
        a = (*CriticalFunction)(b, c);

        ...
        return 0;
    }

The InstructionSet() function is available in the function library asmlib, which is
available in different versions for different compilers. This function is OS independent and
checks both the CPU and the operating system for support of the different instructions sets.
The different versions of CriticalFunction in example 13.1 can be placed in separate
modules if necessary, each compiled for the specific instruction set.

13.6 CPU dispatching at load time in Linux
A feature called "Gnu indirect function" has been introduced in Linux and supported by the
Gnu utilities in 2010 and by Clang in 2015. This feature calls a dispatch function at the time
the program is loaded. The dispatch function returns a pointer to the selected version of the
function, and this pointer is placed in an ordinary procedure linkage table (PLT). The indirect
function feature requires support from both compiler, linker and loader (requires binutils
version 2.20, glibc version 2.11 ifunc branch). This feature works only on platforms that use
the ELF file format, i.e. Linux and FreeBSD, not Windows and MacOS.

Note that the dispatcher function is called before the program starts running and before any
constructors are called. Therefore, the dispatcher function cannot rely on anything else
being initialized, and it has no access to environment variables. The dispatcher function is
called even if the dispatched function is never called. Example 13.2 show how to use the
Gnu indirect function feature.

    // Example 13.2. CPU dispatching with Gnu indirect function

    // The function instrset_detect() is borrowed from:
    // github.com/vectorclass/version2/blob/master/instrset_detect.cpp
    #include "instrset_detect.cpp"

    // Declare myfunc as a dispatched function
    // The name of the dispatcher is given in quotes
    int myfunc (int) __attribute__ ((ifunc ("myfunc_dispatch")));

    // Generic version
    int myfuncGeneric (int a) {
        puts("Generic");
        return a;
    }

    // AVX2 version
    int myfuncAVX2 (int a) {
        puts("AVX2");
        return a;
    }

    // AVX512 version
    int myfuncAVX512 (int a) {
        puts("AVX512");
        return a;
    }

    // declare function type
    // (replace parameter types and return type to fit your case)
    typedef int functype(int);

    // avoid name mangling
    extern "C" {
        // The dispatch function returns a pointer to the selected version
        functype * myfunc_dispatch() {
            // Detect supported instruction set
            int instrset = instrset_detect();

              // Return a pointer to the selected function
              if (instrset >= 10) {
                  return myfuncAVX512;
              }
              else if (instrset >= 8) {
                  return myfuncAVX2;
              }
              else {
                  return myfuncGeneric;
              }
         }
    }

The indirect function feature is used in the Gnu C function library for functions that are
particularly critical.

13.7 CPU dispatching in Intel compiler
The Intel compiler comes in two versions, a legacy version called “Classic” and a newer
version labeled “LLVM-based” which is a forking of the Clang compiler.

The Intel compiler “Classic” has a feature for making multiple versions of a function for
different Intel CPUs. It uses the dispatch on every call method. When the function is called,
a dispatch is made to the desired version of the function. The automatic dispatching can be
made for all suitable functions in a module by compiling the module with, e.g. the option
/QaxAVX or -axAVX. This will make multiple versions of all relevant functions. It is possible
to do the dispatching only for speed-critical functions by using the directive
__declspec(cpu_dispatch(...)). See the Intel C++ Compiler Documentation for
details.

The Intel compiler Classic is currently the only compiler that can generate CPU dispatching
on user code automatically. Unfortunately, the CPU dispatch mechanism in the Intel
compiler works only for Intel CPUs, not for AMD or other brands.

The CPU dispatch mechanism provided by the Intel compiler is less efficient than the Gnu
compiler mechanism because it makes dispatching on every call of the critical function,
while the Gnu mechanism stores a pointer to the desired version in a procedure linkage
table. If a dispatched function calls another dispatched function with the Intel compiler then
the dispatch branch of the latter is executed even though the CPU-type is already known at
this place. This can be avoided by inlining the latter function, but it may be better to do the
CPU dispatching explicitly as in example 13.1 on page 140.

Intel function libraries have features for automatic CPU dispatching. Many Intel library
functions have several versions for different processors and instruction sets.

Unfortunately, the CPU detection mechanism in the Intel compiler Classic has several flaws:

   •   The best possible version of the code is chosen only when running on an Intel
       processor. The CPU dispatcher checks whether the processor is an Intel before it
       checks which instruction set it supports. An inferior "generic" version of the code is
       selected if the processor is not an Intel, even if the processor is compatible with a
       better version of the code. This can lead to a dramatic degradation of performance
       on AMD and VIA processors.

   •   Explicit CPU dispatching works only with Intel processors. A non-Intel processor
       makes the dispatcher signal an error by performing an illegal operation that crashes
       the program or by printing an error message.

   •   The CPU dispatcher does not check if XMM registers are supported by the operating
       system. It will crash on old operating systems that do not support SSE.

Several function libraries published by Intel have similar CPU dispatch mechanisms, and
some of these also treat non-Intel CPUs in a suboptimal way.

The fact that software built with Intel compilers or Intel function libraries performs poorly on
other brands, has become a source of much controversy and legal battles. See my blog for
details.

