How To Write Shared Libraries
                                       Ulrich Drepper
                                        Red Hat, Inc.
                                    drepper@redhat.com

                                      August 20, 2006

                                           Abstract
Today, shared libraries are ubiquitous. Developers use them for multiple reasons and create
them just as they would create application code. This is a problem, though, since on many
platforms some additional techniques must be applied even to generate decent code. Even more
knowledge is needed to generate optimized code. This paper introduces the required rules and
techniques. In addition, it introduces the concept of ABI (Application Binary Interface) stability
and shows how to manage it.
1   Preface

For a long time, programmers collected commonly used
code in libraries so that code could be reused. This saves
development time and reduces errors since reused code
only has to be debugged once. With systems running
dozens or hundreds of processes at the same time reuse
of the code at link-time solves only part of the problem.
Many processes will use the same pieces of code which
they import for libraries. With the memory management
systems in modern operating systems it is also possible
to share the code at run-time. This is done by loading the
code into physical memory only once and reusing it in
multiple processes via virtual memory. Libraries of this
kind are called shared libraries.

The concept is not very new. Operating system designers
implemented extensions to their system using the infras-
tructure they used before. The extension to the OS could
be done transparently for the user. But the parts the user
directly has to deal with created initially problems.

The main aspect is the binary format. This is the for-
mat which is used to describe the application code. Long
gone are the days that it was sufficient to provide a mem-
ory dump. Multi-process systems need to identify differ-
ent parts of the file containing the program such as the
text, data, and debug information parts. For this, binary
formats were introduced early on. Commonly used in the
early Unix-days were formats such as a.out or COFF.
These binary formats were not designed with shared li-
braries in mind and this clearly shows.

 Copyright c 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006 Ulrich Drepper
 All rights reserved. No redistribution allowed.
1.1   A Little Bit of History

The binary format used initially for Linux was an a.out
variant. When introducing shared libraries certain design
decisions had to be made to work in the limitations of
a.out. The main accepted limitation was that no reloca-
tions are performed at the time of loading and afterward.
The shared libraries have to exist in the form they are
used at run-time on disk. This imposes a major restric-
tion on the way shared libraries are built and used: every
shared library must have a fixed load address; otherwise it
would not be possible to generate shared libraries which
do not have to be relocated.

The fixed load addresses had to be assigned and this has
to happen without overlaps and conflicts and with some
future safety by allowing growth of the shared library.
It is therefore necessary to have a central authority for
the assignment of address ranges which in itself is a ma-
jor problem. But it gets worse: given a Linux system
of today with many hundred of DSOs (Dynamic Shared
Objects) the address space and the virtual memory avail-
able to the application gets severely fragmented. This
would limit the size of memory blocks which can be dy-
namically allocated which would create unsurmountable
problems for some applications. It would even have hap-
pened by today that the assignment authority ran out of
address ranges to assign, at least on 32-bit machines.

We still have not covered all the drawbacks of the a.out
shared libraries. Since the applications using shared li-
braries should not have to be relinked after changing a
shared library it uses, the entry points, i.e., the function
and variable addresses, must not change. This can only
be guaranteed if the entry points are kept separate from
the actual code since otherwise limits on the size of a
function would be hard-coded. A table of function stubs
which call the actual implementation was used in solu-
tion used on Linux. The static linker got the address of
each function stub from a special file (with the filename
extension .sa). At run-time a file ending in .so.X.Y.Z
was used and it had to correspond to the used .sa file.
This in turn requires that an allocated entry in the stub
table always had to be used for the same function. The
allocation of the table had to be carefully taken care of.
Introducing a new interface meant appending to the ta-
ble. It was never possible to retire a table entry. To avoid
using an old shared library with a program linked with a
newer version, some record had to be kept in the applica-
tion: the X and Y parts of the name of the .so.X.Y.Z
suffix was recorded and the dynamic linker made sure
minimum requirements were met.

The benefits of the scheme are that the resulting program
runs very fast. Calling a function in such a shared li-
braries is very efficient even for the first call. It can
be implemented with only two absolute jumps: the first
from the user code to the stub, and the second from the
stub to the actual code of the function. This is probably
faster than any other shared library implementation, but
its speed comes at too high a price:

   1. a central assignment of address ranges is needed;
   2. collisions are possible (likely) with catastrophic re-
      sults;
   3. the address space gets severely fragmented.

For all these reasons and more, Linux converted early on
to using ELF (Executable Linkage Format) as the binary
format. The ELF format is defined by the generic spec-
ification (gABI) to which processor-specific extensions
(psABI) are added. As it turns out the amortized cost of
function calls is almost the same as for a.out but the
restrictions are gone.

1.2   The Move To ELF

For programmers the main advantage of the switch to
ELF was that creating ELF shared libraries, or in ELF-
speak DSOs, becomes very easy. The only difference be-
tween generating an application and a DSO is in the final
link command line. One additional option (--shared in
the case of GNU ld) tells the linker to generate a DSO
instead of an application, the latter being the default. In
fact, DSOs are little more than a special kind of binary;
the difference is that they have no fixed load address and
hence require the dynamic linker to actually become ex-
ecutable. With Position Independent Executable (PIEs)
the difference shrinks even more.

This, together with the introduction of GNU Libtool which
will be described later, has led to the wide adoption of
DSOs by programmers. Proper use of DSOs can help
save large amounts of resources. But some rules must be
followed to get any benefits, and some more rules have to
be followed to get optimal results. Explaining these rules
will be the topic of a large portion of this paper.

Not all uses of DSOs are for the purpose of saving re-
sources. DSOs are today also often used as a way to
structure programs. Different parts of the program are
put into separate DSOs. This can be a very powerful tool,
especially in the development phase. Instead of relink-
ing the entire program it is only necessary to relink the
DSO(s) which changed. This is often much faster.

Some projects decide to keep many separate DSOs even
in the deployment phase even though the DSOs are not
reused in other programs. In many situations it is cer-
tainly a useful thing to do: DSOs can be updated indi-
vidually, reducing the amount of data which has to be
transported. But the number of DSOs must be kept to a
reasonable level. Not all programs do this, though, and
we will see later on why this can be a problem.

Before we can start discussing all this some understand-
ing of ELF and its implementation is needed.

1.3   How Is ELF Implemented?

The handling of a statically linked application is very
simple. Such an application has a fixed load address
which the kernel knows. The load process consists sim-
ply of making the binary available in the appropriate ad-
dress space of a newly created process and transferring
control to the entry point of the application. Everything
else was done by the static linker when creating the exe-
cutable.

Dynamically linked binaries, in contrast, are not com-
plete when they are loaded from disk. It is therefore
not possible for the kernel to immediately transfer con-
trol to the application. Instead some other helper pro-
gram, which obviously has to be complete, is loaded as
well. This helper program is the dynamic linker. The task
of the dynamic linker is it, to complete the dynamically
linked application by loading the DSOs it needs (the de-
pendencies) and to perform the relocations. Then finally
control can be transferred to the program.

This is not the last task for the dynamic linker in most
cases, though. ELF allows the relocations associated with
a symbol to be delayed until the symbol is needed. This
lazy relocation scheme is optional, and optimizations dis-
cussed below for relocations performed at startup imme-
diately effect the lazy relocations as well. So we ignore
in the following everything after the startup is finished.

1.4   Startup: In The Kernel

Starting execution of a program begins in the kernel, nor-
mally in the execve system call. The currently executed
                     typedef struct
                     {
                       Elf32 Word p type;
                       Elf32 Off p offset;
                       Elf32 Addr p vaddr;
                       Elf32 Addr p paddr;
                       Elf32 Word p filesz;
                       Elf32 Word p memsz;
                       Elf32 Word p flags;
                       Elf32 Word p align;
                     } Elf32 Phdr;

                                        Figure 1: ELF Program H

code is replaced with a new program. This means the ad-
dress space content is replaced by the content of the file
containing the program. This does not happen by sim-
ply mapping (using mmap) the content of the file. ELF
files are structured and there are normally at least three
different kinds of regions in the file:

    • Code which is executed; this region is normally not
      writable;
    • Data which is modified; this region is normally not
      executable;
    • Data which is not used at run-time; since not needed
      it should not be loaded at startup.

Modern operating systems and processors can protect mem-
ory regions to allow and disallow reading, writing, and
executing separately for each page of memory.1 It is
preferable to mark as many pages as possible not writable
since this means that the pages can be shared between
processes which use the same application or DSO the
page is from. Write protection also helps to detect and
prevent unintentional or malignant modifications of data
or even code.

For the kernel to find the different regions, or segments
in ELF-speak, and their access permissions, the ELF file
format defines a table which contains just this informa-
tion, among other things. The ELF Program Header ta-
ble, as it is called, must be present in every executable
and DSO. It is represented by the C types Elf32 Phdr
and Elf64 Phdr which are defined as can be seen in fig-
ure 1.

To locate the program header data structure another data
structure is needed, the ELF Header. The ELF header is
the only data structure which has a fixed place in the file,
starting at offset zero. Its C data structure can be seen
in figure 2. The e phoff field specifies where, counting
from the beginning of the file, the program header table
starts. The e phnum field contains the number of entries
   1 A memory page is the smallest entity the memory subsystem of

the OS operates on. The size of a page can vary between different
architectures and even within systems using the same architecture.
        typedef struct
        {
          Elf64 Word p type;
          Elf64 Word p flags;
          Elf64 Off p offset;
          Elf64 Addr p vaddr;
          Elf64 Addr p paddr;
          Elf64 Xword p filesz;
          Elf64 Xword p memsz;
          Elf64 Xword p align;
        } Elf64 Phdr;

eader C Data Structure

in the program header table and the e phentsize field
contains the size of each entry. This last value is useful
only as a run-time consistency check for the binary.

The different segments are represented by the program
header entries with the PT LOAD value in the p type field.
The p offset and p filesz fields specify where in the
file the segment starts and how long it is. The p vaddr
and p memsz fields specifies where the segment is located
in the the process’ virtual address space and how large
the memory region is. The value of the the p vaddr field
itself is not necessarily required to be the final load ad-
dress. DSOs can be loaded at arbitrary addresses in the
virtual address space. But the relative position of the seg-
ments is important. For pre-linked DSOs the actual value
of the p vaddr field is meaningful: it specifies the ad-
dress for which the DSO was pre-linked. But even this
does not mean the dynamic linker cannot ignore this in-
formation if necessary.

The size in the file can be smaller than the address space
it takes up in memory. The first p filesz bytes of the
memory region are initialized from the data of the seg-
ment in the file, the difference is initialized with zero.
This can be used to handle BSS sections2 , sections for
uninitialized variables which are according to the C stan-
dard initialized with zero. Handling uninitialized vari-
ables this way has the advantage that the file size can be
reduced since no initialization value has to be stored, no
data has to be copied from dist to memory, and the mem-
ory provided by the OS via the mmap interface is already
initialized with zero.

The p flags finally tells the kernel what permissions to
use for the memory pages. This field is a bitmap with the
bits given in the following table being defined. The flags
are directly mapped to the flags mmap understands.

    2 A BSS section contains only NUL bytes. Therefore they do not

have to be represented in the file on the storage medium. The loader
just has to know the size so that it can allocate memory large enough
and fill it with NUL
        typedef struct
        {
          unsigned char e ident[EI NIDENT];
          Elf32 Half    e type;
          Elf32 Half    e machine;
          Elf32 Word    e version;
          Elf32 Addr    e entry;
          Elf32 Off     e phoff;
          Elf32 Off     e shoff;
          Elf32 Word    e flags;
          Elf32 Half    e ehsize;
          Elf32 Half    e phentsize;
          Elf32 Half    e phnum;
          Elf32 Half    e shentsize;
          Elf32 Half    e shnum;
          Elf32 Half    e shstrndx;
        } Elf32 Ehdr;

                                         Figure 2: ELF Heade

 p flags      Value    mmap flag        Description
 PF X         1        PROT EXEC        Execute Permission
 PF W         2        PROT WRITE       Write Permission
 PF R         4        PROT READ        Read Permission

After mapping all the PT LOAD segments using the ap-
propriate permissions and the specified address, or after
freely allocating an address for dynamic objects which
have no fixed load address, the next phase can start. The
virtual address space of the dynamically linked executable
itself is set up. But the binary is not complete. The kernel
has to get the dynamic linker to do the rest and for this
the dynamic linker has to be loaded in the same way as
the executable itself (i.e., look for the loadable segments
in the program header). The difference is that the dy-
namic linker itself must be complete and should be freely
relocatable.

Which binary implements the dynamic linker is not hard-
coded in the kernel. Instead the program header of the
application contains an entry with the tag PT INTERP.
The p offset field of this entry contains the offset of
a NUL-terminated string which specifies the file name of
this file. The only requirement on the named file is that
its load address does not conflict with the load address of
any possible executable it might be used with. In gen-
eral this means that the dynamic linker has no fixed load
address and can be loaded anywhere; this is just what dy-
namic binaries allow.

Once the dynamic linker has also been mapped into the
memory of the stillborn process we can start the dynamic
linker. Note it is not the entry point of the application to
which control is transfered to. Only the dynamic linker is
ready to run. Instead of calling the dynamic linker right
away, one more step is performed. The dynamic linker
somehow has to be told where the application can be
found and where control has to be transferred to once the
      typedef struct
      {
        unsigned char e ident[EI NIDENT];
        Elf64 Half    e type;
        Elf64 Half    e machine;
        Elf64 Word    e version;
        Elf64 Addr    e entry;
        Elf64 Off     e phoff;
        Elf64 Off     e shoff;
        Elf64 Word    e flags;
        Elf64 Half    e ehsize;
        Elf64 Half    e phentsize;
        Elf64 Half    e phnum;
        Elf64 Half    e shentsize;
        Elf64 Half    e shnum;
        Elf64 Half    e shstrndx;
      } Elf64 Ehdr;

C Data Structure

application is complete. For this a structured way exists.
The kernel puts an array of tag-value pairs on the stack
of the new process. This auxiliary vector contains be-
side the two aforementioned values several more values
which allow the dynamic linker to avoid several system
calls. The elf.h header file defines a number of con-
stants with a AT prefix. These are the tags for the entries
in the auxiliary vector.

After setting up the auxiliary vector the kernel is finally
ready to transfer control to the dynamic linker in user
mode. The entry point is defined in e entry field of the
ELF header of the dynamic linker.

1.5     Startup in the Dynamic Linker

The second phase of the program startup happens in the
dynamic linker. Its tasks include:

      • Determine and load dependencies;

      • Relocate the application and all dependencies;

      • Initialize the application and dependencies in the
        correct order.

In the following we will discuss in more detail only the
relocation handling. For the other two points the way
for better performance is clear: have fewer dependencies.
Each participating object is initialized exactly once but
some topological sorting has to happen. The identify and
load process also scales with the number dependencies;
in most (all?) implementations this is not only a linear
growth.
The relocation process is normally3 the most expensive
part of the dynamic linker’s work. It is a process which is
asymptotically at least O(R +nr) where R is the number
of relative relocations, r is the number of named reloca-
tions, and n is the number of participating DSOs (plus
the main executable). Deficiencies in the ELF hash ta-
ble function and various ELF extensions modifying the
symbol lookup functionality may well increase the factor
to O(R + rn log s) where s is the number of symbols.
This should make clear that for improved performance it
is significant to reduce the number if relocations and sym-
bols as much as possible. After explaining the relocation
process we will do some estimates for actual numbers.

1.5.1    The Relocation Process

Relocation in this context means adjusting the application
and the DSOs, which are loaded as the dependencies, to
their own and all other load addresses. There are two
kinds of dependencies:

    • Dependencies to locations which are known to be
      in the own object. These are not associated with a
      specific symbol since the linker knows the relative
      position of the location in the object.
        Note that applications do not have relative reloca-
        tions since the load address of the code is known
        at link-time and therefore the static linker is able to
        perform the relocation.

    • Dependencies based on symbols. The reference of
      the definition is generally, but not necessarily, in a
      different object than the definition.

The implementation of relative relocations is easy. The
linker can compute the offset of the target destination in
the object file at link-time. To this value the dynamic
linker only has to add the load address of the object and
store the result in the place indicated by the relocation. At
runtime the dynamic linker has to spend only a very small
and constant amount of time which does not increase if
more DSOs are used.

The relocation based on a symbol is much more compli-
cated. The ELF symbol resolution process was designed
very powerful so that it can handle many different prob-
lems. All this powerful functionality adds to the com-
plexity and run-time costs, though. Readers of the fol-
lowing description might question the decisions which
led to this process. We cannot argue about this here; read-
ers are referred to discussions of ELF. Fact is that symbol
relocation is a costly process and the more DSOs partic-
ipate or the more symbols are defined in the DSOs, the
longer the symbol lookup takes.
   3 We ignore the pre-linking support here which in many cases can

reduce significantly or even eliminate the relocation costs.
The result of any relocation will be stored somewhere
in the object with the reference. Ideally and generally
the target location is in the data segment. If code is in-
correctly generated by the user, compiler, or linker relo-
cations might modify text or read-only segments. The
dynamic linker will handle this correctly if the object is
marked, as required by the ELF specification, with the
DF TEXTREL set in the DT FLAGS entry of the dynamic
section (or the existence of the DT TEXTREL flag in old
binaries). But the result is that the modified page can-
not be shared with other processes using the same object.
The modification process itself is also quite slow since
the kernel has to reorganize the memory handling data
structures quite a bit.

1.5.2 Symbol Relocations

The dynamic linker has to perform a relocation for all
symbols which are used at run-time and which are not
known at link-time to be defined in the same object as the
reference. Due to the way code is generated on some ar-
chitectures it is possible to delay the processing of some
relocations until the references in question are actually
used. This is on many architectures the case for calls
to functions. All other kinds of relocations always have
to be processed before the object can be used. We will
ignore the lazy relocation processing since this is just a
method to delay the work. It eventually has to be done
and so we will include it in our cost analysis. To actu-
ally perform all the relocations before using the object is
used by setting the environment variable LD BIND NOW to
a non-empty value. Lazy relocation can be disabled for
an individual object by adding the -z now option to the
linker command line. The linker will set the DF BIND NOW
flag in the DT FLAGS entry of the dynamic section to
mark the DSO. This setting cannot be undone without
relinking the DSOs or editing the binary, though, so this
option should only be used if it is really wanted.

The actual lookup process is repeated from start for each
symbol relocation in each loaded object. Note that there
can be many references to the same symbol in differ-
ent objects. The result of the lookup can be different
for each of the objects so there can be no short cuts ex-
cept for caching results for a symbol in each object in
case more than one relocation references the same sym-
bol. The lookup scope mentioned in the steps below is an
ordered list of a subset of the loaded objects which can
be different for each object itself. The way the scope is
computed is quite complex and not really relevant here so
we refer the interested reader to the ELF specification and
section 1.5.4. Important is that the length of the scope is
normally directly dependent on the number of loaded ob-
jects. This is another factor where reducing the number
of loaded objects is increasing performance.

There are today two different methods for the lookup pro-
cess for a symbol. The traditional ELF method proceeds
in the following steps:
Histogram for bucket list length in section [
 Addr: 0x42000114 Offset: 0x000114 Link to
 Length Number % of total Coverage
      0     132       12.9%
      1     310       30.3%     15.3%
      2     256       25.0%     40.6%
      3     172       16.8%     66.0%
      4      92        9.0%     84.2%
      5      46        4.5%     95.5%
      6      14        1.4%     99.7%
      7       1        0.1%    100.0%
 Average number of tests:   successful lookup
                          unsuccessful lookup

                             Figure 3: Example Output for

Histogram for bucket list length in section [
 Addr: 0x00000114 Offset: 0x000114 Link to
 Length Number % of total Coverage
      0     103       53.9%
      1      71       37.2%     67.0%
      2      16        8.4%     97.2%
      3       1        0.5%    100.0%
 Average number of tests:   successful lookup
                          unsuccessful lookup

                        Figure 4: Example Output for eu-r

  1. Determine the hash value for the symbol name.

  2. In the first/next object in the lookup scope:

      2.a Determine the hash bucket for the symbol us-
          ing the hash value and the hash table size in
          the object.
      2.b Get the name offset of the symbol and using
          it as the NUL-terminated name.
      2.c Compare the symbol name with the reloca-
          tion name.
      2.d If the names match, compare the version names
          as well. This only has to happen if both, the
          reference and the definition, are versioned. It
          requires a string comparison, too. If the ver-
          sion name matches or no such comparison
          is performed, we found the definition we are
          looking for.
      2.e If the definition does not match, retry with the
          next element in the chain for the hash bucket.
      2.f If the chain does not contain any further ele-
          ment there is no definition in the current ob-
          ject and we proceed with the next object in
          the lookup scope.

  3. If there is no further object in the lookup scope the
     lookup failed.
 2] ’.hash’ (total of 1023 buckets):
section: [ 3] ’.dynsym’

: 1.994080
: 1.981427

u-readelf -I libc.so

 2] ’.hash’ (total of 191 buckets):
section: [ 3] ’.dynsym’

: 1.179245
: 0.554974

eadelf -I libnss files.so

Note that there is no problem if the scope contains more
than one definition of the same symbol. The symbol
lookup algorithm simply picks up the first definition it
finds. Note that a definition in a DSO being weak has no
effects. Weak definitions only play a role in static linking.
Having multiple definitions has some perhaps surprising
consequences. Assume DSO ‘A’ defines and references
an interface and DSO ‘B’ defines the same interface. If
now ‘B’ precedes ‘A’ in the scope, the reference in ‘A’
will be satisfied by the definition in ‘B’. It is said that
the definition in ‘B’ interposes the definition in ‘A’. This
concept is very powerful since it allows more special-
ized implementation of an interface to be used without
replacing the general code. One example for this mech-
anism is the use of the LD PRELOAD functionality of the
dynamic linker where additional DSOs which were not
present at link-time are introduced at run-time. But inter-
position can also lead to severe problems in ill-designed
code. More in this in section 1.5.4.

Looking at the algorithm it can be seen that the perfor-
mance of each lookup depends, among other factors, on
the length of the hash chains and the number of objects
in the lookup scope. These are the two loops described
above. The lengths of the hash chains depend on the
number of symbols and the choice of the hash table size.
Since the hash function used in the initial step of the algo-
rithm must never change these are the only two remaining
variables. Many linkers do not put special emphasis on
selecting an appropriate table size. The GNU linker tries
to optimize the hash table size for minimal lengths of the
chains if it gets passed the -O option (note: the linker, not
the compiler, needs to get this option).
   A note on the current implementation of the hash table op-
   timization. The GNU binutils linker has a simple minded
   heuristic which often favors small table sizes over short
   chain length. For large projects this might very well in-
   crease the startup costs. The overall memory consumption
   will be sometimes significantly reduces which might com-
   pensate sooner or later but it is still advised to check the
   effectiveness of the optimization. A new linker implemen-
   tation is going to be developed and it contains a better algo-
   rithm.

To measure the effectiveness of the hashing two numbers
are important:

    • The average chain length for a successful lookup.
    • The average chain length for an unsuccessful lookup.

It might be surprising to talk about unsuccessful lookups
here but in fact they are the rule. Note that “unsuccess-
ful” means only unsuccessful in the current objects. Only
for objects which implement almost everything they get
looked in for is the successful lookup number more im-
portant. In this category there are basically only two ob-
jects on a Linux system: the C library and the dynamic
linker itself.

Some versions of the readelf program compute the value
directly and the output is similar to figures 3 and 4. The
data in these examples shows us a number of things. Based
on the number of symbols (2027 versus 106) the chosen
table size is radically different. For the smaller table the
linker can afford to “waste” 53.9% of the hash table en-
tries which contain no data. That’s only 412 bytes on
a gABI-compliant system. If the same amount of over-
head would be allowed for the libc.so binary the table
would be 4 kilobytes or more larger. That is a big dif-
ference. The linker has a fixed cost function integrated
which takes the table size into account.

The increased relative table size means we have signifi-
cantly shorter hash chains. This is especially true for the
average chain length for an unsuccessful lookup. The av-
erage for the small table is only 28% of that of the large
table.

What these numbers should show is the effect of reduc-
ing the number of symbols in the dynamic symbol ta-
ble. With significantly fewer symbols the linker has a
much better chance to counter the effects of the subopti-
mal hashing function.

Another factor in the cost of the lookup algorithm is con-
nected with the strings themselves. Simple string com-
parison is used on the symbol names which are stored
in a string table associated with the symbol table data
structures. Strings are stored in the C-format; they are
terminated by a NUL byte and no initial length field is
used. This means string comparisons has to proceed until
a non-matching character is found or until the end of the
string. This approach is susceptible to long strings with
common prefixes. Unfortunately this is not uncommon.

namespace some_namespace {
  class some_longer_class_name {
     int member_variable;
   public:
     some_longer_class_name (int p);
     int the_getter_function (void);
  };
}

The name mangling scheme used by the GNU C++ com-
piler before version 3.0 used a mangling scheme which
put the name of a class member first along with a descrip-
tion of the parameter list and following it the other parts
of the name such as namespaces and nested class names.
The result is a name which distinguishable in the begin-
ning if the member names are different. For the example
above the mangled names for the two members functions
look like this figure 5.

In the new mangling scheme used in today’s gcc versions
and all other compilers which are compatible with the
common C++ ABI the names start with the namespaces
and class names and end with the member names. Fig-
ure 6 shows the result for the little example. The mangled
names for the two member functions differs only after the
43rd character. This is really bad performance-wise if the
two symbols should fall into the same hash bucket.4

Ada has similar problems. The standard Ada library for
gcc has all symbols prefixed with ada , then the pack-
age and sub-package names, followed by function name.
Figure 7 shows a short excerpt of the list of symbols from
the library. The first 23 character are the same for all the
names.

The length of the strings in both mangling schemes is
worrisome since each string has to be compared com-
pletely when the symbol itself is searched for. The names
in the example are not extra ordinarily long either. Look-
ing through the standard C++ library one can find many
names longer than 120 characters and even this is not the
longest. Other system libraries feature names longer than
200 characters and complicated, “well designed” C++
projects with many namespaces, templates, and nested
classes can feature names with more than 1,000 charac-
    4 Some people suggested “Why not search from the back?”. Think

about it, these are C strings, not PASCAL strings. We do not know the
length and therefore would have to read every single character of the
string to determine the length. The result would be worse.
__Q214some_namespace22some_longer_class_namei
the_getter_function__Q214some_namespace22some

                                    Figure 5: Mangled names

_ZN14some_namespace22some_longer_class_nameC1
_ZN14some_namespace22some_longer_class_name19

                             Figure 6: Mangled names using

ada__calendar__delays___elabb
ada__calendar__delays__timed_delay_nt
ada__calendar__delays__to_duration

                                     Figure 7: Names from th

ters. One plus point for design, but minus 100 points for
performance.

With the knowledge of the hashing function and the de-
tails of the string lookup let us look at a real-world exam-
ple: OpenOffice.org. The package contains 144 separate
DSOs. During startup about 20,000 relocations are per-
formed. Many of the relocations are performed as the
result of dlopen calls and therefore cannot be optimized
away by using prelink [7]. The number of string compar-
isons needed during the symbol resolution can be used
as a fair value for the startup overhead. We compute an
approximation of this value now.

The average chain length for unsuccessful lookup in all
DSOs of the OpenOffice.org 1.0 release on IA-32 is 1.1931.
This means for each symbol lookup the dynamic linker
has to perform on average 72 × 1.1931 = 85.9032 string
comparisons. For 20,000 symbols the total is 1,718,064
string comparisons. The average length of an exported
symbol defined in the DSOs of OpenOffice.org is 54.13.
Even if we are assuming that only 20% of the string is
searched before finding a mismatch (which is an opti-
mistic guess since every symbol name is compared com-
pletely at least once to match itself) this would mean a to-
tal of more then 18.5 million characters have to be loaded
from memory and compared. No wonder that the startup
is so slow, especially since we ignored other costs.

To compute number of lookups the dynamic linker per-
forms one can use the help of the dynamic linker. If the
environment variable LD DEBUG is set to symbols one
only has to count the number of lines which start with
symbol=. It is best to redirect the dynamic linker’s out-
put into a file with LD DEBUG OUTPUT. The number of
string comparisons can then be estimate by multiplying
the count with the average hash chain length. Since the
collected output contains the name of the file which is
_longer_class_name

using pre-gcc 3 scheme

Ei
the_getter_functionEv

he common C++ ABI scheme

 standard Ada library

looked at it would even be possible to get more accurate
results by multiplying with the exact hash chain length
for the object.

Changing any of the factors ‘number of exported sym-
bols’, ‘length of the symbol strings’, ‘number and length
of common prefixes’,‘number of DSOs’, and ‘hash table
size optimization’ can reduce the costs dramatically. In
general the percentage spent on relocations of the time
the dynamic linker uses during startup is around 50-70%
if the binary is already in the file system cache, and about
20-30% if the file has to be loaded from disk.5 It is there-
fore worth spending time on these issues and in the re-
mainder of the text we will introduce methods to do just
that. So far to remember: pass -O1 to the linker to gener-
ate the final product.

1.5.3 The GNU-style Hash Table

All the optimizations proposed in the previous section
still leave symbol lookup as a significant factor. A lot
of data has to be examined and loading all this data in the
CPU cache is expensive. As mentioned above, the orig-
inal ELF hash table handling has no more flexibility so
any solution would have to do replace it. This is what the
GNU-style hash table handling does. It can peacefully
coexist with the old-style hash table handling by having
its own dynamic section entry (DT GNU HASH). Updated
dynamic linkers will use the new hash table insted of the
old, therefore provided completely transparent backward
compatibility support. The new hash table implementa-
tion, like the old, is self-contained in each executable and
DSO so it is no problem to have binaries with the new
and some with only the old format in the same process.

The main cost for the lookup, especially for certain bina-
   5 These numbers assume pre-linking is not used.
ries, is the comparison of the symbol names. If the num-
ber of comparisons which actually have to be performed
can be reduced we can gain big. A second possible opti-
mization is the layout of the data. The old-style hash table
with its linked list of symbol table entries is not necessar-
ily good to the CPU cache. CPU caches work particularly
well when the used memory locations are consecutive. A
linked list can jump wildly around and render CPU cache
loading and prefetching less effective.

The GNU-style hash tables set out to solve these prob-
lem and more. Since compatibility with existing runtime
environments could be maintained by providing the old-
style hash tables in parallel no restrictions of the changes
were needed. The new lookup process is therefore slightly
different:

   1. Determine the hash value for the symbol name.

   2. In the first/next object in the lookup scope:

        2.a The hash value is used to determine whether
            an entry with the given hash value is present
            at all. This is done with a 2-bit Bloom fil-
            ter.6 . If the filter indicates there is no such
            definition the next object in the lookup scope
            is searched.
       2.b Determine the hash bucket for the symbol us-
           ing the hash value and the hash table size in
           the object. The value is a symbol index.
        2.c Get the entry from the chain array correspond-
            ing to the symbol index. Compare the value
            with the hash value of the symbol we are try-
            ing to locate. Ignore bit 0.
       2.d If the hash value matches, get the name off-
           set of the symbol and using it as the NUL-
           terminated name.
        2.e Compare the symbol name with the reloca-
            tion name.
        2.f If the names match, compare the version names
            as well. This only has to happen if both, the
            reference and the definition, are versioned. It
            requires a string comparison, too. If the ver-
            sion name matches or no such comparison
            is performed, we found the definition we are
            looking for.
       2.g If the definition does not match and the value
           loaded from the hash bucket does not have
           bit 0 set, continue with the next entry in the
           hash bucket array.
       2.h If bit 0 is set there are no further entry in the
           hash chain we proceed with the next object in
           the lookup scope.

   3. If there is no further object in the lookup scope the
      lookup failed.
  6 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bloom filter
This new process seems more complicated. Not only is
this not really the case, it is also much faster. The number
of times we actually have to compare strings is reduced
significantly. The Bloom filter alone usually filters out
80% or more (in many cases 90+%) of all lookups. I.e.,
even in the case the hash chains are long no work is done
since the Bloom filter helps to determine that there will be
no match. This is done with one signal memory access.

Second, comparing the hash value with that of the symbol
table entry prevents yet more string comparisons. Each
hash chain can contain entries with different hash value
and this simple word comparison can filter out a lot of
duplicates. There are rarely two entries with the same
hash value in a hash chain which means that an unsuc-
cessful string comparison is rare. The probability for this
is also increased by using a different hash function than
the original ELF specification dictates. The new function
is much better in spreading the values out over the value
range of 32-bit values.

The hash chain array is organized to have all entries for
the same hash bucket follow each other. There is no
linked list and therefore the cache utilization is much bet-
ter.

Only if the Bloom filter and the hash function test suc-
ceed do we access the symbol table itself. All symbol ta-
ble entries for a hash chain are consecutive, too, so in case
we need to access more than one entry the CPU cache
prefetching will help here, too.

One last change over the old format is that the hash ta-
ble only contains a few, necessary records for undefined
symbol. The majority of undefined symbols do not have
to appear in the hash table. This in some cases signif-
icantly reduces the possibility of hash collisions and it
certainly increases the Bloom filter success rate and re-
duces the average hash chain length. The result are sig-
nificant speed-ups of 50% or more in code which cannot
depend on pre-linking [7] (pre-linking is always faster).

This does not mean, though, that the optimization tech-
niques described in the previous section are irrelevant.
They still should very much be applied. Using the new
hash table implementation just means that not optimizing
the exported and referenced symbols will not have a big
effect on performance as it used to have.

   The new hash table format was introduced in Fedora
   Core 6. The entire OS, with a few deliberate exceptions,
   is created without the compatibility hash table by using
   --hash-style=gnu. This means the binaries cannot be
   used on systems without support for the new hash table for-
   mat in the dynamic linker. Since this is never a goal for any
   of the OS releases making this decision was a no-brainer.
   The result is that all binaries are smaller than with the sec-
   ond set of hash tables and in many cases even smaller than
   binaries using only the old format.
Going back to the OpenOffice.org example, we can make
some estimates about the speedup. If the Bloom filter is
able to filter out a low 80% of all lookups and the prob-
ability of duplicates hash values is a high 15% we only
have to actually compare on average 72 × 0.2 × 0.15 ×
1.1931 = 2.58 strings. This is an improvement of a fac-
tor of 33. Adding to this to improved memory handling
and respect for the CPU cache we have even higher gains.
In real world examples we can reduce the lookup costs so
that programs start up 50% faster or more.

1.5.4   Lookup Scope

The lookup scope has so far been described as an ordered
list of most loaded object. While this is correct it has also
been intentionally vague. It is now time to explain the
lookup scope in more detail.

The lookup scope consists in fact of up to three parts.
The main part is the global lookup scope. It initially
consists of the executable itself and all its dependencies.
The dependencies are added in breadth-first order. That
means first the dependencies of the executable are added
in the order of their DT NEEDED entries in the executable’s
dynamic section. Then the dependencies of the first de-
pendency are added in the same fashion. DSOs already
loaded are skipped; they do not appear more than once
on the list. The process continues recursively and it will
stop at some point since there are only a limited number
of DSOs available. The exact number of DSOs loaded
this way can vary widely. Some executables depend on
only two DSOs, others on 200.

If an executable has the DF SYMBOLIC flag set (see sec-
tion 2.2.7) the object with the reference is added in front
of the global lookup scope. Note, only the object with
the reference itself is added in front, not its dependen-
cies. The effects and reasons for this will be explained
later.

A more complicated modification of the lookup scope
happens when DSOs are loaded dynamic using dlopen.
If a DSO is dynamically loaded it brings in its own set
of dependencies which might have to be searched. These
objects, starting with the one which was requested in the
dlopen call, are appended to the lookup scope if the
object with the reference is among those objects which
have been loaded by dlopen. That means, those objects
are not added to the global lookup scope and they are
not searched for normal lookups. This third part of the
lookup scope, we will call it local lookup scope, is there-
fore dependent on the object which has the reference.

The behavior of dlopen can be changed, though. If the
function gets passed the RTLD GLOBAL flag, the loaded
object and all the dependencies are added to the global
scope. This is usually a very bad idea. The dynami-
cally added objects can be removed and when this hap-
pens the lookups of all other objects is influenced. The
entire global lookup scope is searched before the dynam-
ically loaded object and its dependencies so that defini-
tions would be found first in the global lookup scope ob-
ject before definitions in the local lookup scope. If the
dynamic linker does the lookup as part of a relocation
this additional dependency is usually taken care of auto-
matically, but this cannot be arranged if the user looks up
symbols in the lookup scope with dlsym.

And usually there is no reason to use RTLD GLOBAL. For
reasons explained later it is always highly advised to cre-
ate dependencies with all the DSOs necessary to resolve
all references. RTLD GLOBAL is often used to provide im-
plementations which are not available at link time of a
DSO. Since this should be avoided the need for this flag
should be minimal. Even if the programmer has to jump
through some hoops to work around the issues which are
solved by RTLD GLOBAL it is worth it. The pain of debug-
ging and working around problems introduced by adding
objects to the global lookup scope is much bigger.

The dynamic linker in the GNU C library knows since
September 2004 one more extension. This extension helps
to deal with situations where multiple definitions of sym-
bols with the same name are not compatible and there-
fore cannot be interposed and expected to work. This is
usally a sign of design failures on the side of the peo-
ple who wrote the DSOs with the conflicting definitions
and also failure on the side of the application writer who
depends on these incompatible DSOs. We assume here
that an application app is linked with a DSO libone.so
which defines a symbol duplicate and that it dynami-
cally loads a DSO libdynamic.so which depends on
another DSO libtwo.so which also defines a symbol
duplicate. When the application starts it might have a
global scope like this:

    app → libone.so → libdl.so → libc.so

If now libtwo.so is loaded, the additional local scope
could be like this:

     libdynamic.so → libtwo.so → libc.so

This local scope is searched after the global scope, pos-
sibly with the exception of libdynamic.so which is
searched first for lookups in this very same DSO if the
DF DYNAMIC flag is used. But what happens if the sym-
bol duplicate is required in libdynamic.so? After
all we said so far the result is always: the definition in
libone.so is found since libtwo.so is only in the lo-
cal scope which is searched after the global scope. If the
two definitions are incompatible the program is in trou-
ble.

This can be changed with a recent enough GNU C library
by ORing RTLD DEEPBIND to the flag word passed as the
second parameter to dlopen. If this happens, the dy-
namic linker will search the local scope before the global
scope for all objects which have been loaded by the call
to dlopen. For our example this means the search or-
der changes for all lookups in the newly loaded DSOs
libdynamic.so and libtwo.so, but not for libc.so
since this DSO has already been loaded. For the two af-
fected DSOs a reference to duplicate will now find the
definition in libtwo.so. In all other DSOs the definition
in libone.so would be found.

While this might sound like a good solution for handling
compatibility problems this feature should only be used
if it cannot be avoided. There are several reasonse for
this:

   • The change in the scope affects all symbols and all
     the DSOs which are loaded. Some symbols might
     have to be interposed by definitions in the global
     scope which now will not happen.

   • Already loaded DSOs are not affected which could
     cause unconsistent results depending on whether
     the DSO is already loaded (it might be dynamically
     loaded, so there is even a race condition).

   • LD PRELOAD is ineffective for lookups in the dy-
     namically loaded objects since the preloaded ob-
     jects are part of the global scope, having been added
     right after the executable. Therefore they are looked
     at only after the local scope.

   • Applications might expect that local definitions are
     always preferred over other definitions. This (and
     the previous point) is already partly already a prob-
     lem with the use of DF SYMBOLIC but since this
     flag should not be used either, the arguments are
     still valid.

   • If any of the implicitly loaded DSOs is loaded ex-
     plicitly afterward, its lookup scope will change.

   • Lastly, the flag is not portable.

The RTLD DEEPBIND flag should really only be used as
a last resort. Fixing the application to not depend on the
flag’s functionality is the much better solution.

1.5.5   GOT and PLT

The Global Offset Table (GOT) and Procedure Linkage
Table (PLT) are the two data structures central to the ELF
run-time. We will introduce now the reasons why they
are used and what consequences arise from that.

Relocations are created for source constructs like
   extern int foo;
   extern int bar (int);
   int call_bar (void) {
     return bar (foo);
   }

The call to bar requires two relocations: one to load the
value of foo and another one to find the address of bar.
If the code would be generated knowing the addresses of
the variable and the function the assembler instructions
would directly load from or jump to the address. For IA-
32 the code would look like this:

   pushl       foo
   call        bar

This would encode the addresses of foo and bar as part
of the instruction in the text segment. If the address is
only known to the dynamic linker the text segment would
have to be modified at run-time. According to what we
learned above this must be avoided.

Therefore the code generated for DSOs, i.e., when using
-fpic or -fPIC, looks like this:

   movl        foo@GOT(%ebx), %eax
   pushl       (%eax)
   call        bar@PLT

The address of the variable foo is now not part of the in-
struction. Instead it is loaded from the GOT. The address
of the location in the GOT relative to the PIC register
value (%ebx) is known at link-time. Therefore the text
segment does not have to be changed, only the GOT.7

The situation for the function call is similar. The function
bar is not called directly. Instead control is transferred
to a stub for bar in the PLT (indicated by bar@PLT). For
IA-32 the PLT itself does not have to be modified and can
be placed in a read-only segment, each entry is 16 bytes
in size. Only the GOT is modified and each entry consists
of 4 bytes. The structure of the PLT in an IA-32 DSO
looks like this:

    7 There is one more advantage of using this scheme. If the instruc-

tion would be modified we would need one relocation per load/store
instruction. By storing the address in the GOT only one relocation is
needed.
  .PLT0:pushl 4(%ebx)
        jmp *8(%ebx)
        nop; nop
        nop; nop
  .PLT1:jmp *name1@GOT(%ebx)
        pushl $offset1
        jmp .PLT0@PC
  .PLT2:jmp *name2@GOT(%ebx)
        pushl $offset2
        jmp .PLT0@PC

This shows three entries, there are as many as needed,
all having the same size. The first entry, labeled with
.PLT0, is special. It is used internally as we will see.
All the following entries belong to exactly one function
symbol. The first instruction is an indirect jump where
the address is taken from a slot in the GOT. Each PLT en-
try has one GOT slot. At startup time the dynamic linker
fills the GOT slot with the address pointing to the sec-
ond instruction of the appropriate PLT entry. I.e., when
the PLT entry is used for the first time the jump ends at
the following pushl instruction. The value pushed on
the stack is also specific to the PLT slot and it is the off-
set of the relocation entry for the function which should
be called. Then control is transferred to the special first
PLT entry which pushes some more values on the stack
and finally jumps into the dynamic linker. The dynamic
linker has do make sure that the third GOT slot (offset
8) contains the address of the entry point in the dynamic
linker. Once the dynamic linker has determined the ad-
dress of the function it stores the result in the GOT entry
which was used in the jmp instruction at the beginning of
the PLT entry before jumping to the found function. This
has the effect that all future uses of the PLT entry will not
go through the dynamic linker, but will instead directly
transfer to the function. The overhead for all but the first
call is therefore “only” one indirect jump.

The PLT stub is always used if the function is not guaran-
teed to be defined in the object which references it. Please
note that a simple definition in the object with the refer-
ence is not enough to avoid the PLT entry. Looking at
the symbol lookup process it should be clear that the def-
inition could be found in another object (interposition)
in which case the PLT is needed. We will later explain
exactly when and how to avoid PLT entries.

How exactly the GOT and PLT is structured is architecture-
specific, specified in the respective psABI. What was said
here about IA-32 is in some form applicable to some
other architectures but not for all. For instance, while the
PLT on IA-32 is read-only it must be writable for other
architectures since instead of indirect jumps using GOT
values the PLT entries are modified directly. A reader
might think that the designers of the IA-32 ABI made a
mistake by requiring a indirect, and therefore slower, call
instead of a direct call. This is no mistake, though. Hav-
ing a writable and executable segment is a huge security
problem since attackers can simply write arbitrary code
into the PLT and take over the program. We can anyhow
summarize the costs of using GOT and PLT like this:

    • every use of a global variable which is exported
      uses a GOT entry and loads the variable values in-
      directly;
    • each function which is called (as opposed to refer-
      enced as a variable) which is not guaranteed to be
      defined in the calling object requires a PLT entry.
      The function call is performed indirectly by trans-
      ferring control first to the code in the PLT entry
      which in turn calls the function.
    • for some architectures each PLT entry requires at
      least one GOT entry.

Avoiding a jump through the PLT therefore removes on
IA-32 16 bytes of text and 4 bytes of data. Avoiding the
GOT when accessing a global variable saves 4 bytes of
data and one load instruction (i.e., at least 3 bytes of code
and cycles during the execution). In addition each GOT
entry has a relocation associated with the costs described
above.

1.5.6 Running the Constructors

Once the relocations are performed the DSOs and the ap-
plication code can actually be used. But there is one more
thing to do: optionally the DSOs and the application must
be initialized. The author of the code can define for each
object a number of initialization functions which are run
before the DSO is used by other code. To perform the ini-
tialization the functions can use code from the own object
and all the dependencies. To make this work the dynamic
linker must make sure the objects are initialized in the
correct order, i.e., the dependencies of an object must be
initialized before the object.

To guarantee that the dynamic linker has to perform a
topological sort in the list of objects. This sorting is no
linear process. Like all sorting algorithms the run-time is
at least O(n log n) and since this is actually a topological
sort the value is even higher. And what is more: since
the order at startup need not be the same as the order
at shutdown (when finalizers have to be run) the whole
process has to be repeated.

So we have again a cost factor which is directly depend-
ing on the number of objects involved. Reducing the
number helps a bit even though the actual costs are nor-
mally much less than that of the relocation process.

At this point it is useful to look at the way to correctly
write constructors and destructors for DSOs. Some sys-
tems had the convention that exported functions named
 init and fini are automatically picked as constructor
and destructor respectively. This convention is still fol-
lowed by GNU ld and using functions with these names
on a Linux system will indeed cause the functions used
in these capacities. But this is totally, 100% wrong!

By using these functions the programmer overwrites what-
ever initialization and destruction functionality the sys-
tem itself is using. The result is a DSO which is not
fully initialized and this sooner or later leads to a catas-
trophy. The correct way of adding constructors and de-
structors is by marking functions with the constructor
and destructor function attribute respectively.

void
__attribute ((constructor))
init_function (void)
{
  ...
}

void
__attribute ((destructor))
fini_function (void)
{
  ...
}

These functions should not be exported either (see sec-
tions 2.2.2 and 2.2.3) but this is just an optimization.
With the functions defined like this the runtime will ar-
range that they are called at the right time, after perform-
ing whatever initialization is necessary before.

1.6   Summary of the Costs of ELF

We have now discussed the startup process and how it is
affected by the form of the binaries. We will now summa-
rize the various factors so that we later on can determine
the benefits of an optimization more easily.

Code Size As everywhere, a reduced size for code with
     the same semantics often means higher efficiency
     and performance. Smaller ELF binaries need less
     memory at run-time.
      In general the compiler will always generate the
      best code possible and we do not cover this further.
      But it must be known that every DSO includes a
      certain overhead in data and code. Therefore fewer
      DSOs means smaller text.

Number of Objects The fact that a smaller number of
    objects containing the same functionality is bene-
    ficial has been mentioned in several places:
         • Fewer objects are loaded at run-time. This
           directly translates to fewer system call. In the
           GNU dynamic linker implementation loading
           a DSO requires at least 8 system calls, all of
           them can be potentially quite expensive.
         • Related, the application and the dependencies
           with additional dependencies must record the
           names of the dependencies. This is not a ter-
           ribly high cost but certainly can sum up if
           there are many dozens of dependencies.
         • The lookup scope grows. This is one of the
           dominating factors in cost equation for the re-
           locations.
         • More objects means more symbol tables which
           in turn normally means more duplication. Un-
           defined references are not collapsed into one
           and handling of multiple definitions have to
           be sorted out by the dynamic linker.
           Moreover, symbols are often exported from a
           DSO to be used in another one. This would
           not have to happen if the DSOs would be merged.
         • The sorting of initializers/finalizers is more
           complicated.
         • In general does the dynamic linker have some
           overhead for each loaded DSO per process.
           Every time a new DSO is requested the list of
           already loaded DSOs must be searched which
           can be quite time consuming since DSOs can
           have many aliases.

Number of Symbols The number of exported and unde-
    fined symbols determines the size of the dynamic
    symbol table, the hash table, and the average hash
    table chain length. The normal symbol table is not
    used at run-time and it is therefore not necessary
    to strip a binary of it. It has no impact on perfor-
    mance.
      Additionally, fewer exported symbols means fewer
      chances for conflicts when using pre-linking (not
      covered further).

Length of Symbol Strings Long symbol lengths cause
     often unnecessary costs. A successful lookup of a
     symbol must match the whole string and compar-
     ing dozens or hundreds of characters takes time.
     Unsuccessful lookups suffer if common prefixes
     are long as in the new C++ mangling scheme. In
     any case do long symbol names cause large string
     tables which must be present at run-time and thereby
     is adding costs in load time and in use of address
     space which is an issue for 32-bit machines.

Number of Relocations Processing relocations constitute
    the majority of work during start and therefore any
    reduction is directly noticeable.

Kind of Relocations The kind of relocations which are
     needed is important, too, since processing a rela-
$ env LD_DEBUG=statistics /bin/echo ’+++ some
...:
...:    run-time linker statistics:
...:      total startup time in dynamic loade
...:                time needed for relocatio
...:                     number of relocation
...:          number of relocations from cach
...:               time needed to load object
+++ some text +++
...:
...:    run-time linker statistics:
...:               final number of relocation
...:    final number of relocations from cach

                                           Figure 8: Gather S

      tive relocation is much less expensive than a nor-
      mal relocation. Also, relocations against text seg-
      ments must be avoided.

Placement of Code and Data All executable code should
     be placed in read-only memory and the compiler
     normally makes sure this is done correctly. When
     creating data objects it is mostly up to the user
     to make sure it is placed in the correct segment.
     Ideally data is also read-only but this works only
     for constants. The second best choice is a zero-
     initialized variable which does not have to be ini-
     tialized from file content. The rest has to go into
     the data segment.

In the following we will not cover the first two points
given here. It is up to the developer of the DSO to de-
cide about this. There are no small additional changes to
make the DSO behave better, these are fundamental de-
sign decisions. We have voiced an opinion here, whether
it is has any effect remains to be seen.

1.7   Measuring ld.so Performance

To perform the optimizations it is useful to quantify the
effect of the optimizations. Fortunately it is very easy to
do this with glibc’s dynamic linker. Using the LD DEBUG
environment variable it can be instructed to dump in-
formation related to the startup performance. Figure 8
shows an example invocation, of the echo program in
this case.

The output of the dynamic linker is divided in two parts.
The part before the program’s output is printed right be-
fore the dynamic linker turns over control to the appli-
cation after having performed all the work we described
in this section. The second part, a summary, is printed
after the application terminated (normally). The actual
format might vary for different architectures. It includes
the timing information only on architectures which pro-
vide easy access to a CPU cycle counter register (modern
 text +++’

r: 748696 clock cycles
n: 378004 clock cycles (50.4%)
s: 133
e: 5
s: 193372 clock cycles (25.8%)

s: 188
e: 5

artup Statistics

IA-32, IA-64, x86-64, Alpha in the moment). For other
architectures these lines are simply missing.

The timing information provides absolute values for the
total time spend during startup in the dynamic linker, the
time needed to perform relocations, and the time spend
in the kernel to load/map binaries. In this example the
relocation processing dominates the startup costs with
more than 50%. There is a lot of potential for optimiza-
tions here. The unit used to measure the time is CPU
cycles. This means that the values cannot even be com-
pared across different implementations of the same ar-
chitecture. E.g., the measurement for a PentiumRM III and
a PentiumRM 4 machine will be quite different. But the
measurements are perfectly suitable to measure improve-
ments on one machine which is what we are interested
here.

Since relocations play such a vital part of the startup per-
formance some information on the number of relocations
is printed. In the example a total of 133 relocations are
performed, from the dynamic linker, the C library, and the
executable itself. Of these 5 relocations could be served
from the relocation cache. This is an optimization imple-
mented in the dynamic linker to handle the case of mul-
tiple relocations against the same symbol more efficient.
After the program itself terminated the same information
is printed again. The total number of relocations here is
higher since the execution of the application code caused
a number, 55 to be exact, of run-time relocations to be
performed.

The number of relocations which are processed is stable
across successive runs of the program. The time mea-
surements not. Even in a single-user mode with no other
programs running there would be differences since the
cache and main memory has to be accessed. It is there-
fore necessary to average the run-time over multiple runs.

It is obviously also possible to count the relocations with-
out running the program. Running readelf -d on the
binary shows the dynamic section in which the DT RELSZ,
