DT RELENT, DT RELCOUNT, and DT PLTRELSZ entries are
interesting. They allow computing the number of normal
and relative relocations as well as the number of PLT en-
tries. If one does not want to do this by hand the relinfo
script in appendix A can be used.

2   Optimizations for DSOs

In this section we describe various optimizations based
on C or C++ variables or functions. The choice of vari-
able or function, unless explicitly said, is made deliber-
ately since many of the implementations apply to the one
or the other. But there are some architectures where func-
tions are handled like variables. This is mainly the case
for embedded RISC architectures like SH-3 and SH-4
which have limitations in the addressing modes they pro-
vide which make it impossible to implement the function
handling as for other architectures. In most cases it is
no problem to apply the optimizations for variables and
functions at the same time. This is what in fact should be
done all the time to achieve best performance across all
architectures.

The most important recommendation is to always use
-fpic or -fPIC when generating code which ends up in
DSOs. This applies to data as well as code. Code which
is not compiled this way almost certainly will contain text
relocations. For these there is no excuse. Text relocations
requires extra work to apply in the dynamic linker. And
argumentation saying that the code is not shared because
no other process uses the DSO is invalid. In this case it is
not useful to use a DSO in the first place; the code should
just be added to the application code.

Some people try to argue that the use of -fpic/-fPIC
on some architectures has too many disadvantages. This
is mainly brought forward in argumentations about IA-
32. Here the use of %ebx as the PIC register deprives
the compiler of one of the precious registers it could use
for optimization. But this is really not that much of a
problem. First, not having %ebx available was never a
big penalty. Second, in modern compilers (e.g., gcc after
release 3.1) the handling of the PIC register is much more
flexible. It is not always necessary to use %ebx which
can help eliminating unnecessary copy operations. And
third, by providing the compiler with more information as
explained later in this section a lot of the overhead in PIC
can be removed. This all combined will lead to overhead
which is in most situations not noticeable.

When gcc is used, the options -fpic/-fPIC also tell the
compiler that a number of optimizations which are pos-
sible for the executable cannot be performed. This has to
do with symbol lookups and cutting it short. Since the
compiler can assume the executable to be the first object
in the lookup scope it knows that all references of global
symbols known to be defined in the executable are re-
solved locally. Access to locally defined variable could
be done directly, without using indirect access through
the GOT. This is not true for DSOs: the DSOs can be
later in the lookup scope and earlier objects might be in-
terposed. It is therefore mandatory to compile all code
which can potentially end up in a DSO with -fpic/-fPIC
since otherwise the DSO might not work correctly. There
is no compiler option to separate this optimization from
the generation of position-independent code.

Which of the two options, -fpic or -fPIC, have to be
used must be decided on a case-by-case basis. For some
architectures there is no difference at all and people tend
to be careless about the use. For most RISC there is a big
difference. As an example, this is the code gcc generates
for SPARC to read a global variable global when using
-fpic:

sethi %hi(_GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_-4),%l7
call .LLGETPC0
add   %l7,%lo(_GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_+4),%l7
ld    [%l7+global],%g1
ld    [%g1],%g1

And this is the code sequence if -fPIC is used:

sethi %hi(_GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_-4),%l7
call .LLGETPC0
add   %l7,%lo(_GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_+4),%l7
sethi %hi(global),%g1
or    %g1,%lo(global),%g1
ld    [%l7+%g1],%g1
ld    [%g1],%g1

In both cases %l7 is loaded with the address of the GOT
first. Then the GOT is accessed to get the address of
global. While in the -fpic case one instruction is suf-
ficient, three instructions are needed in the -fPIC case.
The -fpic option tells the compiler that the size of the
GOT does not exceed an architecture-specific value (8kB
in case of SPARC). If only that many GOT entries can
be present the offset from the base of the GOT can be
encoded in the instruction itself, i.e., in the ld instruc-
tion of the first code sequence above. If -fPIC is used
no such limit exists and so the compiler has to be pes-
simistic and generate code which can deal with offsets of
any size. The difference in the number of instructions in
this example correctly suggests that the -fpic should be
used at all times unless it is absolutely necessary to use
-fPIC. The linker will fail and write out a message when
this point is reached and one only has to recompile the
code.

When writing assembler code by hand it is easy to miss
cases where position independent code sequences must
be used. The non-PIC sequences look and actually are
simpler and more natural. Therefore it is extremely im-
portant to in these case to check whether the DSO is
marked to contain text relocations. This is easy enough
to do:

      readelf -d binary | grep TEXTREL

If this produces any output text relocations are present
and one better starts looking what causes them.

2.1    Data Definitions

Variables can be defined in C and C++ in several different
ways. Basically there are three kinds of definitions:

Common Common variables are more widely used FOR-
    TRAN but they got used in C and C++ as well to
    work around mistakes of programmers. Since in
    the early days people used to drop the extern key-
    word from variable definitions, in the same way it
    is possible to drop it from function declaration, the
    compiler often has multiple definitions of the same
    variable in different files. To help the poor and
    clueless programmer the C/C++ compiler normally
    generates common variables for uninitialized defi-
    nitions such as
           int foo;
       For common variables there can be more than one
       definition and they all get unified into one location
       in the output file. Common variables are always
       initialized with zero. This means their value does
       not have to be stored in an ELF file. Instead the
       file size of a segment is chosen smaller than the
       memory size as described in 1.4.

Uninitialized If the programmer uses the compiler com-
     mand line option -fno-common the generated code
     will contain uninitialized variables instead of com-
     mon variables if a variable definition has no ini-
     tializer. Alternatively, individual variables can be
     marked like this:
           int foo       attribute ((nocommon));
       The result at run-time is the same as for common
       variable, no value is stored in the file. But the rep-
       resentation in the object file is different and it al-
       lows the linker to find multiple definitions and flag
       them as errors. Another difference is that it is pos-
       sible to define aliases, i.e., alternative names, for
       uninitialized variables while this is not possible for
       common variables.
       With recent gcc versions there is another method to
       create uninitialized variables. Variables initialized
       with zero are stored this way. Earlier gcc versions
       stored them as initialized variables which took up
      space in the file. This is a bit cumbersome for vari-
      ables with structured types. So, sticking with the
      per-variable attribute is probably the best way.

Initialized The variable is defined and initialized to a
       programmer-defined value. In C:
           int foo = 42;
      In this case the initialization value is stored in the
      file. As described in the previous case initializa-
      tions with zero are treated special by some compil-
      ers.

Normally there is not much the user has to do to create
optimal ELF files. The compiler will take care of avoid-
ing the initializers. To achieve the best results even with
old compilers it is desirable to avoid explicit initializa-
tions with zero if possible. This creates normally com-
mon variables but if combined with gcc’s -fno-common
flag the same reports about multiple definitions one would
get for initialized variables can be seen.

There is one thing the programmer is responsible for. As
an example look at the following code:

bool is_empty = true;
char s[10];

const char *get_s (void) {
  return is_empty ? NULL : s;
}

The function get s uses the boolean variable is empty
to decide what to do. If the variable has its initial value
the variable s is not used. The initialization value of
is empty is stored in the file since the initialize is non-
zero. But the semantics of is empty is chosen arbitrar-
ily. There is no requirement for that. The code could
instead be rewritten as:

bool not_empty = false;
char s[10];

const char *get_s (void) {
  return not_empty ? s : NULL;
}

Now the semantics of the control variable is reversed. It
is initialized with false which is guaranteed to have the
numeric value zero. The test in the function get s has
to be changed as well but the resulting code is not less or
more efficient than the old code.
By simple transformations like that it is often possible
to avoid creating initialized variables and instead using
common or uninitialized variables. This saves disk space
and eventually improves startup times. The transforma-
tion is not limited to boolean values. It is sometimes pos-
sible to do it for variables which can take on more than
two values, especially enumeration values. When defin-
ing enums one should always put the value, which is most
often used as initializer, first in the enum definition. I.e.

      enum { val1, val2, val3 };

should be rewritten as

      enum { val3, val1, val2 };

if val3 is the value most often used for initializations.
To summarize, it is always preferable to add variables
as uninitialized or initialized with zero as opposed to as
initialized with a value other than zero.

2.2     Export Control

When creating a DSO from a collection of object files the
dynamic symbol table will by default contain all the sym-
bols which are globally visible in the object files. In most
cases this set is far too large. Only the symbols which are
actually part of the ABI should be exported. Failing to
restrict the set of exported symbols are numerous draw-
backs:

      • Users of the DSO could use interfaces which they
        are not supposed to. This is problematic in revi-
        sions of the DSO which are meant to be binary
        compatible. The correct assumption of the DSO
        developer is that interfaces, which are not part of
        the ABI, can be changed arbitrarily. But there are
        always users who claim to know better or do not
        care about rules.

      • According to the ELF lookup rules all symbols in
        the dynamic symbol table can be interposed (un-
        less the visibility of the symbol is restricted). I.e.,
        definitions from other objects can be used. This
        means that local references cannot be bound at link
        time. If it is known or intended that the local defi-
        nition should always be used the symbol in the ref-
        erence must not be exported or the visibility must
        be restricted.

      • The dynamic symbol table and its string table are
        available at run-time and therefore must be loaded.
        This can require a significant amount of memory,
        even though it is read-only. One might think that
        the size is not much of an issue but if one exam-
        ines the length of the mangled names of C++ vari-
        ables or functions, it becomes obvious that this is
        not the case. In addition we have the run-time costs
      of larger symbol tables which we discussed in the
      previous section.

We will now present a number of possible solutions for
the problem of exported interfaces. Some of them solve
the same problem in slightly different ways. We will say
which method should be preferred. The programmer has
to make sure that whatever is used is available on the tar-
get system.

In the discussions of the various methods we will use one
example:

int last;

int next (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int index (int scale) {
  return next () << scale;
}

Compiled on a IA-32 Linux machine a DSO with only
this code (plus startup code etc) contains seven reloca-
tions, two of which are relative, and four PLT entries (use
the relinfo script). We will see how we can improve on
this. Four of the normal and both relative relocations as
well as three PLT entries are introduced by the additional
code used by the linker to create the DSO. The actual ex-
ample code creates only one normal relocation for last
and one PLT entry for next. To increment and read the
variable last in next the compiler generates code like

  movl     last@GOT(%ebx), %edx
  movl     (%edx), %eax
  incl     %eax
  movl     %eax, (%edx)

and the call of next is compiled to

  call next@PLT

These code fragments were explained in section 1.5.5.

2.2.1 Use static

The easiest way to not export a variable or function is to
the define it file file-local scope. In C and C++ this is
done by defining it with static. This is for many peo-
ple obvious but unfortunately not for all. Many consider
adding static as optional. This is true when consider-
ing only the C semantics of the code.

If in our example neither last or next are needed out-
side the file we can change the source to:

static int last;

static int next (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int index (int scale) {
  return next () << scale;
}

Compiled in the same way as before we see that all the re-
locations introduced by our example code vanished. I.e.,
we are left with six relocations and three PLT entries. The
code to access last now looks like this:

  movl     last@GOTOFF(%ebx), %eax
  incl     %eax
  movl     %eax, last@GOTOFF(%ebx)

The code improved by avoiding the step which loads the
address of the variable from the GOT. Instead, both mem-
ory accesses directly address the variable in memory. At
link-time the variable location has a fixed offset from the
PIC register, indicated symbolically by last@GOTOFF.
By adding the value to the PIC register value we get the
address of last. Since the value is known at link-time
this construct does not need a relocation at run-time.

The situation is similar for the call to next. The IA-32 ar-
chitecture, like many others, know a PC-relative address-
ing mode for jumps and calls. Therefore the compiler can
generate a simple jump instruction

  call next

and the assembler generates a PC-relative call. The dif-
ference between the address of the instruction following
the call and the address of next is constant at link-time
and therefore also does not need any relocation. Another
advantage is that, in the case of IA-32, the PIC register
does not have to be set up before the jump. If the com-
piler wouldn’t know the jump target is in the same DSO
the PIC register would have to be set up. Other architec-
tures have similar requirements.

The generated code is optimal. The compiler might even
consider inlining some code if it finds that this is bene-
ficial. It is always advised that the programmer places
the various variable and function definitions in the same
file as the references and then define the referenced ob-
jects as static. When generating the production bina-
ries it might even be desirable to merge as many input
files as possible together to mark as many objects as pos-
sible static. Unless one is comfortable with one giant
file there is a limit on how many functions can be grouped
together. It is not necessary to continue the process ad in-
finitum since there are other ways to achieve the same
result (minus inlining).

2.2.2 Define Global Visibility

The next best thing to using static is to explicitly de-
fine the visibility of objects in the DSO. The generic ELF
ABI defines visibility of symbols. The specification de-
fines four classes of which here only two are of interest.
STV DEFAULT denotes the normal visibility. The symbol
is exported and can be interposed. The other interesting
class is denoted by STV HIDDEN. Symbols marked like
this are not exported from the DSO and therefore can-
not be used from other objects. There are a number of
different methods to define visibility.

Starting with version 4.0, gcc knows about a the com-
mand line option -fvisibility. It takes a parameter
and the valid forms are these:

-fvisibility=default
-fvisibility=hidden
-fvisibility=internal
-fvisibility=protected

Only the first two should ever be used. The default is
unsurprisingly default since this is the behavior of the
compiler before the introduction of this option. When
-fvisibility=hidden is specified gcc changes the de-
fault visibility of all defined symbols which have no ex-
plicit assignment of visibility: all symbols are defined
with STV HIDDEN unless specified otherwise. This op-
tion has to be used with caution since unless the DSO
is prepared by having all APIs marked as having default
visibility, the generated DSO will not have a single ex-
ported symbol. This is usually not what is wanted.

In general it is the preference of the author which decides
whether -fvisibility=hidden should be used. If it
is not used, symbols which are not to be exported need
to be marked in one way or another. The next section
will go into details. In case the option is used all ex-
ported functions need to be declared as having visibility
default which usually means the header files are sig-
nificantly uglified. On the other hand it means that no
symbol can accidentally be exported because an appro-
priate declaration etc is missing. In some situations this
can prevent bad surprises.8

2.2.3    Define Per-Symbol Visibility

Instead of changing the default visibility the programmer
can choose to define to hide individual symbols. Or, if
the default visibility is hidden, make specific symbols ex-
portable by setting the visibility to default.

Since the C language does not provide mechanisms to
define the visibility of a function or variable gcc resorts
once more to using attributes:

int last
 __attribute__ ((visibility ("hidden")));

int
__attribute__ ((visibility ("hidden")))
next (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int index (int scale) {
  return next () << scale;
}

This defines the variable last and the function next
as hidden. All the object files which make up the DSO
which contains this definition can use these symbols. I.e.,
while static restricts the visibility of a symbol to the
file it is defined in, the hidden attribute limits the visibil-
ity to the DSO the definition ends up in. In the example
above the definitions are marked. This does not cause any
harm but it is in any case necessary to mark the declara-
tion. In fact it is more important that the declarations are
marked appropriately since it is mainly the code gener-
ated for in a reference that is influenced by the attribute.

Instead of adding an visibility attribute to each declara-
tion or definition, it is possible to change the default tem-
porarily for all definitions and declarations the compiler
sees at this time. This is mainly useful in header files
since it reduces changes to a minimum but can also be
useful for definitions. This compiler feature was also in-
troduced in gcc 4.0 and is implemented using a pragma:9
    8 Accidentally exporting symbol can mean that programs can use

and get dependent on them. Then it is hard to remove the symbol again
for binary compatibility reasons.
    9 Note: ISO C99 introduced Pragma which allows using pragmas

in macros.
#pragma GCC visibility push(hidden)
int last;

int
next (void) {
  return ++last;
}
#pragma GCC visibility pop

int index (int scale) {
  return next () << scale;
}

As in the example using the attributes, last and next
are both defined with hidden visibility while index is
defined with default visibility (assuming this is the de-
fault currently in use). As the pragma syntax suggests, it
is possible to nest the pragmas with the expected result.

In case the -fvisibility=hidden command line op-
tion is used, individual symbols can be marked as ex-
portable by using the same syntax as presented in this
section, except with default in place of hidden. In
fact, the names of all four visibilities are allowed in the
attribute or pragma.

Beside telling the backend of the compiler to emit code to
flag the symbol as hidden, changing the visibility has an-
other purpose: it allows the compiler to assume the defi-
nition is local. This means the addressing of variables and
function can happen as if the definitions would be locally
defined in the file as static. Therefore the same code
sequences we have seen in the previous section can be
generated. Using the hidden visibility attribute is there-
fore almost completely equivalent to using static; the
only difference is that the compiler cannot automatically
inline the function since it need not see the definition.

We can now refine the rule for using static: merge
source files and mark as many functions static as far as
one feels comfortable. In any case merge the files which
contain functions which potentially can be inlined. In all
other cases mark functions (the declarations) which are
not to be exported from the DSO as hidden.

Note that the linker will not add hidden symbols to the
dynamic symbol table. I.e., even though the symbol ta-
bles of the object files contain hidden symbols they will
disappear automatically. By maximizing the number of
hidden declarations we therefore reduce the size of the
symbol table to the minimum.

The generic ELF ABI defines another visibility mode:
protected. In this scheme references to symbols defined
in the same object are always satisfied locally. But the
symbols are still available outside the DSO. This sounds
like an ideal mechanism to optimize DSO by avoiding the
use of exported symbols (see section 2.2.7) but it isn’t.
Processing references to protected symbols is even more
expensive than normal lookup. The problem is a require-
ment in the ISO C standard. The standard requires that
function pointers, pointing to the same function, can be
compared for equality. This rule would be violated with a
fast and simple-minded implementation of the protected
visibility. Assume an application which references a pro-
tected function in a DSO. Also in the DSO is another
function which references said function. The pointer in
the application points to the PLT entry for the function
in the application’s PLT. If a protected symbol lookup
would simply return the address of the function inside
the DSO the addresses would differ.

In programming environments without this requirement
on function pointers the use of the protected visibility
would be useful and fast. But since there usually is only
one implementation of the dynamic linker on the sys-
tem and this implementation has to handle C programs
as well, the use of protected is highly discouraged.

There are some exceptions to these rules. It is possible
to create ELF binaries with non-standard lookup scopes.
The simplest example is the use of DF SYMBOLIC (or of
DT SYMBOLIC in old-style ELF binaries, see page 25).
In these cases the programmer decided to create a non-
standard binary and therefore accepts the fact that the
rules of the ISO C standard do not apply.

2.2.4   Define Visibility for C++ Classes

For C++ code we can use the attributes as well but they
have to be used very carefully. Normal function or vari-
able definitions can be handled as in C. The extra name
mangling performed has no influence on the visibility.
The story is different when it comes to classes. The sym-
bols and code created for class definitions are member
functions and static data or function members. These
variables and functions can easily be declared as hidden
but one has to be careful. First an example of the syntax.

  class foo {
    static int u __attribute__
      ((visibility ("hidden")));
    int a;
   public:
    foo (int b = 1);
    void offset (int n);
    int val () const __attribute__
      ((visibility ("hidden")));
  };

  int foo::u __attribute__
    ((visibility ("hidden")));
  foo::foo (int b) : a (b) { }
  void foo::offset (int n) { u = n; }
  int
  __attribute__ ((visibility ("hidden")))
  foo::val () const { return a + u; }

In this example code the static data member u and the
member function val are defined as hidden. The sym-
bols cannot be accessed outside the DSO the definitions
appear in. Please note that this is an additional restriction
on top of the C++ access rules. For the member functions
one way around the problem is to instantiate the class in
more than one DSO. This is usually causing no problems
and “only” adds to code bloat.

Things are getting more interesting when static data mem-
bers or static local variables in member functions are used.
In this case there must be exactly one definition used
(please note: “used”, not “present”). To obey this rule
it is either necessary to not restrict the export of the static
data member of member function from the DSO or to
make sure all accesses of the data or function are made
in the DSO with the definitions. If multiple definitions
are present it is very easy to make mistakes when hiding
static data members or the member functions with static
variables since the generated code has no way of knowing
that there are multiple definitions of the variables. This
leads to very hard to debug bugs.

In the example code above the static data member u is de-
clared hidden. All users of the member must be defined
in the same DSO. C++ access rules restrict access only to
member functions, regardless of where they are defined.
To make sure all users are defined in the DSO with the
definition of u it is usually necessary to avoid inline func-
tions which access the hidden data since the inline gener-
ated code can be placed in any DSO which contains code
using the class definition. The member function offset
is a prime example of a function which should be inlined
but since it accesses u it cannot be done. Instead offset
is exported as an interface from the DSO which contains
the definition of u.

If a member function is marked as hidden, as val is in
the example, it cannot be called from outside the DSO.
Note that in the example the compiler allows global ac-
cess to the member function since it is defined as a public
member. The linker, not the compiler, will complain if
this member function is used outside the DSO with the
instantiation. Inexperienced or not fully informed users
might interpret this problem as a lack of instantiation
which then leads to problems due to multiple definitions.

Because these problems are so hard to debug it is essen-
tial to get the compiler involved in making sure the user
follows the necessary rules. The C++ type system is rich
enough to help if the implementor puts some additional
effort in it. The key is to mimic the actual symbol access
as closely as possible with the class definition. For this
reason the class definitions of the example above should
actually look like this:
  class foo {
    static int u __attribute__
      ((visibility ("hidden")));
    int a;
   public:
    foo (int b = 1);
    int val () const __attribute__
      ((visibility ("hidden")));
    void offset (int n);
  };

  class foo_ext : protected foo {
   public:
    foo_ext (int b = 1) : foo (b) { }
    void offset (int n)
      { return foo::offset (n); }
  };

The class foo is regarded as a private class, not to be
used outside the DSO with the instantiation. The public
interface would be the class foo ext. It provides access
to the two public interfaces of the underlying class. As
long as the users of the DSO containing the definitions
respect the requirement that only foo ext can be used
there is no way for the compiler not noticing accesses to
foo::u and foo::val outside the DSO containing the
definitions.

Template class and functions are not different. The syn-
tax is the same. Non-inline function definitions get yet
again less readable but that is something which can be
mostly hidden with a few macros.

  template<class T>
  class a {
    T u;
   public:
    a (T a = 0);
    T r () const __attribute__
      ((visibility ("hidden")));
  };

  template<class T> a<T>::a (T a)
  { u = a; }
  template<class T> T
  __attribute__ ((visibility ("hidden")))
   a<T>::r () const { return u; }

For templatized classes the problems of making sure that
if necessary only one definition is used is even harder to
fix due to the various approaches to instantiation.

One sort of function which can safely be kept local and
not exported are inline function, either defined in the class
definition or separately. Each compilation unit must have
its own set of all the used inline functions. And all the
functions from all the DSOs and the executable better be
the same and are therefore interchangeable. It is possible
to mark all inline functions explicitly as hidden but this is
a lot of work. Since version 4.0 gcc knows about the op-
tion -fvisibility-inlines-hidden which does just
what is wanted. If this option is used a referenced in-
line function is assumed to be hidden and an out-of-line
copy of the function is marked with STV HIDDEN. I.e., if
the function is not inlined the separate function created is
not exported. This is a quite frequent situation at times
since not all functions the programmer thinks should be
inlined are eligible according to the compiler’s analysis.
This option is usable in almost all situations. Only if the
functions in the different DSOs can be different or if the
code depends on exactly one copy of the function ever
being used (e.g., if the function address is expected to be
the same) should this option be avoided.

If a C++ class is used only for the implementation and
not used in any interface of a DSO using the code, then
it would be possible to mark each member function and
static data element as hidden. This is cumbersome, error-
prone, and incomplete, though. There is perhaps a large
number of members which need to be marked and when a
new member is added it is easy to forget about adding the
necessary attributes. The incompleteness stems from the
fact that the C++ compiler automatically generates a few
members functions such are constructors and destructors.
These member functions would not be affected by the
attributes.

The solution to these problems is to explicitly determine
the visibility of the entire class. Since version 4.0 does
gcc have support for this. There are two ways to achieve
the goal. First, the already mentioned pragma can be
used.

#pragma GCC visibility push(hidden)
class foo {
  ...
};
#pragma GCC visibility pop

All member functions and static data members of foo
are automatically defined as hidden. This extends even to
implicitly generated functions and operators if necessary.

The second possibility is to use yet another extension in
gcc 4.0. It is possible to mark a function as hidden when
it is defined. The syntax is this:

class __attribute ((visibility ("hidden")))
foo {
  ...
};

Just as with the pragma, all defined functions are defined
as hidden symbols. Explicitly using attributes should be
preferred since the effect of the pragmas is not always
obvious. If the push and pop lines are far enough from
each other a programmer might accidentally add a new
declaration in the range even though the visibility of this
new declaration is not meant to be affected. Both, the
pragma and the class attribute, should only be used in
internal headers. In the headers which are used to ex-
pose the API of the DSO it makes no sense to have them
since the whole point is to hide the implementation de-
tails. This means it is always a good idea to differentiate
between internal and external header files.

Defining entire classes with hidden visibility has some
problems which cannot be modeled with sophisticated
class layout or moving the definition in private headers.
For exception handling the compiler generates data struc-
tures (typeinfo symbols) which are also marked ac-
cording to the visibility attribute used. If an object of
this type is thrown the catch operation has to look for
the typeinfo information. If that information is in a
different DSO the search will be unsuccessful and the
program will terminate. All classes which are used in
exception handling and where the throw and catch are
not both guaranteed to reside in the DSO with the defi-
nition must be declared with default visibility. Individual
members can still be marked with an visibility attribute
but since the typeinfo data is synthesized by the com-
piler on command there is no way for the programmer to
overwrite a hidden visibility attribute associated with the
class.

The use of the most restrictive visibility possible can be
of big benefit for C++ code. Each inline function which
is (also) available as a stand-alone function, every syn-
thesized function are variable has a symbol associated
which is by default exported. For templatized classes this
is even worse, since each instantiated class can bring is
many more symbols. It is best to design the code right
away so that the visibility attributes can be applied when-
ever possible. Compatibility with older compilers can
easily be achieved by using macros.

2.2.5   Use Export Maps

If for one reason or another none of the previous two so-
lutions are applicable the next best possibility is to in-
struct the linker to do something. Only the GNU and
Solaris linker are known to support this, at least with the
syntax presented here. Using export maps is not only
useful for the purpose discussed here. When discussing
maintenance of APIs and ABIs in chapter 3 the same kind
of input file is used. This does not mean the previous two
methods should not be preferred. Instead, export (and
symbol) maps can and should always be used in addition
to the other methods described.

The concept of export maps is to tell the linker explicitly
which symbols to export from the generated object. Ev-
ery symbol can belong to one of two classes: exported or
not exported. Symbols can be listed individually, glob-
expressions can be used, or the special * catch-all glob
expression can be used. The latter only once. The sym-
bol map file for our example code could look like this:

{
  global: index;
  local: *;
};

This tells the linker that the symbol index is to be ex-
ported and all others (matched by *) are local. We could
have listed last and next explicitly in the local: list
but it is generally advised to always use the catch-all case
to mark all not explicitly mentioned symbols as local.
This avoids surprises by allowing access only to the sym-
bols explicitly mentions. Otherwise there would also be
the problem with symbols which are matched neither by
the global: nor by the local:, resulting in unspecified
behavior. Another unspecified behavior is if a name ap-
pears in both lists or is matched using globbing in both
lists.

To generate a DSO with this method the user has to pass
the name of the map file with the --version-script
option of the linker. The name of the option suggests that
the scripts can be used for more. We will get back to this
when we discuss ABIs in the next chapter.

$ gcc -shared -o foo.so foo.c -fPIC \
  -Wl,--version-script=foo.map

The file foo.map is supposed to contain text like the one
shown above.

It is of course also possible to use export maps with C++
code. One has two options in this case: explicitly name
the symbols using their mangled names, or rely on pat-
tern matching for the mangled names. Using the man-
gled names is straight-forwarded. Just use the identifiers
as in the C examples. Using the demangled names re-
quire support in the linker. Assume a file defining the
following functions:

int foo (int a) { ... }
int bar (int a) { ... }
struct baz {
  baz (int);
  int r () const;
  int s (int);
};

A DSO containing definitions for all these functions and
members should only export the function foo and the de-
structor(s) of baz and baz::s. An export map to achieve
this could look like this:

{
     global:
       extern "C++" {
         foo*;
         baz::baz*;
         baz::s*
       };
     local: *;
};

The use of extern "C" tells the linker to match the fol-
lowing patterns with demangled C++ names. The first
entry foo* matches the first global function in the ex-
ample. The second entry matches the constructor(s) of
baz and the third entry matches the function baz::s.
Note that patterns are used in all cases. This is necessary
since foo, baz::baz, and baz::s are not the complete
names. The function parameter are also encoded in the
mangled name and must be matched. It is not possible to
match complete demangled C++ names since the current
linker implementation refuses to allow non-alphanumeric
characters. Using pattern might have unwanted effects.
If there is another member function in baz starting with
the letter ‘s’ it will also be exported. And one last odd-
ity should be mentioned: currently the linker requires that
there is no semicolon after the last entry in the C++ block.

Using export maps seems like a very desirable solution.
The sources do not have to be made less readable us-
ing attribute declarations or eventually pragmas. All the
knowledge of the ABI is kept locally in the export map
file. But this process has one fundamental problem: ex-
actly because the sources are not modified the final code
is not optimal. The linker is used only after the compiler
already did its work and the once generated code cannot
be optimized significantly.

In our running example the compiler must generate the
code for the next function under the worst case sce-
nario assumption that the variable last is exported. This
means the code sequence using @GOTOFF which was men-
tioned before cannot be generated. Instead the normal
two instruction sequence using @GOT must be generated.
This is what the linker will see when it gets instructed to
hide the symbol last. The linker will not touch the ac-
tual code. Code relaxation here would require substantial
analysis of the following code which is in theory possi-
ble but not implemented. But the linker will not generate
the normal R 386 GLOB DAT relocation either. Since the
symbol is not exported no interposition is allowed. The
position of the local definition relative to the start of the
DSO is known and so the linker will generate a relative
relocation.

For function calls the result is often as good as it gets.
The code generated by the compiler for a PC-relative
jump and a jump through the PLT is identical. It is just
the code which is called (the target function versus the
code in the PLT) which makes the difference. The code
is only not optimal in one case: if the function call is the
only reason the PIC register is loaded. For a call to a local
function this is not necessary and loading the PIC is just
a waste of time and code.

To summarize, for variables the use of symbol maps cre-
ates larger and less efficient code, adds an entry in the
GOT, and adds a relative relocation. For functions the
generated code sometimes contains unnecessary loads of
the PIC. One normal relocation is converted into a rel-
ative relocation and one PLT entry is removed. This is
one relative relocation worse than the previous methods.
These deficiencies are the reason why it is much prefer-
able to tell the compiler what is going on since after the
compiler finished its work certain decisions cannot be re-
verted anymore.

2.2.6 Libtool’s -export-symbols

The fourth method to restrict symbol export is the least
desirable of them. It is the one used by the GNU Libtool
program when the -export-symbols option is used.
This option is used to pass to Libtool the name of a file
which contains the names of all the symbols which should
be exported, one per line. The Libtool command line
might look like this:

$ libtool --mode=link gcc -o libfoo.la \
  foo.lo -export-symbols=foo.sym

The file foo.sym would contain the list of exported sym-
bols. foo.lo is the special kind of object files Libtool
generates. For more information on this and other strange
details from the command line consult the Libtool man-
ual.

Interesting for us here is the code the linker produces us-
ing this method. For the GNU linker Libtool converts the
-export-symbols option into the completely useless
-retain-symbols-file option. This option instructs
the linker to prune the normal symbol tables, not the dy-
namic symbol table. The normal symbol table will con-
tain only the symbols named in the export list file plus the
special STT SECTION symbols which might be needed in
relocations. All local symbols are gone. The problem is
that the dynamic symbol table is not touched at all and
this is the table which is actually used at runtime.

The effect of the using libtool this way is that pro-
grams reading the normal symbol table (for instance nm)
do not find any symbols but those listed in the export
list. And that is it. There are no runtime effects. Neither
have any symbols been made unavailable for the dynamic
linker, nor have any normal relocations been converted
into relative relocations.

The only reason this method is mentioned here is that
there is hope libtool will learn about converting the
export lists into the anonymous version maps we have
seen in the previous section when the GNU linker is used.
At that point libtool will become useful. Until then
relying on its -export-symbols option is misleading
at best.

2.2.7   Avoid Using Exported Symbols

In some situations it might not be desirable to avoid ex-
porting a symbol but at the same time all local references
should use the local definition. This also means that the
uses of the symbols is cheaper since the less general code
sequences can be used. This is a subset of the problem
discussed so far. A solution needs a different approach
since so far we achieved the better code by not exporting
only.

Since a symbol cannot be exported and not-exported at
the same time the basic approach is to use two names for
the same variable or function. The two names then can
be treated differently. There are multiple possibilities to
create two names, varying in efficiency and effort.

At this point it is necessary to add a warning. By per-
forming this optimization the semantics of the program
changes since the optimization interferes with the sym-
bol lookup rules. It is now possible to use more than one
symbol with a given name in the program. Code out-
side the DSO might find a definition of a symbol some-
where else while the code in the DSO always uses the
local definition. This might lead to funny results. Of-
ten it is acceptable since multiple definitions are not al-
lowed. A related issue is that one rule of ISO C can be
violated by this. ISO C says that functions are identified
by their names (identifiers) and that comparing the func-
tion pointers one can test for equality. The ELF imple-
mentation works hard to make sure this rule is normally
obeyed. When forcing the use of local symbols code in-
side and outside the DSO might find different definitions
for a given name and therefore the pointers do not match.
It is important to always consider these side effects before
performing the optimization.

Wrapper Functions Only applicable to functions, us-
ing wrappers (i.e. alternative entry points) is the most
portable but also most costly way to solve the problem.
If in our example code we would want to export index
as well as next we could use code like this:

static int last;

static int next_int (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int next (void) {
  return next_int ();
}

int index (int scale) {
  return next_int () << scale;
}

The function next is now a simple wrapper around next int.
All calls to next int are recognized by the compiler as
calls to a local function since next int, unlike next, is
defined with static. Therefore no PLT entries is used
for the call in index.

The drawback of this method is that additional code is re-
quired (the code for the new next function) and that call-
ing next also minimally slower than necessary at run-
time. As a fallback solution, in case no other method
works, this is better than nothing.

Using Aliases Introducing two names without adding
code can be achieved by creating aliases for existing ob-
jects. Support for this is included in gcc; this does not
only include the creation of the alias, gcc also knows the
type for the alias and can perform appropriate tests when
the alias is used. The here goal is therefore to create an
alias and tell gcc and/or the linker to not export the sym-
bol. I.e., we apply the same techniques described in the
previous sections now to an alias. The only difference is
that defining an alias as static will not work. The best
method therefore is to use visibility attributes. The other
previously discussed methods will also work but we do
not go into the details for them here.

If in our example we want to export both last and next
we can rewrite the example like this:

int last;
extern __typeof (last) last_int
 __attribute ((alias ("last"),
               visibility ("hidden")));

int next (void) {
  return ++last_int;
}
extern __typeof (next) next_int
  __attribute ((alias ("next"),
                visibility ("hidden")));

int index (int scale) {
  return next_int () << scale;
}

This is quite a collection of non-standard gcc extensions
to the C language so it might need some explanation. The
actual definitions of all three objects are the same as in the
original code. All these objects are exported. The differ-
ence in the definitions is that next is using the internal
alias last int instead of last and similarly for index
and next. What looks like two declarations is the mech-
anism by which gcc is told about the aliases. It is basi-
cally an extern declaration of an object with the same
type (we use here typeof to ensure that) which has an
alias added. The alias attribute names the object this
is an alias of.

To achieve the results we want, namely that the aliases are
not exported and that gcc gets told about this, we have
to add the hidden visibility attribute. Looking back at
sections 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 it should be easy to see that the
use of this attribute is equivalent.

If the visibility attributes cannot be used for some reason
almost the same code should be used, only leaving out

    , visibility ("hidden")

This will create a normal alias with the same scope as the
original symbol. Using export maps the alias can then
be hidden. The resulting binary will not use the efficient
code sequences (see section 2.2.5) but the local definition
will always be used.

An attentive reader might suggest that it is possible to
avoid some of the complications by writing the code for
next like this:

static int next_int (void) {
  return ++last_int;
}
extern __typeof (next_int) next
  __attribute ((alias ("next_int")));

As a static definition, next int is not exported and el-
igible for inlining, while next is defined as extern and
therefore exported. Even though this sometimes works
there is no guarantee it does all the time. The compiler
is allowed to use arbitrary symbol names for static
functions and variables since the names are not part of
the ABI of the object file. This is necessary in some
situations to avoid name clashes. The result is that the
alias("next int") part might fail to provide the cor-
rect symbol name and therefore the alias definition will
fail. For this reason it is mandatory to create alias only of
non-static functions and variables.

For C++ programs defining aliases we also are also chal-
lenged by names. The problem is that the alias attribute
requires the assembler name of the defined symbol as a
string parameter. For C++ code this means the mangled
name. For simple C++ function we manage to get along
with the same trick used in the C example.

int
add (int a, int b)
{
  return a + b;
}
extern __typeof (add) add_int
 __attribute ((alias ("_Z3addii"),
               visibility ("hidden")));

There are only two tricky parts. The first is finding the
correct mangled name. For the locally used compiler it is
quite easy to determine the name, just compile the code
without the alias definition and look at the symbol table
of the generated file. Name mangling is unfortunately
traditionally not well standardized. There exist several
different name mangling schemes which means the alias
string would have to be adjusted to the compiler which is
used for the compilation.

The second problem is the use of typeof if the func-
tion name is overloaded. In this case the compiler does
not know which of the potentially many versions of the
function is meant and it bails out.

DF SYMBOLIC The original designers of the ELF for-
mat considered the possibility that preferring local def-
initions might be useful. They have included a mecha-
nism which can enforce this. If the DF SYMBOLIC flag
is set in the DT FLAGS entry of the dynamic section (or
in older ELF binaries: if the dynamic section contains
an DT SYMBOLIC entry) the dynamic linker has to prefer
local definitions.

This approach has numerous disadvantages. First, all in-
terfaces are affected. The other approaches discussed
here have a per-interface granularity. Treating all inter-
faces like this is normally not the right way. The second
disadvantage is that the compiler does not get told about
the use of local symbols and therefore cannot optimize
the uses, just as if export maps would be used. And what
is even worse, calls to local functions still use the PLT en-
tries. The PLT and GOT entries are still created and the
jump is indirect. This might be useful in some situations
(e.g., when using LD PROFILE) but usually means a big,
missed opportunity for optimization.

Finally the third problem is that the lookup scope is changed
in a way which can lead to using unexpected dependen-
cies. DF SYMBOLIC effectively puts the own object in
the first spot of its own lookup scope so that there are
a number of other DSO which are seen before the depen-
dencies. This is nothing new but the fact that the DSO
marked with DF SYMBOLIC is in an unusual place can
cause unexpected versions from being picked up.

The advice here is to never use DF SYMBOLIC. It does
not improve the code, forces all symbols to be treated the
same, and can cause problems in symbol lookup. It is
mentioned here only for completeness and as a warning.

2.3   Shortening Symbol Names

The description of the ELF symbol lookup algorithm shows
that one of the cost factors for the lookup is length of
the symbols involved. For successful lookups the entire
string has to be matched and unsuccessful lookups re-
quire matching the common prefix of the involved strings.

The flat namespace of the C programming environment
makes following the guideline to use short names easy.
The names the programmer uses are directly mapped to
names in the ELF file. The same is true for some other
programming environments such as traditional Pascal and
FORTRAN.

Programming environments with more sophisticated sym-
bol handling use name mangling. The most prominent
programming language in this class is C++. The sym-
bol string of a function consists beside the function name
also of a description of the parameter list, the classes the
function is a member of and the namespaces the class
or function is defined in. This can lead to enormously
long symbol names. Names of more than 1,000 charac-
ters have been sighted in the wild. Ada names tend to get
very long because of the package namespace.

The object and namespace model in C++ is used to man-
age the complexity of large projects and to facilitate code
reuse. Therefore it is desirable keep symbol names un-
modified during the development process. But once a
program is to be deployed the long names become a nui-
sance. This is when a person can step in and shorten the
names.

In C++ the most critical classes are those with templates
and/or deeply nested namespaces and class definitions. If
such classes are part of the interface of a DSO the pro-
grammer should make a change. A shorter name for a
class can be introduced by deriving publically a new class
from the class with the long name. The definition could
be in the global scope to avoid the namespace part of the
mangled name. The symbols associated with this new
class can be exported, the original class’ names are not.
This does not remove the names of the original class from
the non-dynamic symbol table but this table does not play
any role at run-time.

The wrapper class will have to redefine all non-virtual
member functions of the class it is helping to export. This
requires some work and it might add run-time costs by
an additional function call, the one to the wrapper func-
tion. Note that defining those functions inline will not
help since then the reference to the original, long name
is reintroduced. The only way to avoid the extra call is
to define appropriate aliases, which might prove cumber-
some.

Shortening symbol names can be considered a micro-
optimization and certainly should not be performed pre-
maturely. When keeping this optimization in mind dur-
ing the development it might be easy to implement and
the possible benefits can be big. Memory operations are
slow and if the number of bytes which have to be loaded
can be reduced this definitely has measurable results.

2.4   Choosing the Right Type

The selection of the right type can have significant im-
pact on the performs, startup time, and size of a program.
Most of the time it seems obvious what the right type
is but alternatives are sometimes available and in other
cases it might be preferable to rearrange code slightly.
This section will provide a few concrete examples which
by no means are meant to be a complete representation of
all the cases which can be optimized.

2.4.1 Pointers vs. Arrays

In some situations there is little or no difference between
pointers and arrays in C. The prototypes

  void scale (int arr[10], int factor)

and

  void scale (int *arr, int factor)
are in fact mostly equivalent. So people got the impres-
sion that there is never a difference and one often finds
code like this:

  char *str = "some string";

This is correct and meaningful in some situations. A vari-
able is str is created with an initial value being a pointer
to a string. This specific piece of code compiles fine with
some compilers but will generate a warning when com-
piled with gcc. More on that in the next section.

The point to be made here is that the use of a variable
in this situation is often unnecessary. There might not be
an assignment to str (note: not the string, the pointer
variable). The value could be used only in I/O, string
generation, string comparison or whatever.

If this is the case the code above is not optimal and wastes
resources. All that would be needed is the string itself. A
better definition would therefore be:

  char str[] = "some string";

This is something completely different than the code be-
fore. Here str is a name for a sequence of bytes which
contains initially the sequence "some string". By rewrit-
ing code in this way whenever it is possible we save one
pointer variable in the non-sharable data segment, and
one relative relocation to initialize the variable with a
pointer to the string. Eventually the compiler is able to
generate better code since it is known that the value of
str can never change (the bytes pointed to by str can
change).

2.4.2   Forever const

One nit still exists with the result in the last section: the
string is modifiable. Very often the string will never be
modified. In such a case the unsharable data segment is
unnecessarily big.

  const char str[] = "some string";

After adding the const keyword the compiler is able
to move the string in sharable read-only memory. This
not only improves the program’s resource use and startup
speed, it also allows to catch mistakes like writing into
this string.
But that is not all. Modern gcc and linker versions can
work together to perform cross-object optimizations. I.e.,
strings which appear in more than one object file appear
only once in the final output. And even more: some link-
ers perform suffix optimizations, something which is pos-
sible with the string representation used in C. For this it
is necessary to realize that a string, which is the back-
part of a longer string (including the NUL byte), can be
represented by the bytes from the longer string.

    const char s1[] = "some string";
    const char s2[] = "string";

In this case only the string "some string" has to be
stored in the read-only data segment. The symbol s2 can
be a reference to the fifth character of the longer string.

To make this possible the compiler has to emit the string
data in specially marked section. The sections are marked
with the flags SHF MERGE and SHF STRINGS.

Not all strings can be handled, though. If a string con-
tains an explicit NUL byte, as opposed to the implicit
one at the end of the string, the string cannot be placed
in mergeable section. Since the linker’s algorithms use
the NUL byte to find the end of the string the rest of the
input string would be discarded. It is therefore desirable
to avoid strings with explicit NUL bytes.

2.4.3 Arrays of Data Pointers

Some data structure designs which work perfectly well
in application code add significant costs when used in
DSOs. This is especially true for arrays of pointers. One
example which shows the dilemma can be met frequently
in well-designed library interface. A set of interfaces re-
turns error number which can be converted using another
function into strings. The code might look like this:

    static const char *msgs[] = {
      [ERR1] = "message for err1",
      [ERR2] = "message for err2",
      [ERR3] = "message for err3"
    };

    const char *errstr (int nr) {
      return msgs[nr];
    }

The problematic piece is the definition of msgs. msgs is
as defined here a variable placed in non-sharable, writable
memory. It is initialized to point to three strings in read-
only memory (that part is fine). Even if the definition
would be written as

     static const char *const msgs[] = {

(note the addition const) this would not change this (but
it opens up some other opportunities, see 2.6). The com-
piler still would have the place the variable in writable
memory. The reason are three relative relocation which
modify the content of the array after loading. The total
cost for this code is three words of data in writable mem-
ory and three relocations modifying this data in addition
to the memory for the strings themselves.

Whenever a variable, array, structure, or union, contains
a pointer, the definition of an initialized variable requires
relocations which in turn requires the variable to be placed
in writable memory. This along with the increased startup
time due to processing of the relocations is not acceptable
for code which is used only in error cases.

For a simple case as the example above a solution entirely
within C can be used by rewriting the array definition like
this:

     static const char msgs[][17] = {
       [ERR1] = "message for err1",
       [ERR2] = "message for err2",
       [ERR3] = "message for err3"
     };

The result of this code is optimal. The array msgs is
placed entirely in read-only memory since it contains no
pointer. The C code does not have to be rewritten. The
drawback of this solution is that it is not always applica-
ble. If the strings have different lengths it would mean
wasting quite a bit of memory since the second dimen-
sion of the array has to be that of the length of the longest
string plus one. The waste gets even bigger if the values
ERR0, ERR1, and ERR2 are not consecutive and/or do not
start with zero. Every missing entry would mean, in this
case, 17 unused bytes.

There are other methods available for case which cannot
be handled as the example above but none without major
code rewrite.10 One possible solution for the problem is
the following. This code is not as elegant as the original
code but it is still maintainable. Ideally there should be a
tool which generates from a description of the strings the
appropriate data structures. This can be done with a few
lines

   10 If we would write assembler code we could store offsets relative to

a point in the DSO and add the absolute address of the reference point
when using the array elements. This is unfortunately not possible in C.
    static const char msgstr[] =
      "message for err1\0"
      "message for err2\0"
      "message for err3";

    static const size_t msgidx[] = {
      0,
      sizeof ("message for err1"),
      sizeof ("message for err1")
      + sizeof ("message for err2")
    };

    const char *errstr (int nr) {
      return msgstr + msgidx[nr];
    }

The content of both arrays in this code is constant at
compile time. The references to msgstr and msgidx
in errstr also do not need relocations since the defini-
tions are known to be local. The cost of this code include
three size t words in read-only memory in addition to
the memory for the strings. I.e., we lost all the reloca-
tions (and therefore startup costs) and moved the array
from writable to read-only memory. In this respect the
code above is optimal.

For a more elaborate and less error-prone method of con-
structing such tables is appendix B. The presented code
does not require the programmer to duplicate strings which
must be kept in sync.

2.4.4 Arrays of Function Pointers

The situation for function pointers is very similar to that
of data pointers. If a pointer to a function is used in the
initialization of a global variable the variable the result
gets written to must be writable and non-sharable. For
locally defined functions we get a relative relocation and
for functions undefined in the DSO a normal relocation
which is not lazily performed. The question is how to
avoid the writable variable and the relocations. Unfortu-
nately there is no generally accepted single answer. All
we can do here is to propose a few solution. Our example
code for this section is this:

    static int a0 (int a) { return a + 0; }
    static int a1 (int a) { return a + 1; }
    static int a2 (int a) { return a + 2; }

    static int (*fps[]) (int) = {
      [0] = a0,
      [1] = a1,
      [2] = a2
    };
    int add (int a, int b) {
      return fps[b] (a);
    }

A solution for this problem must inevitably be differ-
ent from what we did for strings where we combined all
strings into one. We can do this for functions as well but
it will look different:

    int add (int a, int b) {
      switch (b) {
      case 0:
        return a + 0;
      case 1:
        return a + 1;
      case 2:
        return a + 2;
      }
    }

Inlining the code as in the code above should certainly be
the preferred solution. The compiler never generates re-
locations for the implementation of a switch statement
and therefore the whole code does not need any reloca-
tion.

Inlining makes sense even if the inlined function are much
larger. Compilers do not have problems with large func-
tions and might even be able to optimize better. The
problem is only the programmer. The original code was
clean and intentionally written using function pointers.
The transformed code might be much less readable. This
makes this kind of optimization one which is not per-
formed until the code is tested and does not need much
maintenance anymore.

A similar problem, though it (unfortunately) is rather rare
today, arises for the use of computed gotos, a gcc ex-
tension for C. Computed gotos can be very useful in
computer-generated code and in highly optimized code.11
The previous example using computed gotos might look
like this:

   int add (int a, int b) {
     static const void *labels[] = {
        &&a0, &&a1, &&a2
     };
     goto *labels[b];
    a0:
     return a + 0;
    a1:

   11 Interested readers might want to look at the vfprintf implemen-

tation in the GNU libc.
    return a + 1;
   a2:
    return a + 2;
  }

How the code works should be obvious. The array labels
contains pointers to the places in the function where the
labels are placed and the gotos jumps to the place picked
out of the array. The problem with this code is that the ar-
ray contains absolute address which require relative relo-
cations in a DSO and which require that the array labels
is writable and placed in non-sharable memory.

The above code in principal is an implementation of a
switch statement. The difference is that the compiler
never stores absolute addresses which would need relo-
cations of position-independent code is generated. In-
stead the addresses are computed relative to the PIC ad-
dress, producing a constant offset. This offset then has
to be added to the PIC register value which is a minimal
amount of extra work. To optimize the code above a sim-
ilar scheme but be used.

  int add (int a, int b) {
    static const int offsets[] = {
      &&a0-&&a0, &&a1-&&a0, &&a2-&&a0
    };
    goto *(&&a0 + offsets[b]);
   a0:
    return a + 0;
   a1:
    return a + 1;
   a2:
    return a + 2;
  }

Since we do not have direct access to the PIC register at
compile-time and cannot express the computations of the
offsets we have to find another base address. In the code
above it is simply one of the target addresses, a0. The
array offsets is in this case really constant and placed
in read-only memory since all the offsets are known once
the compiler finished generating code for the function.
We now have relative addresses, no relocations are nec-
essary. The type used for offsets might have to be ad-
justed. If the differences are too large (only really pos-
sible for 64-bit architectures, and then only for tremen-
dously large functions) the type might have to be changed
to ssize t or something equivalent. In the other direc-
tion, if it is known that the offsets would fit in a variable
of type short or signed char, these types might be
used to save some memory.
2.4.5   C++ Virtual Function Tables

Virtual function tables, generated for C++ classes with
member functions tagged with virtual, are a special
case. The tables normally involve function pointer which
cause, as seen above, the linker to create relocations. It
is also worthwhile looking at the runtime costs of virtual
functions compared to intra- and inter-DSO calls. But
first the relocation issues.

Usually the virtual function table consists of an array of
function pointers or function descriptors. These represen-
tations have in common that for every slot in the virtual
function table there must be one relocation and all the
relocations have to be resolved at startup-time. There-
fore having larger a number of virtual function tables or
virtual function tables with many entries impact startup
time.

One other implication is noteworthy. Even though at run-
time normally only one virtual function table is used (since
the name is the same the first is in the lookup scope is
used) all tables must be initialized. The dynamic linker
has no possibility to determine whether the table will be
used at some point or not and therefore cannot avoid ini-
tializing it. Having exactly one virtual function table def-
inition in all the participating DSOs is therefore not only
useful for space conservation reasons.

The cost of each relocation depends on whether the func-
tion being referenced is defined locally and whether it
is exported or not. Only for functions which are explic-
itly hidden by using the visibility attributes or a version
script can the linker use relative relocations which can
be processed quickly. Otherwise relocations with symbol
lookups have to be used. Using the visibility attributes
was mentioned as a possibility to get relative relocations.
But since the virtual function table and the instantiated
member functions are generated by the compiler adding
an attribute cannot be done without some dirty tricks. So
using linker version scripts is really the only possibility.

But even this is often not possible. The virtual functions
can be called not only through the virtual function table
but also directly if the compiler can determine the exact
type of an C++ object. Therefore virtual function in most
cases have to be exported from the DSO. For instance,
the virtual function in the following example is called di-
rectly.

  struct foo {
    virtual int virfunc () const;
  };
  foo var;
  int bar () { return var.virfunc (); }
The reason is that var is known to have type foo and
not a derived type from which the virtual function table
is used. If the class foo is instantiated in another DSO
not only the virtual function table has to be exported by
that DSO, but also the virtual function virfunc.

If a tiny runtime overhead is acceptable the virtual func-
tion and the externally usable function interface should
be separated. Something like this:

  /* In the header. */
  struct foo {
     virtual int virfunc () const;
     int virfunc_do () const;
  };

  /* In the source code file. */
  virtual int foo::virfunc () const
  { return virfunc_do (); }
  int foo::virfunc_do () const
  { ...do something... }

In this case the real implementation of the function is in
virfunc do and the virtual function just calls it. There
is no need for the user to call the virtual function di-
rectly as in the function bar above since virfunc do
can be called instead. Therefore the linker version script
could hide the symbol for the virtual function and export
virfunc do to be called from other DSOs. If the user
still calls the virtual function the linker will not be able to
find a definition and the programmer has to know that this
means she has to rewrite the code to use virfunc do.
This makes using the class and the DSO a bit more com-
plex.

The consequence of hiding the virtual function is that the
virtual function table slot for virfunc can be handled
with a relative relocation. This is a big gain not only be-
cause this relocation type is much faster to handle. Since
virtual function tables contain data references the relo-
cation of the virtual function table slots must happen at
startup time.

The improved example above assumes that direct calls
are more frequent than calls through the virtual func-
tion table since there is additional overhead (one extra
function call) involved when calling virfunc. If this as-
sumption is wrong and calls through the virtual function
table are more frequent, then the implementations of the
two functions can be swapped.

In summary, the number and size of virtual function ta-
bles should be kept down since it directly impacts startup
time behavior. If virtual functions cannot be avoided the
implementations of the functions should not be exported.
2.5   Improving Generated Code

On most platforms the code generated for DSOs differs
from code generated for applications. The code in DSOs
needs to be relocatable while application code can usu-
ally assume a fixed load address. This inevitably means
that the code in DSOs is slightly slower and probably
larger than application code. Sometimes this additional
overhead can be measured. Small, often called functions
fall into this category. This section shows some problem
cases of code in DSOs and ways to avoid them.

In the preceding text we have seen that for IA-32 a func-
tion accessing a global variable has to load determine the
address of the GOT to use the @GOTOFF operation. As-
suming this C code

static int foo;
int getfoo (void)
{ return foo; }

the compiler might end up creating code like this:

getfoo:
   call 1f
1: popl %ecx
   addl _GLOBAL_OFFSET_TABLE_[.-1b],%ecx
   movl foo@GOTOFF(%ecx),%eax
   ret

The actual variable access is overshadowed by the over-
head to do so. Loading the GOT address into the %ecx
register takes three instructions. What if this function
is called very often? Even worse: what if the function
getfoo would be defined static or hidden and no pointer
to it are ever available? In this case the caller might al-
ready have computed the GOT address; at least on IA-32
the GOT address is the same for all functions in the DSO
or executable. The computation of the GOT address in
foobar would be unnecessary. The key word in this sce-
nario description is “might”. The IA-32 ABI does not
require that the caller loads the PIC register. Only if a
function calls uses the PLT do we know that %ebx con-
tains the GOT address and in this case the call could come
from any other loaded DSO or the executable. I.e., we re-
ally always have to load the GOT address.

On platforms with better-designed instruction sets the gen-
erated code is not bad at all. For example, the x86-64
version could look like this:
getfoo:
  movl foo(%rip),%eax
  ret

The x86-64 architecture provides a PC-relative data ad-
dressing mode which is extremely helpful in situations
like this.

Another possible optimization is to require the caller to
load the PIC register. On IA-64 the gp register is used
for this purpose. Each function pointer consist of a pair
function address and gp value. The gp value has to be
loaded before making the call. The result is that for our
running example the generated code might look like this:

getfoo:
  addl r14=@gprel(foo),gp;;
  ld4 r8=[r14]
  br.ret.sptk.many b0

If the caller knows that the called function uses the same
gp value, it can avoid the loading of gp. IA-32 is really a
special case, but still a very common one. So it is appro-
priate to look for a solution.

Any solution must avoid the PIC register entirely. We
propose two possible ways to improve the situation. First,
do not use position-independent code. This will generate
code like

getfoo:
  movl foo,%eax
  ret

The drawback is that the resulting binary will have text
relocations. The page on which this code resides will
not be sharable, the memory subsystem is more stressed
because of this, a runtime relocation is needed, program
startup is slower because of both these points, and secu-
rity of the program is impacted. Overall, there is a mea-
surable cost associated with not using PIC. This possibil-
ity should be avoided whenever possible. If the DSO is
question is only used once at the same time (i.e., there are
no additional copies of the same program or other pro-
grams using the DSO) the overhead of the copied page is
not that bad. Only in case the page has to be evacuated
from memory we would see measurable deficits since the
page cannot simply be discarded, it must be stored in the
disk swap storage.
The second proposed solution has a bigger impact on the
whole code. Assume this extended example:

static int foo;
static int bar;
int getfoo (void)
{ return foo; }
int getboth (void)
{ return bar+getfoo(); }

If this code gets translated as is, both functions will load
the GOT address to access the global variables. This can
be avoided by putting all variables in a struct and passing
the address of the struct to the functions which can use it.
For instance, the above code could be rewritten as:

static struct globals {
  int foo;
  int bar;
} globals;
static int intfoo (struct globals *g)
{ return g->foo; }
int getfoo (void)
{ return intfoo(&globals); }
int getboth (void)
{ return globals.bar+intfoo(&globals); }

The code generated for this example does not compute
the GOT address twice for each call to getboth. The
function intfoo uses the provided pointer and does not
need the GOT address. To preserve the semantics of the
first code this additional function had to be introduced;
it is now merely a wrapper around intfoo. If it is pos-
sible to write the sources for a DSO to have all global
variables in a structure and pass the additional parameter
to all internal functions, then the benefit on IA-32 can be
big.

But it must be kept in mind that the code generated for the
changed example is worse than what would be created for
the original on most other architectures. As can be seen,
in the x86-64 case the extra parameter to intfoo would
be pure overhead since we can access global variables
without the GOT value. On IA-64 marking getfoo as
hidden would allow to avoid the PLT and therefore the gp
register is not reloaded during the call to getfoo. Again,
the parameter is pure overhead. For this reason it is ques-
tionable whether this IA-32 specific optimization should
ever be performed. If IA-32 is the by far most important
platform it might be an option.
2.6   Increasing Security

The explanation of ELF so far have shown the critical im-
portance of the GOT and PLT data structures used at run-
time by the dynamic linker. Since these data structures
are used to direct memory access and function calls they
are also a security liability. If a program error provides
an attacker with the possibility to overwrite a single word
in the address space with a value of his choosing, then
targetting a specific GOT entry is a worthwhile goal. For
some architectures, a changed GOT value might redirect
a call to a function, which is called through the PLT, to
an arbitrary other place. Similarly, if the PLT is modified
in relocations and therefore writable, that memory could
be modified.

An example with security relevance could be a call to
setuid to drop a process’ privileges which is redirected
to perhaps getpid. The attacker could therefore keep
the raised priviledges and later cause greater harm.

This kind of attack would not be possible if the data GOT
and PLT could not be modified by the user program. For
some platforms, like IA-32, the PLT is already read-only.
But the GOT must be modifiable at runtime. The dy-
namic linker is an ordinary part of the program and it
is therefore not possible to require the GOT in a mem-
ory region which is writable by the dynamic linker but
not the rest of the application. Another possibility would
be to have the dynamic linker change the access permis-
sions for the memory pages containing the GOT and PLT
whenever it has to change a value. The required calls to
mprotect are prohibitively expensive, ruling out this so-
lution for any system which aims to be performing well.

At this point we should remember how the dynamic linker
works and how the GOT is used. Each GOT entry be-
longs to a certain symbol and depending on how the sym-
bol is used, the dynamic linker will perform the relo-
cation at startup time or on demand when the symbol
is used. Of interest here are the relocations of the first
group. We know exactly when all non-lazy relocation
are performed. So we could change the access permis-
sion of the part of the GOT which is modified at startup
time to forbid write access after the relocations are done.
Creating objects this way is enabled by the -z relro
linker option. The linker is instructed to move the sec-
tions, which are only modified by relocations, onto sep-
arate memory page and emit a new program header en-
try PT GNU RELRO to point the dynamic linker to these
special pages. At runtime the dynamic linker can then
remove the write access to these pages after it is done.

This is only a partial solution but already very useful.
By using the -z now linker option it is possible to dis-
able all lazy relocation at the expense of increased startup
costs and make all relocations eligible for this special
treatment. For long-running applications which are secu-
rity relevant this is definitely attractive: the startup costs
should not weigh in as much as the gained security. Also,
if the application and DSOs are written well, they avoid
relocations. For instance, the DSOs in the GNU C library
are all build with -z relro and -z now.

The GOT and PLT are not the only parts of the applica-
tion which benefit from this feature. In section 2.4.2 we
have seen that adding as many const to a data object def-
inition as possible has benefits when accessing the data.
But there is more. Consider the following code:

const char *msgs1[] = {
 "one", "two", "three"
};
const char *const msgs2[] = {
 "one", "two", "three"
};

It has been explained that neither array can be moved
into the read-only, and therefore shared, data section if
the file is linked into a DSO. The addresses of the strings
pointed to by the elements are known only at runtime.
Once the addresses are filled in, though, the elements of
msgs2 must never be modified again since the array it-
self is defined as const. Therefore gcc stores the array
msgs1 in the .data section while msgs2 is stored into
a section called .data.rel. This .data.rel section is
just like .data but the dynamic linker could take away
write access after the relocations are done. The previ-
ously described handling of the GOT is just a special case
of exactly this feature. Adding as many const as possi-
ble together with the -z relro linker option therefore
protects even program data. This might even catch bugs
where code incorrectly modifies data declared as const.

A completely different issue, but still worth mentioning
in the context of security, are text relocations. Generat-
ing DSOs so that text relocations are necessary (see sec-
tion 2) means that the dynamic linker has to make mem-
ory pages, which are otherwise read-only, temporarily
writable. The period in which the pages are writable is
usually brief, only until all non-lazy relocations for the
object are handled. But even this brief period could be
exploited by an attacker. In a malicious attack code re-
gions could be overwritten with code of the attacker’s
choice and the program will execute the code blindly if it
reaches those addresses.

During the program startup period this is not possible
since there is no other thread available which could per-
form the attack while the pages are writable. The same is
not true if later, when the program already executes nor-
mal code and might have start threads, some DSOs are
loaded dynamically with dlopen. For this reason cre-
ating DSOs with text relocation means unnecessarily in-
creasing the security problems of the system.
Much more critical is that with Security Enhanced Linux
(SELinux) text relocations become a big liability. By de-
fault, the SELinux extensions prevent making executable
data pages writable. Since the kernel cannot distinguish
between the dynamic linker doing this and the program
or an attacker making the change, the abilities of the dy-
namic linker are also restricted. The only ways out are
to grant the program permission to change the protection
(and therefore give attackers the ability to do the same) or
to remove text relocations from all DSOs and PIEs. The
former option should only be used as a last resort.

2.7   Simple Profiling of Interface Usage

The dynamic linker in the GNU C library allows easy
profiling of the way a DSO is used without recompiling
any code. By setting the value of the environment vari-
able LD PROFILE to the shared object name (SONAME)
of a DSO, all uses of interfaces defined in this DSO which
go through a PLT are recorded. In addition time-based
sampling happens as well and all samples which happen
in the profiled DSO are recorded. This is all similar to the
gprof-based profiling which is available on Unix sys-
tems for a long time.

The LD PROFILE variable can be set for arbitrarily many
applications running at the same time. All profiling activ-
ity is recorded in real-time in the same output file which is
usually stored in /var/tmp. Without having to stop any
or all applications currently profiled, the current status
can be examined by running the sprof program. The op-
tions this program understands are similar to those gprof
understand. There are basically three report types, call
pairs, flat profiles, and graph profiles which can all be
requested at once.

How to use these profile results is specific to the applica-
tion. It is easy to locate often called functions and, given
sufficient runtime, functions inside the DSO which run
for a long time. Everybody who used gprof should feel
right at home although DSO profiling has its limitations.

The call data is accumulated by intercepting the calls
made through the PLT. The dynamic linker can do this
without the application noticing it. But if the PLT is not
used, data is not recorded. This is the case if an appli-
cation looks a symbol up using dlsym and then calls it
directly. This might make the profiling data useless.

The solution for this problem is to use the DL CALL FCT
macro the GNU C library’s <dlfcn.h> header defines.
If a looked-up function pointer fctp has been used like
this

      foo = fctp (arg1, arg2);

or if you prefer

      foo = (*fctp) (arg1, arg2);
