the code should be rewritten to look like this:

      foo = DL CALL FCT (fctp, (arg1, arg2));

The DL CALL FCT macro contains the necessary magic
to record the calling of the function pointed to by fctp.
If the DSO which contains the symbol is not profiled
nothing happens. It is therefore safe to always use this
macro to call symbols in dynamically loaded DSOs. The
DL CALL FCT macro has a low overhead and so could be
used unconditionally but for production code it is proba-
bly best to avoid it.

3     Maintaining APIs and ABIs

When writing DSOs which are used as resources in mul-
tiple projects mastering the technical aspects of writing
optimized DSOs is only part of what is needed. Main-
taining the programming interface (API) and the binary
interface (ABI) play an even more important role in a suc-
cessful project. Without API and ABI stability the DSO
would be a burden to use or even unusable. In this sec-
tion we will introduce a number of rules which increase
the chance of success for projects which provides inter-
faces for other projects. We are talking specifically about
library implementations in DSOs but most rules can be
transferred to projects of any kind.

3.1    What are APIs and ABIs?

DSOs are used both at compile time and at run-time. At
compile time the linker tries to satisfy undefined refer-
ences from the definitions in the DSO. The linker then
associates the reference with the definition in the DSO. In
ELF objects this reference is not explicitly present since
the symbol lookup allows finding different definitions at
run-time. But the reference is marked to be satisfied. At
run-time the program can rely on the fact that a defini-
tion is present. If this would not be the case something
changed in the DSO between the time of linking the ap-
plication and the time the application is executed. A
change in which a symbol vanishes is usually fatal. In
some cases definitions in other DSOs can take over but
this is nothing which one can usually be depended on.
A symbol once exported must be available at run-time in
the future.

The ABI of the DSO comprises the collection of all the
definitions which were available for use during the life-
time of the DSO. Maintaining ABI compatibility means
that no definition, also called interface, gets lost. This is
only the easy part, though.

For variable definitions it also means that the size and
structure of the variable does not change in a way the
application cannot handle. What this actually means de-
pends on the situation. If any code outside the DSO di-
rectly accesses the variable, the accessed part of the struc-
ture of the variable must not change. On platforms which
require copy relocations to handle accesses to variables
defined in DSOs in the main application (such as IA-32)
the size of the variable must not change at all. Otherwise
variables might increase in size.

The requirements on function definitions are even harder
to check. The documented semantic of a function must
not change. Defining “semantic” for any non-trivial func-
tion is not easy, though. In the next section we try to
define the requirements of a stable interface. Basically
stability means that correct programs which ran in the
past continue to run in the future. One of the require-
ments therefore is that the parameters of a function do not
change. This brings up an interesting point: in C++ this
is ensured automatically. Functions incorporate in their
mangled names the parameter types. This means that any
change in the signature of a function will result in link-
time and run-time errors and therefore can be detected
easily. This is not the case for variables; their mangled
names only contain the namespace part. Another good
reason to not export variables as part of the API.

3.2   Defining Stability

Having said that stability of the ABI is the highest goal
of DSO maintenance, it is now time to define what sta-
bility means. This might be surprising for some readers
as a naı̈ve view of the problem might be that everything
which worked before has to continue working in the fu-
ture. Everybody who tried this before will see a problem
with it.

Requiring everything to continue to be possible in future
releases would mean that even programs, which use in-
terfaces in an undocumented way, have to be supported.
Almost all non-trivial function interfaces allow parame-
ters to specify values which are outside the documented
interface and most interfaces are influenced by side ef-
fects from other functions or previous calls. Requiring
that such uses of an interface are possible in future revi-
sions means that not only the interface but also the im-
plementation is fixed.

As an example assume the implementation of the strtok
function in the C run-time library. The standard requires
that the first call if strtok gets passed a non-NULL first
parameter. But what happens if the first call has a NULL as
the first parameter? In this case the behavior is undefined
(not even implemented-defined in this case). Some im-
plementations will in this case simply return NULL since
this a common side effect of a possible implementation.
But this is not guaranteed. The function call might as
well cause the application to crash. Both are valid im-
plementations but changing from one to the other in the
lifetime of a DSO would mean an incompatibility.

The question is: does this really constitute an incompat-
ibility? No valid program would ever be affected. Only
programs which are not following the documented inter-
face are affected. And if the change in the implementa-
tion would mean an improvement in efficiency (accord-
ing to whatever measure) this would mean broken appli-
cations prevent progress in the implementation of a DSO.
This is not acceptable.

Stability therefore should be defined using the documented
interface. Legitimate uses of interfaces should not be af-
fected by changes in the implementation; using interfaces
in an undefined way void the warranty. The same is true
for using completely undocumented, internal symbols.
Those must not be used at all. While this definition of
stability is widely accepted it does not mean that avoid-
ing or working around changes introduced by changes to
the implementation is wrong. It just is not necessary if
the achievement of stability comes at a cost which almost
always is the case.

Rejecting stability of undefined functionality is one thing,
but what happens if some documented behavior changes?
This is can happen for various reasons:

   • The implementation contains a bug. Other imple-
     mentations produce different results and this is what
     people interested in cross-platform compatibility
     are interested in. The old, broken behavior might
     be useful, too.
   • Similarly, alignment with standards, revisions of
     them, or existing practice in other implementations
     can promise gains in the future and therefore mak-
     ing a change is useful.
   • Functionality of an interface gets extended or re-
     duced according to availability of underlying tech-
     nology. For instance, the introduction of more ad-
     vanced harddisk drives can handle requests which
     previous versions cannot handle and these addi-
     tional requests can be exposed through function in-
     terfaces.

Not making the changes can have negative results. Blindly
changing the code will definitely have negative results.
Making the change and still maintaining ABI stability re-
quires the use of versioning.

These incompatible changes to a DSO are not the only
changes which can cause problems. Adding a new inter-
face does not cause problems for existing applications.
But if a new application uses the new interface it will run
into problems if at runtime only the old version of the
DSO, the one without the newly added symbol, is avail-
able. The user can detect this by forcing the dynamic
linker to perform all relocations at load-time by defin-
ing LD BIND NOW to an nonempty value in the environ-
ment before starting the application. The dynamic linker
will abort with an error if an old DSO is used. But forc-
ing the relocations introduces major performance penal-
ties (which is the reason why lazy relocations were in-
troduced in the first place). Instead the dynamic linker
should detect the old DSO version without performing
the relocations.

3.3   ABI Versioning

The term “ABI versioning” refers to the process of asso-
ciating an ABI with a specific version so that if necessary
more than one version of the ABI can be present at any
one time. This is no new concept but it was refined over
time and not all possible versioning methods are available
on all systems.

The first method is the oldest and coarsest grained one. It
is implemented by using a different filename for each in-
compatible DSO. In ELF binaries dependencies on DSOs
are recorded using DT NEEDED entries in the dynamic
segment. The string associated with the entry has to be
the name of an existing DSO. It is usually taken from the
string associated with the DT SONAME entry in the DSO.
Different names can point to different files which makes
coexistence of different DSOs possible and easy. But
while this method is easy to use and such DSOs can eas-
ily be produced, it has a major drawback. For every re-
leased version of the DSO which contains an incompati-
ble change the SONAME would have to be changed. This
can lead to large numbers of versions of the DSO which
each differ only slightly from each other. This wastes
resources especially at run-time when the running appli-
cation need more than one version of the DSO. Another
problem is the case when one single application loads
more than one version of the DSO. This is easily pos-
sible if dependencies (other DSOs the application needs)
pull in independently these different versions. Since the
two versions of the versioned DSO do not know of each
other, the results can be catastrophic. The only safe way
to handle versioning with filenames is to avoid the de-
scribed situation completely. This is most probably only
possible by updating all binaries right away which means
that effectively no versioning happens. The main advan-
tage of filename versioning is that it works everywhere
and can be used as a fallback solution in case no other
versioning method is available.

A second method with finer grained control was devel-
oped by Sun for its Solaris OS. In this method DSOs have
internal versioning methods (filename versioning is ob-
viously available on top of them). The internal version-
ing allows to make compatible changes to a DSO while
avoiding runtime problems with programs running in en-
vironments which have only the old version of the DSO
available. Compatible changes mean adding new inter-
faces or defining additional behavior for existing inter-
faces. Each symbol is associated with a version. The
versions in a file are described by a non-cyclical graph
which forms a hierarchy. If a symbol is associated with a
version which has a predecessor it means that the proper-
ties of the symbol associated with the predecessor version
are also fulfilled in the successor version. In short: a new
version is defined for a new release of a DSO whenever
new features are added. The interfaces which changed
in a compatible way get the new version associated. All
the other interfaces must not change and they keep the
version they had in the previous release.

When the linker uses the versioned DSO to satisfy a de-
pendency it also records the version of the used symbol.
This way it gets for each DSO a list of required versions.
This list is recorded in the binary which is produced.
With this information available it is now easy for the dy-
namic linker to determine at startup-time whether all the
interfaces the application needs are available in at least
the version which was used at link-time. To do this the
dynamic linker has to go through the list of all required
versions and search in the list of defined versions in the
referenced DSOs for a matching entry. If no matching
entry is found the DSO used at runtime is incompatible
and the program does not start up.

It should be noted that the number of versions is much
lower than the number of symbols and generally inde-
pendent of it. New versions are introduced only for up-
dates of the DSO package or an OS release. Therefore
the version matching is a quick process.

While Sun’s extensions help to cope with parts of the
stability problem, the much larger problem remains to
be solved: how to handle incompatible changes. Every
non-trivial DSO will sooner or later in its lifetime require
some incompatible changes. Even changes made to cor-
rect problems fall sometimes into this category. Some
(broken) program might depend on the old method. So
far there is only one way out: change the SONAME.

With Linux’s symbol versioning mechanism this is not
necessary. ABIs can normally be kept stable for as long
as wanted. The symbol versioning mechanism [4] is an
extension of Sun’s internal versioning mechanism. The
two main differences are: it is possible to have more than
one definition of a given symbol (the associated version
must differ) and the application or DSO linked with the
versioned DSO contains not only a list of the required
version, but also records for each symbol which sym-
bol version was used and from which DSO the definition
came. At runtime this information can then be used to
pick the right version from all the different versions of
the same interface. The only requirement is that the API
(headers, DSO used for linking, and documentation) is
consistent. Every versioned DSO has at most one version
of every API which can be used at link-time. An API
(not ABI) can also vanish completely: this is a way to
deprecate APIs without affecting binary compatibility.

The only real problem of this approach is that if more
than one version of the same API is used in the same ap-
plication. This can only happen if the uses are in different
objects, DSOs or the application itself. From inside one
object only one version can be accessed. In the last 8+
years this hasn’t been found to be a problem in the GNU
C library development. If it becomes a problem it can po-
tentially be worked around by changing the implementa-
tion of the multi-versioned interface to make it aware of
it. Since both versions of the interface are implemented
in the same DSO the versions can coordinate. In general,
most of the implementation of the different versions is
shared and the actual versioned interfaces are normally
wrappers around a general implementation (see below).

If possible, projects implementing generally usable DSOs
should use symbol versioning from day one. Since the
same techniques are used for symbol export control this is
attractive. Unfortunately this versioning scheme requires
changes in the dynamic linker which are currently only
available on Linux and GNU Hurd.12 If this is not possi-
ble use Sun’s internal versioning for compatible changes
(really only applies to Solaris). Otherwise there is no op-
tion but to change the SONAME for every release with
incompatible and possible even releases with compati-
ble changes. But the fact that such limited systems ex-
ist should never make this the only implemented way: if
better mechanisms are available they should be used.

3.4    Restricting Exports

One of the reasons changes between revisions of a DSO
appear incompatible is that users use internal interfaces
of the DSO. This should never happen and usually the
official interfaces are documented and the internal inter-
faces have special names. Still, many users choose to
ignore these rules and then complain when internal inter-
faces change or go away entirely. There is no justification
for these complaints but developers can save themselves
a lot of nerves by restricting the set of interfaces which
are exported from the DSO.

Section 2.2 introduced the mechanisms available for this.
Now that symbol versioning has been introduced we can
extend this discussion a bit. Using symbol maps was in-
troduced as one of the possibilities to restrict the exported
symbols. Ideally symbol maps should be used all the
time, in addition to the other method chosen. The rea-
son is that this allows associating version names with the
interfaces which in turn later allow incompatible changes
to be made without breaking the ABI. The example map
file in section 2.2.5 does not define a version name, it is
an anonymous version map. The version defining a ver-
sion name would look like this:

VERS_1.0 {
  global: index;
  local: *;
};

   12 Apparently some of the BSD variants “borrowed” the symbol ver-

sioning design. They never told me though.
In this example VERS 1.0 is an arbitrarily chosen version
name. As far as the static and dynamic linker are con-
cerned version names are simply strings. But for mainte-
nance purposes it is advised that the names are chosen to
include the package name and a version number. For the
GNU C library project, for instance, the chosen names
are GLIBC 2.0, GLIBC 2.1, etc.

3.5   Handling Compatible Changes (GNU)

The two basic compatible changes, extending functional-
ity of an existing interface and introducing a new inter-
face, can be handled similarly but not exactly the same
way. And we need slightly different code to handle the
Linux/Hurd and the Solaris way. To exemplify the changes
we extend the example in section 2.2. The index func-
tion as defined cannot handle negative parameters. A ver-
sion with this deficiency fixed can handle everything the
old implementation can handle but not vice versa. There-
fore applications using the new interface should be pre-
vented from running if only the old DSO is available. As
a second change assume that a new function indexp1 is
defined. The code would now look like this when using
Linux/Hurd:

static int last;

static int next (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int index1__ (int scale) {
  return next () << (scale>0 ? scale : 0);
}
extern int index2__ (int)
  __attribute ((alias ("index1__")));
asm(".symver index1__,index@VERS_1.0");
asm(".symver index2__,index@@VERS_2.0");

int indexp1 (int scale) {
  return index2__ (scale) + 1;
}

Several things need explaining here. First, we do not ex-
plicitly define a function index anymore. Instead index1
is defined (note the trailing underscore characters; lead-
ing underscores are reserved for the implementation). This
function is defined using the new semantic. The extern
declaration following the function definition is in fact a
definition of an alias for the name index1 . This is
gcc’s syntax for expressing this. There are other ways
to express this but this one uses only C constructs which
are visible to the compiler. The reason for having this
alias definition can be found in the following two lines.
These introduce the “magic” to define a versioned sym-
bol with more than one definition. The assembler pseudo-
op .symver is used to define an alias of a symbol which
consists of the official name, @ or @@, and a version name.
The alias name will be the name used to access the sym-
bol. It has to be the same name used in the original code,
index in this case. The version name must correspond
to the name used in the map file (see the example in the
previous section).

What remains to be explained is the use of @ and @@. The
symbol defined using @@ is the default definition. There
must be at most one. It is the version of the symbol used
in all linker runs involving the DSO. No symbol defined
using @ are ever considered by the linker. These are the
compatibility symbols which are considered only by the
dynamic linker.

In this example we define both versions of the symbol to
use the same code. We could have just as well kept the
old definition of the function and added the new defini-
tion. This would have increased the code size but would
provide exactly the same interface. Code which calls the
old version, index@VERS 1.0, would have produced un-
specified behavior with the old DSO and now it would re-
turn the same as a call to index@@VERS 2.0. But since
such a call is invalid anyway nobody can expect that the
ABI does not change in this regard.

Since this code introduced a new version name the map
file has to change, too.

VERS_1.0 {
  global: index;
  local: *;
};

VERS_2.0 {
  global: index; indexp1;
} VERS_1.0;

The important points to note here are that index is men-
tioned in more than one version, indexp1 only appears
in VERS 2.0, the local: definitions only appear in the
VERS 1.0 definition, and the definition of VERS 2.0 refers
to VERS 1.0. The first point should be obvious: we want
two versions of index to be available, this is what the
source code says. The second point is also easy to under-
stand: indexp1 is a new function and was not available
when version 1 of the DSO was released. It is not nec-
essary to mark the definition of indexp1 in the sources
with a version name. Since there is only one definition
the linker is able to figure this out by itself.

The omission of the catch-all local: * case might be
a bit surprising. There is no local: case at all in the
VERS 2.0 definition. What about internal symbols in-
troduced in version 2 of the DSO? To understand this it
must be noted that all symbols matched in the local:
part of the version definition do not actually get a version
name assigned. They get a special internal version name
representing all local symbols assigned. So, the local:
part could appear anywhere, the result would be the same.
Duplicating local: * could possibly confuse the linker
since now there are two catch-all cases. It is no problem
to explicitly mention newly introduced local symbols in
the local: cases of new versions, but it is normally not
necessary since there always should be a catch-all case.

The fourth point, the VERS 1.0 version being referred
to in the VERS 2.0 definition, is not really important in
symbol versioning. It marks the predecessor relationship
of the two versions and it is done to maintain the similar-
ities with Solaris’ internal versioning. It does not cause
any problem it might in fact be useful to a human reader
so predecessors should always be mentioned.

3.6   Handling Compatible Changes (Solaris)

The code changes to the code of the last section to handle
Solaris’ internal versioning simplify sources and the map
file. Since there can only be one definition of a symbol
(and since a symbol cannot be removed there is exactly
one definition) we do not need any alias and we do not
have to mention index twice in the map file. The source
code would look like this:

static int last;

static int next (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int index (int scale) {
  return next () << (scale>0 ? scale : 0);
}

int indexp1 (int scale) {
  return index (scale) + 1;
}

Note that this only works because the previously defined
semantics of the index function is preserved in the new
implementation. If this would not be the case this change
would not qualify as compatible and the whole discussion
would be moot. The equally simplified map file looks like
this:

VERS_1.0 {
   local: *;
};
VERS_2.0 {
   global: index; indexp1;
} VERS_1.0;
The change consists of removing the index entry from
version VERS 1.0 and adding it to VERS 2.0. This leaves
no exported symbol in version VERS 1.0 which is OK.
It would be wrong to remove VERS 1.0 altogether after
moving the local: * case to VERS 2.0. Even if the
move would be done the VERS 1.0 definition must be
kept around since this version is named as the predeces-
sor of VERS 2.0. If the predecessor reference would be
removed as well, programs linked against the old DSO
and referencing index in version VERS 1.0 would stop
working. Just like symbols, version names must never be
removed.

The code in this section has one little problem the code
for the GNU versioning model in the previous section
does not have: the implementation of indexp1 refer-
ences the public symbol index and therefore calls it with
a jump to the PLT (which is slower and possibly allows
interposition). The solution for this is left as an exercise
to the user (see section 2.2.7).

The Solaris runtime linker uses the predecessor imple-
mentation to determine when it finds an interface not avail-
able with the version found at link-time. If a applica-
tion was linked with the old DSO constructed from the
code above it would reference index@VERS 1.0. If the
new DSO is found at runtime the version found would
be index@VERS 2.0. In case such a mismatch is found
the dynamic linker looks into the list of symbols and tries
all predecessors in turn until all are checked or a match
is found. In our example the predecessor of VERS 2.0
is VERS 1.0 and therefore the second comparison will
succeed.

3.7   Incompatible Changes

Incompatible changes can only be handled with the sym-
bol versioning mechanism present on Linux and GNU
Hurd. For Solaris one has to fall back to the filename
versioning method.

Having just covered the code for the compatible change,
the differences are not big. For illustration we pick up the
example code once again. This time, instead of making a
compatible change to the semantics of index we change
the interface.

static int last;

static int next (void) {
  return ++last;
}

int index1__ (int scale) {
  return next () << scale;
}
asm(".symver index1__,index@VERS_1.0");
int index2__ (int scale, int *result) {
  if (result < 0
      || result >= 8 * sizeof (int))
    return -1;
  *result = index1__ (scale);
  return 0;
}
asm(".symver index2__,index@@VERS_2.0");

The interface of index in version VERS 2.0 as imple-
mented in index2 (note: this is the default version as
can be seen by the two @ in the version definition) is quite
different and it can easily be seen that programs which
previously return some more or less sensible value now
can crash because *result is written to. This parameter
would contain garbage if the function would be used with
an old prototype. The index1 definition is the same as
the previous index implementation. We once again have
to define the real function with an alias since the index
names get introduced by the .symver pseudo-ops.

It is characteristic for incompatible changes that the im-
plementations of the different versions require separate
code. But as in this case one function can often be imple-
mented in terms of the other (the new code using the old
code as it is the case here, or vice versa).

The map file for this example looks very much like the
one for the compatible change:

VERS_1.0 {
   global: index;
   local: *;
};

VERS_2.0 {
  global: index;
} VERS_1.0;

We have two definitions of index and therefore the name
must be mentioned by the appropriate sections for the two
versions.

It might also be worthwhile pointing out once again that
the call to index1 in index2 does not use the PLT
and is instead a direct, usually PC-relative, jump.

With a simple function definition, like the one in this ex-
ample, it is no problem at all if different parts of the pro-
gram call different versions of the index interface. The
only requirement is that the interface the caller saw at
compile time, also is the interface the linker finds when
handling the relocatable object file. Since the relocatable
object file does not contain the versioning information
it is not possible to keep object files around and hope
the right interface is picked by the linker. Symbol ver-
sioning only works for DSOs and executables. If it is
necessary to reuse relocatable object files later, it is nec-
essary to recreate the link environment the linker would
have seen when the code was compiled. The header files
(for C, and whatever other interface specification exists
for other languages) and the DSOs as used by linking to-
gether form the API. It is not possible to separate the two
steps, compiling and linking. For this reason packaging
systems, which distinguish between runtime and devel-
opment packages, put the headers and linkable DSOs in
one file, while the files needed at runtime are in another.

3.8   Using Versioned DSOs

All methods which depend on symbol versioning have
one requirement in common: it is absolutely necessary
for the users of the DSO to always link with it. This might
sound like a strange requirement but it actually is not
since it is not necessary to provide definitions for all ref-
erences when creating DSOs. I.e., the linker is perfectly
happy if a symbol is completely undefined in a DSO. It
is only the dynamic linker which would complain: if no
object is in scope which defines the undefined symbol the
lookup fails.

This method is sometimes, rarely, a useful method. If a
DSO is behaving differently depending on the context it
is loaded in and if the context has to provide some call-
backs which make the DSO complete, using undefined
symbols is OK. But this does not extend to definitions
from DSOs which use symbol versioning.

The problem is that unless the DSO containing the defi-
nitions is used at link time, the linker cannot add a ver-
sion name to the undefined reference. Following the rules
for symbol versioning [4] this means the earliest version
available at runtime is used which usually is not the in-
tended version. Going back to the example in section 3.7,
assume the program using the DSO would be compiled
expecting the new interface index2 . Linking happens
without the DSO, which contains the definition. The ref-
erence will be for index and not index@@VERS 2.0. At
runtime the dynamic linker will find an unversioned ref-
erence and versioned definitions. It will then select the
oldest definition which happens to be index1 . The re-
sult can be catastrophic.

It is therefore highly recommended to never depend on
undefined symbols. The linker can help to ensure this if
-Wl,-z,defs is added to compiler command line. If it
is really necessary to use undefined symbols the newly
built DSO should be examined to make sure that all ref-
erences to symbols in versioned DSOs are appropriately
marked.
3.9   Inter-Object File Relations

Part of the ABI is also the relationship between the var-
ious participating executables and DSOs which are cre-
ated by undefined references. It must be ensured that
the dynamic linker can locate exactly the right DSOs at
program start time. The static linker uses the SONAME
of a DSO in the record to specify the interdependencies
between two objects. The information is stored in the
DT NEEDED entries in the dynamic section of the object
with the undefined references. Usually this is only a file
name, without a complete path. It is then the task of the
dynamic linker to find the correct file at startup time.

This can be a problem, though. By default the dynamic
linker only looks into a few directories to find DSOs (on
Linux, in exactly two directories, /lib and /usr/lib).
More directories can be added by naming them in the
/etc/ld.so.conf file which is always consulted by
the dynamic linker. Before starting the application, the
user can add LD LIBRARY PATH to the environment of
the process. The value is another list of directories which
are looked at.

But all this means that the selection of the directories is
under the control of the administrator. The program’s au-
thor can influence these setting only indirectly by doc-
umenting the needs. But there is also way for the pro-
grammer to decide the path directly. This is sometimes
important. The system’s setting might not be usable by
all programs at the same time.

For each object, DSO as well as executable, the author
can define a “run path”. The dynamic linker will use the
value of the path string when searching for dependencies
of the object the run path is defined in. Run paths comes
is two variants, of which one is deprecated. The runpaths
are accessible through entries in the dynamic section as
field with the tags DT RPATH and DT RUNPATH. The dif-
ference between the two value is when during the search
for dependencies they are used. The DT RPATH value is
used first, before any other path, specifically before the
path defined in the LD LIBRARY PATH environment vari-
able. This is problematic since it does not allow the user
to overwrite the value. Therefore DT RPATH is depre-
cated. The introduction of the new variant, DT RUNPATH,
corrects this oversight by requiring the value is used after
the path in LD LIBRARY PATH.

If both a DT RPATH and a DT RUNPATH entry are avail-
able, the former is ignored. To add a string to the run
path one must use the -rpath or -R for the linker. I.e.,
on the gcc command line one must use something like

  gcc -Wl,-rpath,/some/dir:/dir2 file.o

This will add the two named directories to the run path
in the order in which say appear on the command line. If
more than one -rpath/-R option is given the parameters
will be concatenated with a separating colon. The order
is once again the same as on the linker command line.
For compatibility reasons with older version of the linker
DT RPATH entries are created by default. The linker op-
tion --enable-new-dtags must be used to also add
DT RUNPATH entry. This will cause both, DT RPATH and
DT RUNPATH entries, to be created.

There are a number of pitfalls one has to be aware of
when using run paths. The first is that an empty path
represents the current working directory (CWD) of the
process at runtime. One can construct such an empty path
by explicitly adding such a parameter (-Wl,-R,"") but
also, and this is the dangerous part, by two consecutive
colons or a colon at the beginning or end of the string.
That means the run path value ”:/home::/usr:” searches
the CWD, home, the CWD again, usr, and finally the
CWD again.13 It is very easy to add such an empty path.
Makefiles often contain something like this:

RPATH = $(GLOBAL\_RPATH):$(LOCAL\_RPATH)
LDFLAGS += -Wl,-rpath,$(RPATH)

If either GLOBAL RPATH or LOCAL RPATH is empty the
dynamic linker will be forced to look in the CWD. When
constructing strings one must therefore always be careful
about empty strings.

The second issue run paths have is that either that paths
like /usr/lib/someapp are not “relocatable”. I.e., the
package cannot be installed in another place by the user
without playing tricks like creating symbolic links from
/usr/lib/someapp to the real directory. The use of rel-
ative paths is possible, but highly discouraged. It might
be OK in application which always control their CWD,
but in DSOs which are used in more than one application
using relative paths means calling for trouble since the
application can change the CWD.

A solution out of the dilemma is an extension syntax for
all search paths (run paths, but also LD LIBRARY PATH).
If one uses the string $ORIGIN this will represent the ab-
solute path of the directory the file containing this run
path is in. One common case for using this “dynamic
string token” (DST) is a program (usually installed in a
bin/ directory) which comes with one or more DSOs it
needs, which are installed in the corresponding lib/ di-
rectory. For instance the paths could be /bin and /lib
or /usr/bin and /usr/lib. In such a case the run
path of the application could contain $ORIGIN/../lib
which will expand in the examples case just mentioned
to /bin/../lib and /usr/bin/../lib respectively.
The effective path will therefore point to the appropriate
   13 The dynamic linker is of course free to avoid the triple search since

after the first one it knows the result.
lib/ directory.

$ORIGIN is not the only DST available. The GNU libc
dynamic currently recognizes two more. The first is $LIB
which is useful on platforms which can run in 32- and 64-
bit mode (maybe more in future). On such platforms the
replacement value in 32-bit binaries is lib and for 64-
bit binaries it is lib64. This is what the system ABIs
specify as the directories for executable code. If the plat-
form does not know more than one mode the replacement
value is lib. This DST makes it therefore easy to write
Makefiles creating the binaries since no knowledge about
the differentiation is needed.

The last DST is $PLATFORM. It is replaced by the dy-
namic linker with an architecture-specific string repre-
senting the name of the platform (as the name suggests).
For instance, it will be replaced with i386 or i686 on
IA-32 machines, depending on the CPU(s) used. This al-
lows using better optimized versions of a DSO if the CPU
supports it. On system with the GNU libc this is gener-
ally not needed since the dynamic linker by itself and by
default looks for such subdirectories. The actual rules are
quite complicated and not further discussed here. What
is important to remember is that the $PLATFORM DST is
not really useful; it is mainly available for compatibility
with Solaris’s dynamic linker.

Another aspect of DT NEEDED entries worth looking at
is whether they are necessary in the first place. Espe-
cially when the above guideline of using the -z defs
linker option is followed, many projects name all kinds of
DSOs on the linker command line, whether they are re-
ally needed or not in the specific case. This problem is in-
tensified with useless wrappers like pkg-config which
just add tons of dependencies to the link time. This might
have been OK in the days of static linking, but the de-
fault for DSOs appearing on the linker command line
is, that they are always added to the result’s dependency
list, whether they are actually used or not. To determine
whether an executable or DSO has such unnecessary de-
pendencies the ldd script can be used:

$ ldd -u -r \
  /usr/lib/libgtk-x11-2.0.so.0.600.0
Unused direct dependencies:

           /usr/lib/libpangox-1.0.so.0
           /lib/libdl.so.2

These references can be manually eliminated by avoiding
to name the DSO on the linker command line. Alterna-
tively the --as-needed linker option can be used. If
this option is used, all DSOs named on the command line
after the option are only added to the dependency list if
they are really needed. This mode can be disabled again
with the --no-as-needed option. This way the lazy
programmer can still name all the DSOs which might be
needed at all times. The linker does all the hard work.

This process should not be executed mindlessly, though.
Not having the DSO on the direct dependency list any-
more means the symbol lookup path is altered. If the
DSO in question contains a definition of a symbol which
also appears in a second DSO and now that second DSO
is earlier in the lookup path, the program’s semantics
might be altered. This is a rare occurrence, though.
