
Chapter 2. RVY Base Capability Instruction Set, Version 1.0
This chapter introduces a new set of base ISAs called RVY that extend the RV32[IE]/RV64[IE] base ISAs
with CHERI.

The RVY base ISA can be composed with other standard options to bases such as Zfinx.

2.1. CHERI Overview
CHERI enhances the base ISA by adding hardware memory access control. It has an additional memory
access mechanism that protects references to code and data (pointers), rather than the location of code and
data (integer addresses). This mechanism is implemented by providing a new primitive, called a capability,
that software components can use to implement strongly protected pointers within an address space.
Capabilities are unforgeable and delegatable tokens of authority that grant software the ability to perform a
specific set of operations. In CHERI, integer-based pointers are replaced by capabilities to provide memory
access control.

Every RVY base ISA requires a capability encoding format to complete the specification, such as RV64LYA.
The capability encoding format gives full details of how CHERI capabilities are represented in memory and
in registers, and specifies the exact properties such as bounds precision and available combinations of
permissions.

For example, in RV64LYA:

 1. XLEN=64
 2. L denotes a parameterized base.
 3. Y denotes a CHERI base.
 4. A denotes the capability encoding format.

                  This naming scheme is based on the RISC-V "longer base name" proposal, which allows base
                 ISA names longer than two characters.

                  Future RV64 CHERI capability encoding formats could be named RV64LYB, RV64LYC, and so
                 on, or they may have more descriptive names after the RV64LY prefix.

Also see capability encoding format.

2.2. CHERI protection model
The CHERI model is motivated by the principle of least privilege, which argues that greater security can be
obtained by minimizing the privileges accessible to running software. A second guiding principle is the
principle of intentional use, which argues that, where many privileges are available to a piece of software, the
privilege to use should be explicitly named rather than implicitly selected. While CHERI does not prevent
the expression of vulnerable software designs, it provides strong vulnerability mitigation: attackers have a
more limited vocabulary for attacks, and should a vulnerability be successfully exploited, they gain fewer
rights, and have reduced access to further attack surfaces.

Protection properties for capabilities include the ISA ensuring that capabilities are always derived via valid
manipulations of other capabilities (provenance), that corrupted1 in-memory capabilities cannot be
dereferenced (integrity), and that derived capabilities must not grant permissions or bounds that exceed
those of their source capabilities (monotonicity). Tampering or modifying capabilities in an attempt to
elevate their rights will yield an invalid capability. Attempting to dereference via an invalid capability will

result in raising an exception.
1
    Not all possible corrupted states are detected, see Section 2.5, “Integrity of Capabilities”.

CHERI capabilities may be held in registers or memory, and are loaded, stored, and dereferenced using
CHERI-aware instructions that expect capability operands rather than integer addresses. On system
initialization, initial capabilities are made available to software by the execution environment via general
purpose registers. All other capabilities will be derived from these initial valid capabilities through valid
capability transformations.

Developers can use CHERI to build fine-grained spatial and temporal memory protection into their system
software and applications and significantly improve their security.

2.3. Capability Registers and Format
RVY widens all registers that can hold addresses (including the general-purpose registers, pc, and address-
holding CSRs) from XLEN to 2*XLEN bits (hereafter referred to as YLEN), adding metadata to protect their
integrity, limit how they are manipulated, and control their use. In addition to widening to YLEN, each
register also gains a one-bit capability tag which is defined below.

RVY specifies the minimum required fields that the capability encoding format must support, and their
semantics. This version of RVY defines only little-endian capability memory layouts. The memory
representation of capabilities is always 2*XLEN (YLEN) bits wide and holds the address in the lower XLEN bits
of memory and the metadata in the upper XLEN bits.

RVY is designed to be highly extensible by allowing different capability encoding formats to exist. Specific
capability encoding formats may support different ISA extensions and add new architectural permissions.

            XLEN-1                                                                                                         0

      CT                                      Metadata (bounds, permissions, etc.)

                                                             Address

                                                              XLEN

                                          Figure 1. CHERI Capability structure

2.3.1. Address

The lower XLEN bits of a capability encode the address to which the capability points. This is also referred
to as the integer part of the capability. When an instruction writes non-capability data to an extended
register, the metadata fields and capability tag of the destination are set to zero unless that instruction’s
definition explicitly states otherwise.

2.3.2. Capability Tag

The capability tag is a single additional bit associated with YLEN-bit memory locations and YLEN-bit
registers. It is stored separately (i.e., is out-of-band or hidden), and is hardware managed. It indicates whether
a YLEN-bit register or YLEN-aligned memory location contains a valid capability. If the capability tag is
set, the capability is valid and may authorize operations, subject to type, permission, bounds, and integrity
checks.

All registers or memory locations able to hold a valid capability are YLEN bits wide and have an associated
capability tag. These are referred to as being YLEN-bit in this specification.

Not all memory in a real system will support capability tags. The Execution Environment Interface (EEI)
will define what regions of the address space support them.

The capability tag cannot be directly set by software; it is not a conventionally accessible bit of state. If the
capability tag is set then it shows that the capability has been derived correctly according to the principles
listed above (provenance, integrity, monotonicity). If the rules are followed then the capability tag will
propagate through the instructions that modify, load or store the capability.

Therefore, whenever an instruction writes a capability with the capability tag set to a register or to memory:

 ⚫ At least one capability tag must have been set in the input operands.
      ⚫ This is the provenance check.
 ⚫ The requested operation must have been legal and not increase bounds or permissions.
      ⚫ This is the monotonicity check.
 ⚫ The instruction may have checked that none of the input capabilities were corrupted.
      ⚫ This is the integrity check. Not all instructions check all input operands for integrity.

Capability load/store require the provenance check:

 ⚫ Any store that wrote the capability to memory was correctly authorized.
 ⚫ Any load that read the capability from memory was correctly authorized.

When an operation fails a check, either due to software error or malicious intent, the operation raises an
exception or sets the resulting capability tag to zero, as defined by each instruction.

For a capability to be valid, the capability tag must be set, otherwise a capability is invalid.

Using an invalid capability to dereference memory or authorize any operation raises an exception. All
capabilities derived from invalid capabilities are themselves invalid, i.e., their capability tags are zero.

                  Writing non-capability data into a register or memory location causes the capability tag to be
                 set to 0. When the capability tag associated with the memory location is zero, the location
                  contains non-capability data.

2.3.3. Capability tags in registers

Every YLEN-bit register has a one-bit capability tag, indicating whether the capability in the register is
valid to be dereferenced. This capability tag is set to 0 whenever an invalid capability operation is
performed. Examples of such invalid operations include writing only the integer portion (the address field)
of the register or attempting to increase bounds or permissions.

2.3.4. Capability tags in memory

Capability tags are tracked through the memory subsystem: every aligned YLEN-bit wide region has a non-
addressable one-bit capability tag, which the hardware manages atomically with the data. The
implementation must set the capability tag to zero if any byte in the YLEN/8 aligned memory region is
ever written using an operation other than a store of a capability operand. For example, the SY instruction
sets the capability tag to one if all the instruction’s prerequisites are met, including rs2 's capability tag
being set to one, but SW will always set the stored capability tag to zero.

                All system memory and caches that store capabilities must preserve this abstraction, handling
               the capability tags atomically with the data.

2.3.5. Capability Bounds

Capabilities encode memory bounds as a half-open byte range [base, top), which is the range that may be
accessed when the capability authorizes data memory access or instruction execution.

Checking is on a byte-by-byte basis, so that it is possible for a memory access to be fully in-bounds,
partially out-of-bounds or fully out-of-bounds.

A partially or fully out-of-bounds data access or instruction fetch raises an exception.

Every capability has two memory address bounds: base representing the lowest accessible byte, and top
representing one byte above the highest accessible byte.

 ⚫ The base is XLEN bits and is inclusive.
 ⚫ The top is (XLEN+1) bits and is exclusive.

                    Inclusive top, with XLEN bits, was considered but rejected in favor of the exclusive top
                    (with an additional bit to allow covering the entire address space). Using exclusive top
                   allows representing a zero-length capability starting at address zero, which is not possible
                    with inclusive top unless you introduce a special value for -1.

 ⚫ The length is (XLEN+1) bits and is defined to be top - base.

Therefore, a memory location A in the range base ≤ A < top is within bounds, and so valid to access.

                Checking every byte of every executed instruction and every byte of every data memory access
                is fundamental to the memory safety which CHERI provides. In a typical load/store unit, the
               expansion of the bounds from rs1 and bounds checking is in parallel with the address
                calculation, the memory translation and/or the PMA/PMP checking.

A compressed format is used to encode the bounds with a scheme similar to floating-point using an
exponent and a mantissa. Therefore, small exponents can allow byte granularity on the bounds, but larger
exponents give coarser granularity. One bounds encoding format based upon (Woodruff et al., 2019) is
defined in Section 3.1.5.

                Future CHERI bases may use encoding formats with different bounds encoding schemes (see
               capability encoding format).

Software can query the bounds of a capability held in a general-purpose register using the following
instructions:

 ⚫ The base is returned by the YBASER instruction.
 ⚫ The length is returned by the YLENR instruction.
 ⚫ The top is returned by the YTOPR instruction.

                The length and top are (XLEN+1)-bit values, so YLENR and YTOPR saturate their result to the
               maximum XLEN-bit value (2XLEN-1) when it overflows an XLEN-bit register.

2.3.6. Deriving New Bounds

On system initialization, one or more Root capabilities are available. All capabilities with smaller bounds
are derived from these.

The bounds are reduced using the YBNDSW, YBNDSWI and YBNDSRW instructions.

They all copy rs1 to the output rd, set the base bound address of rd to rs1.address, subject to encoding
granularity constraints, and set the length of rd from rs2 or the immediate field depending on the
instruction.

 ⚫ YBNDSW sets the base to rs1.address, and the length to rs2.
      ⚫ The capability tag is set to zero if the bounds cannot be encoded exactly.
 ⚫ YBNDSWI sets the base to rs1.address, and the length to the immediate value.
      ⚫ The capability tag is set to zero if the bounds cannot be encoded exactly.
 ⚫ YBNDSRW sets the base to rs1.address, and the length to rs2.
      ⚫ If the requested bounds cannot be encoded exactly, the result uses the smallest representable
        bounds that contain the requested range and remain within the initial bounds.
 ⚫ YAMASK can be used to calculate the nearest precisely encodable length and base values for a given
   size.

The bounds are encoded relative to the address field, sharing some upper bits of the address. The number
of shared bits depends on the exponent, see Section 3.1.5.

2.3.7. Representability and Updating the Address

Software sometimes uses out-of-bounds pointers, for example, to represent a one-past-the-end pointer to
an array in C (arr + size). To support this pattern, CHERI must allow these out-of-bounds pointers to be
held in capabilities while still protecting the bounds and integrity. Because the CHERI Concentrate
(Woodruff et al., 2019) encoding scheme for memory bounds shares the upper bits of the address with the
bounds, only a limited range of out-of-bounds pointers can be represented for any given set of bounds. This
range is known as the representable range. The relationship between the bounds and the representable
range is illustrated in Figure 2.

                  The C standard permits forming a one-past-the-end pointer (but no more than one), as long as
                  it is not dereferenced. Real-world software has been observed to temporarily create pointers
                 that point multiple bytes past the end or even before the start. To maximize software
                  compatibility, the bounds representation was designed to allow for out-of-bounds pointers.

               Figure 2. Memory address bounds and representable range encoded within a capability

The maximum range of address values that the pointer can take without changing the calculation of the
bounds is defined by the representable range.

                The historic, uncompressed 64-bit CHERI-MIPS CPU had a 256-bit capability encoding with
               separate 64-bit values for the base and top memory bounds, and another for metadata fields.
                This scheme could represent all out-of-bounds pointers with a very high hardware cost.

Since the upper bits of the address are used to calculate the top and base bound addresses, deriving a new
capability with a different address could change the resulting bounds. All instructions that derive a
capability with a new address must check that the new address does not change the bounds. If the bounds
do change then the capability tag of the derived capability is set to zero, so that the capability becomes
invalid.

Software can derive a capability with a new address using instructions such as YADDRW, YADD and
YADDI.

                YADDRW writes back a derived capability with a new address field and, if the capability tag
               was previously set, sets the capability tag of the derived capability to one if the resulting
                capability still has the same bounds.

                RVY implementations that use a different encoding scheme to RV64LYA (e.g., for accelerators
                or specific micro-controllers) may specify an alternative to the representable range check, and
               may never allow the address to be out of bounds. Therefore, the ISA specification uses the
                phrase represented exactly for this check.

2.3.8. Memory space

A hart supporting RVY has a single byte-addressable address space of 2XLEN bytes for all memory accesses.
Each memory region capable of holding a capability also stores a capability tag for each naturally aligned
YLEN bits (e.g., 16 bytes in RV64), so that capabilities with their capability tag set can only be stored in
naturally aligned addresses. Capability tags must be atomically bound to the data they protect.

Address arithmetic is modulo 2XLEN, so the byte at address 2XLEN - 1 is adjacent to the byte at address zero. A
capability’s Representable Range is also circular, so address 0 is within the Representable Range of a

capability where address 2XLEN - 1 is within the bounds.

However, the decoded top bound address of a capability is XLEN + 1 bits wide and does not wrap. For
example, a hypothetical capability with base 2XLEN - 1 and top 2XLEN + 1 is not a subset of the infinite
capability and authorizes access to the last byte of the address space only, and does not authorize access to
the byte at address 0.

Like malformed bounds (see Section 3.1.5.6), it is impossible for a CHERI core to generate a valid capability
with architectural top > 2XLEN.

If such a capability exists then it must have been caused by a logic or memory fault. Unlike malformed
bounds, the top overflowing is not treated as a special case in the architecture: normal bounds check rules
should be followed.

2.3.9. Capability Type (CT)

This metadata value indicates the type of the capability and determines which operations the capability
authorizes. For example, the CT-field can be used to seal capabilities against modification, to provide
control flow integrity, and to provide immutable software tokens.

Unsealed capabilities
   When CT=0, the capability authorizes access to a region of memory as defined by the permissions and
   bounds.

Sealed capabilities
   Capabilities with CT≠0 are sealed against modification and cannot be dereferenced to access memory.
   Instructions that operate on capabilities will produce a result with the capability tag set to zero if the
   source capability is sealed and the operation would alter its address, bounds, or permissions.

Sealing
   Given a capability with CT=0, deriving a capability with CT≠0 is termed sealing. This is achieved using
   YSENTRY.

Unsealing
   Given a capability with CT≠0, deriving a capability with CT=0 is termed unsealing. This is achieved using
   YSUNSEAL.

Sealed entry point capability
   Sealed entry point capabilities provide immutable function pointers within a CHERI software system.

                  Such function pointers are sometimes known as "sentries", a contraction of "sealed entries".

They can establish a form of control-flow integrity between mutually distrusting code. Because they are
immutable, the jump target cannot be modified, ensuring that control flow can only enter at the specific
address encoded in the capability and not elsewhere in a function.

A sealed entry point capability may be passed as the rs1 argument to JALR (RVY), and is unsealed on
dereference. If rd is not x0, the link capability written to rd is also written as a Sealed entry point capability.

                   In addition to using sealed capabilities for sealed entry points, sealed capabilities can also be
                  useful to software as secure software tokens. YSUNSEAL can be used to convert such a token
                   back to an unsealed capability.

The standard capability type mapping is shown in Table 4, extensions and capability encoding formats

may add more types.

                                     Table 4. Standard capability type mapping
Type Name                        Integer Value    Description
Unsealed                         0                Unsealed capability granting access to memory
Sealed entry point capability    1                Sealed capability that can be used as a function entry point or
                                                  function return.

                 Future extensions and capability encoding formats may declare new CT-field values, examples
                 of which are:

                 ⚫ Sealed types which cannot be used as a Sealed entry point capability
                  ⚫ Sealed entry point capability types which can be only used for function calls or for function
                    returns for improved CFI.

2.3.10. Architectural Permissions (AP)

This metadata field encodes architecturally defined permissions of the capability. Permissions grant access
subject to the capability tag being set, the capability being unsealed, and bounds checks passing.

                 Any memory operation is also contingent on requirements imposed by other RISC-V
                architectural features, such as virtual memory, PMP and PMAs, even if the capability grants
                 sufficient permissions.

The permissions defined in RVY are listed in Table 5. All capability encoding formats must support at least
this set of permissions. Extensions building on top of RVY may define additional permissions.

                An example of such an extension is Zylevels1.

Permissions can be cleared when deriving a new capability value (using YPERMC) but they can never be
added.

                                             Table 5. AP-field summary
Permission                Type                     Comment
R-permission              Data memory              Authorize data memory read access
                          permission
W-permission              Data memory              Authorize data memory write access
                          permission
X-permission              Instruction memory       Authorize instruction memory execute access
                          permission
C-permission              Data memory              Authorize loading/storing of capability tags
                          permission
LM-permission             Data memory              Used to restrict the permissions of loaded capabilities.
                          permission
ASR-permission            Privileged state         Authorize privileged instructions and CSR accesses.
                          permission

Read Permission (R)
   Allow reading data from memory.

Write Permission (W)
   Allow writing data to memory.

Execute Permission (X)
   Allow instruction execution.

Capability Permission (C)
   Allow reading capability tags from memory if R-permission is also granted.

   Allow writing capability tags to memory if W-permission is also granted.

   If C-permission is missing then the capability tags for capability loads and stores are read and written as
   zero.

Load Mutable Permission (LM)
   Allow preserving the W-permission of capabilities loaded from memory. If a capability grants R-
   permission and C-permission, but no LM-permission, then a capability loaded via this authorizing
   capability will have W-permission and LM-permission removed.

   The permission stripping behavior only applies to loaded capabilities with their capability tag set and
   that are not sealed after all other checks. This ensures that capability loads of non-capability data do not
   modify the loaded value, and that sealed capabilities are not modified.

                  Clearing a capability’s LM-permission and W-permission allows sharing a read-only version
                  of a data structure without making a copy. For example, if software removes LM-permission
                 from a capability to a linked list, any pointers loaded through that capability will automatically
                  lose their W-permission, preventing modification of the list content.

Access System Registers Permission (ASR, primarily used to authorize CSR accesses)
   Allow read and write access to all privileged CSRs and some unprivileged CSRs, and the execution of
   some privileged instructions. ASR-permission checks always use the permission in the pc.

In the unprivileged RVY ISA, the following are affected by ASR-permission:

 ⚫ Thread ID CSRs: The utidc CSR requires ASR-permission for writing but not for reading.
 ⚫ Instructions: CBO.INVAL (RVY) requires ASR-permission in the pc.

In the privileged RVY ISA, the following are affected by ASR-permission:

 ⚫ Instructions: MRET (RVY), SRET (RVY) require ASR-permission in the pc.
 ⚫ CSRs: The privileged xtidc CSRs require ASR-permission for writing, but not for reading (if access is
   permitted in the current privilege mode). All other privileged CSRs require ASR-permission in the pc
   for any access.

                  This permission is important in privileged execution environments. Removing this permission
                 allows constraining privileged software to a sandbox that cannot be subverted by changing
                  privileged state.

                 Extensions may add additional unprivileged CSRs that require ASR-permission.

2.3.10.1. Permission Transitions

Not all capability permissions are orthogonal as some permissions inherently depend on others. As such,

using YPERMC to clear some permissions may have the effect of clearing others as well.

For the base set of permissions just defined, the rules in Table 6 apply.

                                            Table 6. YPERMC base rules
YPERMC Rule                  Permission                    Valid only if
base-1                       C-permission                  R-permission or W-permission
base-2                       LM-permission                 C-permission and R-permission
base-3                       ASR-permission                X-permission

               These rules enforce sensible permission combinations.

Extensions that define new permission bits may also introduce new dependency constraints. Currently
defined examples are:

 1. Zyhybrid, see Table 50
 2. Zylevels1, see Section 13.3.1

Capability encoding formats may impose additional constraints to reduce the number of bits necessary to
represent permissions.

2.3.11. Software-Defined Permissions (SDP)

The metadata also contains an encoding-dependent number of software-defined permission (SDP) bits.
They can be inspected by the kernel or application programs to enforce restrictions on API calls (e.g.,
permit/deny system calls, memory allocation, etc.). They can be cleared by YPERMC but are not
interpreted by the CPU otherwise.

While these bits are not used by the hardware as architectural permissions, modification follows the same
rules: SDP bits can only be cleared and never set on valid capabilities.

                This property is required to ensure restricted programs cannot forge capabilities that would
               pass the software-enforced checks.

               Software is completely free to define the usage of these bits.

2.3.12. Special Capabilities

Root Capabilities
   Root capabilities are those provided by the system on initialization. In some capability encoding formats
   there is a single Infinite capability value, which grants all permissions and has bounds covering the
   whole 2XLEN address space; in such systems, root capabilities are often Infinite.

   Other capability encoding formats may have a set of root capabilities distinguishing between data and
   executable capabilities as shown below.

   At system initialization the set of all root capabilities must be made available to software.

                    Implementations are not required to provide access to the entire address space to a single
                   hart, the root capabilities may be restricted to only cover a subset of the entire address
                    space, or to remove certain permissions.

Root Executable Capability
   An unsealed capability that has bounds nominally covering all addresses and grants at least all of X-
   permission, R-permission, C-permission, LM-permission, and ASR-permission. Extensions introducing
   new permissions may require these to be provided by root executable capabilities.

Root Data Capability
   An unsealed capability that has bounds nominally covering all addresses and grants at least all of R-
   permission, W-permission, C-permission, and LM-permission. Extensions introducing new permissions
   may require these to be provided by root data capabilities.

NULL Capability
   A capability with all-zero metadata, a zero capability tag, and an address of zero is referred to as the
   NULL capability. This capability grants no permissions and any dereference results in raising an
   exception.

2.4. Capability encoding formats
CHERI implementations make trade-offs in their "capability encoding formats", such as the precision of
bounds and the expressible set of combinations of permissions, that impact certain behaviors of the ISA.
The definition of all CHERI base ISAs includes sufficient details of a capability encoding format to
precisely define the execution behavior of all base ISA instructions.

Whilst RV64Y has enough bits in the encoding format to prevent such trade-offs in general, the concepts
are introduced here and RV32Y formats will make extensive use of them.

The name RVY refers generically to CHERI base ISAs, which share common semantics but may have
different metadata encodings. The RVY name on its own does not describe the complete base ISAs, but
defines all the semantics of a RVY machine, where certain behavioral parameters must be filled in by the
capability encoding. For example, the YBNDSRW instruction yields a capability with new bounds that are
rounded differently depending on the number of bits allocated to the bounds in the capability encoding
format. Systems with XLEN=64 can allocate more bits towards the mantissa of the bounds than XLEN=32
system and therefore have a larger Representable Range.

                  These observable differences in behavior are similar to floating point numbers where the
                 supported operations and their semantics are the same for all formats, but the exact result
                  depends on the representation (e.g., 16/32/64-bit IEEE-754 or other floating point formats).

It is possible to generate code for RVY that is compatible with all valid capability encoding formats.
However, to allow compilers and/or software library authors to make assumptions about encoding-
dependent properties such as bounds precisions, each capability encoding format comes with a set of
standard parameters.

Each capability encoding format also declares a new base ISA.

The documentation for each capability encoding format specifies at least the parameters in Table 7 below
where the default is not used.

                 The default settings all match RV64LYA.

                                     Table 7. RVY capability encoding format parameters
Parameter          Legal values       Default Value   Comment
Parameters used for the bounds encoding (see Section 3.1.5)
MW                 integer values     14              Mantissa width for the bounds encoding

Parameter        Legal values     Default Value   Comment
EW               integer values   6               Exponent width for the bounds encoding
CAP_MAX_E        integer values   52              Maximum exponent value
enableL8         0/1              0               Whether the encoding format includes the L8 bit
Parameters used for permissions encoding in the AP-field
AP_MAX           integer values   all ones        Value of the AP-field giving maximum permissions
AP_ENC           full<suffix>/    full1           Encoding scheme for the AP-field
                 part<suffix>
Other parameters
AUIPC_SHIFT integer values        12              Shift distance of the immediate in AUIPC
            up to 12
REP_RANGE        rc1/r0           rc1             Whether out of bounds addresses are representable

Two parameters use non-numeric values:

AP_ENC
   Whether permissions in the AP-field are encoded using a full (full) representation allowing all valid
   combinations of permissions, or a partial (part) representation which does not represent all possible
   combinations and so uses fewer encoding bits.

REP_RANGE
   Whether the capability encoding format guarantees representability of out-of-bounds capability values:
   rc1, where the encoding uses one additional bit and a centered out-of-bounds region, or r0, where no
   bits are used for out-of-bounds capabilities and there is no guaranteed representable range for out-of-
   bounds addresses.

                For RV64Y, the number of spare bits in the capability encoding ensures sufficient future
                extensibility and therefore few custom formats are expected to exist. RV32Y, however, has
               insufficient bits available to enable features for all target domains, so multiple RV32Y-
                extending capability encoding formats will exist.

2.5. Integrity of Capabilities
CHERI defines the following integrity check rules:

 1. The bounds are not malformed.
 2. The capability metadata does not have any bits, or fields, set to a reserved value.

                An example of a reserved field value is an illegal set of permissions such as ASR-permission
               without X-permission.

If any of the above rules do not hold for a capability with the capability tag set, it indicates either:

 ⚫ State corruption due to memory or logic faults, or
 ⚫ The presence of incompatible or faulty CHERI IP within the system.

                These checks are much less rigorous than parity or ECC protection, and are only used to detect
               simple problems with the capability metadata.

Instructions that are defined to accept arbitrary input bit patterns, and can write an output with the

capability tag set, must perform an integrity check on the input capability if its capability tag is set to zero.

                       In the RVY ISA this only affects YBLD.

All other integrity checks are optional as a valid capability can always be assumed to satisfy these integrity
rules, because it could only have been produced by a valid derivation. Consequently, an integrity check
should only change the result of an operation when it is performed on an invalid input capability (i.e.
whose capability tag is zero).

Therefore, unless stated otherwise, all integrity checks in this specification are optional.

                        Implementations may choose to enforce optional integrity checks for a number of reasons:

                            1. Instruction level verification is simpler as the behavior is precisely specified for all 2(YLEN+1)
                               input values.
                           2. To give more resilience in systems which mix CHERI IPs from different sources due to
                               possible incompatibilities.
                            3. If the hart implements additional reliability features, it may wish to detect and report
                               capabilities which lack integrity.

2.6. Extended State
As stated above, unless noted otherwise, state which can hold addresses is extended from XLEN to YLEN
bits.

                       The privileged mconfigptr CSR is the only documented exception to the rule.

                       A reminder that all YLEN state also has a hardware managed capability tag.

2.6.1. General Purpose Registers

The XLEN-wide integer registers (e.g., x1, x2) are all widened to YLEN bits, each gaining an associated
capability tag, as shown in Figure 3.
 YLEN   2*XLEN-1 (YLEN-1)                                                XLEN XLEN-1                                                0

   0                                                   x0 (all bits including capability tag zero)

  CT                                 x1 (metadata)                                                     x1

                                                             Same layout for x2-x30

  CT                                x31 (metadata)                                                    x31

  CT                                 pc (metadata)                                                     pc

 CTag                                  Metadata                                                      Address

                                                     Figure 3. Extended registers in RVY

The zero register (x0) is extended with zero metadata and a zero capability tag: this is called the NULL
capability.

2.6.2. The Program Counter Capability (pc)

The pc is widened to a capability. Widening the pc allows the range of branches, jumps and linear

execution for currently executing code to be restricted. The pc address field is the pc in the base RISC-V
ISA so that the hardware automatically updates it as instructions are executed.

The hardware performs the following checks on pc for each instruction executed in addition to the checks
already required by the base RISC-V ISA. A failing check raises a CHERI exception.

 ⚫ The capability tag must be set to one.
 ⚫ The capability must not be sealed.
 ⚫ The capability must grant X-permission.
 ⚫ All bytes of the instruction must be in bounds.
 ⚫ All integrity checks must have passed.

On system initialization the pc bounds and permissions must be set such that the program can run
successfully (e.g., by setting it to a Root Executable capability to ensure all instructions are in bounds).

                 Future ISA extensions should respect these rules so that the checked bits do not need to be
                stored in all copies of the pc in the implementation.
            XLEN-1                                                                                                0
       CT                                             pc (Metadata, WARL)
                                                       pc (Address, WARL)
                                                             XLEN

                                        Figure 4. Program Counter Capability

2.6.3. Added CSRs

RVY adds the YLEN-bit CSR shown in Table 8.

                                       Table 8. Capability CSRs added in RVY
         YLEN CSR     Permissions                                                 Description
         utidc        RW, ASR-permission required for writes, not reads           User Thread ID Capability

2.6.3.1. User Thread Identifier Capability (utidc)

The utidc register is an unprivileged CSR used to identify the current software thread. Any operation that
modifies utidc raises an exception unless the ASR-permission is set in the current pc.

The EEI sets the value of the capability tag of this CSR to zero, and the values of the metadata and address
fields are UNSPECIFIED.
            XLEN-1                                                                                                0
       CT                                               utidc (Metadata)
                                                         utidc (Address)
                                                             XLEN

                                  Figure 5. User thread identifier capability register

                 Each thread (as scheduled by the kernel) can have its own context stored in privileged data
                 structures managed by the compartmentalization TCB, for example a stack of user-level
                 compartment entries and exits. utidc allows compartment-switching code to determine the
                currently running thread without a call into the operating system. This is read-only without
                 ASR-permission to prevent a malicious compartment from tricking the switching mechanism
                 into accessing data corresponding to the wrong thread. While the RISC-V ABI includes a
                 thread pointer (tp) register, it is not usable for the purpose of reliably identifying the current

                  software thread because the tp register is a general purpose register and can be changed
                  arbitrarily by untrusted code. Extending utidc to a capability allows a data structure to be
                  shared (guarded by e.g., the subset sealing mechanism), which allows for example efficient
                  recovery of a trusted stack, without requiring additional indirection.

2.6.4. CSR Classes

All CSRs that can hold addresses are widened to YLEN bits.

RVY has three classes of CSRs:

XLEN-bit CSRs
   These do not contain pointers (e.g., fcsr from the "F" extension).

Extended CSRs
   These are XLEN-bit CSRs widened to YLEN bits, which are able to contain pointers (e.g., mtvec from the
   privileged specification).

YLEN-bit CSRs
   These are added by RVY and contain pointers (e.g., utidc).

When accessing CSRs these rules are followed:

 1. Accesses to XLEN-bit CSRs are as specified by Zicsr
 2. Accesses to YLEN-bit CSRs and extended CSRs, using CSRRW will:
      a. Read YLEN bits
      b. Write YLEN bits, and will write the capability tag to zero if the written value fails any of the checks
         in Section 2.5, “Integrity of Capabilities”
 3. Accesses to YLEN-bit CSRs and extended CSRs, using instructions other than CSRRW will:
      a. Read YLEN bits
      b. For CSRRS/CSRRC, compute the XLEN-bit address-field value using the standard Zicsr bitwise set
         or clear operation on the old CSR address field and the XLEN source operand.
      c. For immediate forms, compute the XLEN-bit address-field value using the standard Zicsr operation
         with the zero-extended uimm operand.
     d. Write the computed XLEN-bit value to the address field, and use the semantics of the YADDRW
        instruction to determine the final written value

                  Any YLEN-bit or extended CSR may have additional rules defined to determine the final
                 written value of the metadata and/or to write zero to the capability tag.

The assembler pseudoinstruction to read a capability CSR csrr rd, csr, is encoded as csrrs rd, csr,
x0.

                            Table 9. YLEN-bit CSR and Extended CSR access summary for RVY
Instruction                               Read Width                         Write Width
CSRRW rd==x0                                                                 YLEN
CSRRW rd!=x0                              YLEN                               YLEN
CSRR[C|S] rs1==x0                         YLEN

Instruction                              Read Width                             Write Width
CSRR[C|S] rs1!=x0                        YLEN                                   XLEN
CSRRWI rd==x0                                                                   XLEN
CSRRWI rd!=x0                            YLEN                                   XLEN
CSRR[C|S]I uimm==0                       YLEN
CSRR[C|S]I uimm!=0                       YLEN                                   XLEN

In Table 9, when there is no read or write width shown, the CSR access is not made and there are no side-
effects following standard Zicsr rules.

2.7. Capability checks
Every memory access must be authorized by a valid capability.

Instruction fetches and data memory accesses raise an exception if the access is out of bounds, or if the
authorizing capability is missing the required permissions:

 ⚫ All load instructions require R-permission and are authorized by the capability in rs1
 ⚫ All store instructions require W-permission and are authorized by the capability in rs1
 ⚫ All instruction fetches require X-permission in pc

Instruction fetches are authorized by the program counter capability (pc) which extends the pc.

                   This allows code fetch to be bounded, preventing a wide range of attacks that subvert control
                  flow with non-capability data.

E.g., lw t0, 16(sp) loads a word from memory, getting the address, bounds, and permissions from the sp
(capability stack pointer) register.

2.8. Added Instructions
RVY adds new instructions to operate on capabilities, and redefines part of the RVI/RVE custom encoding
space for this purpose. For harts implementing RVY, these opcode spaces are not available for vendor
custom instructions except where this specification explicitly returns subspaces to custom use.

 1. The RVI custom-3 space is renamed to RVY-A and is used for standard RVY encodings.
 2. The RVI custom-2 space is renamed to RVY-B and is used for standard RVY encodings.
 3. The RVI custom-1 space is renamed to RVY-C and is used for standard RVY encodings.
 4. The RVI custom-0 space is still available for custom encodings.

                                Table 10. RISC-V base opcode map for RVY, inst[1:0]=11
   inst[4:2]
                     000         001            010         011          100        101          110          111 (>32b)
   inst[6:5]

              00    LOAD      LOAD-FP      custom-0      MISC-MEM      OP-IMM     AUIPC      OP-IMM-32         reserved
              01    STORE     STORE-FP       RVY-C          AMO          OP         LUI         OP-32          reserved
              10    MADD        MSUB         NMSUB        NMADD        OP-FP       OP-V         RVY-B          reserved
              11   BRANCH       JALR       reserved         JAL        SYSTEM     OP-VE         RVY-A          reserved

                 Standard RVY encodings will never be placed in custom-0.

                 Parts of RVY-A/B/C may be returned to custom space in the future.

2.8.1. Instructions to Update The Capability Pointer

Creating a new capability with a different address (i.e., updating the pointer) requires specific instructions
instead of integer ADD/ADDI. These instructions all include a check that the resulting address can be
represented exactly within the new capability.

                           Table 11. Instructions which update the address field summary in RVY
Mnemonic                   Description
YADDI                      Capability pointer increment by immediate
YADD                       Capability pointer increment
YADDRW                     Write capability address

2.8.1.1. YADD, YADDI

Synopsis
   Capability pointer increment

Mnemonics
   YADD rd, rs1, rs2
   YADDI rd, rs1, imm

Encoding

 31                      25 24               20 19              15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                  rs2≠0               rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
           7                         5                 5               3               5                     7
      YADD=0000011               increment            src          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

 31                                          20 19              15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
                   imm[11:0]                          rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
                       12                              5               3               5                     7
                      imm                             src          YADDI=100          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

                  YMV uses the reserved encoding of YADD where rs2=0.

Description
   Copy the capability in register rs1 to register rd.

   For YADD, increment rd.address by the value in rs2[XLEN-1:0].
   For YADDI, increment rd.address by the sign-extended immediate value imm.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 is sealed.

   Set rd.tag=0 if the resulting capability cannot be represented exactly.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 fails any integrity checks.

Operation for YADD

          let cs1_val = C(cs1);
          let rs2_val = X(rs2);

          let newCap = incCapAddrChecked(cs1_val, rs2_val);

          C(cd) = newCap;
          RETIRE_SUCCESS

Operation for YADDI

          let cs1_val = C(cs1);

         let immBits : xlenbits = sign_extend(imm);

         let newCap = incCapAddrChecked(cs1_val, immBits);

         C(cd) = newCap;
         RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.1.2. YADDRW

Synopsis
  Write capability address

Mnemonic
  YADDRW rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

31                       25 24             20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                   rs2                rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
           7                        5                  5               3               5                     7
     YADDRW=0001011              address              src          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
  Copy the capability rs1 to rd.

  Set rd.address to rs2[XLEN-1:0].

  Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 is sealed.

  Set rd.tag=0 if the resulting capability cannot be represented exactly.

  Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 fails any integrity checks.

Operation

      C(cd) = setCapAddrChecked(C(cs1), X(rs2));
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2. Instructions to Manipulate Capabilities

For security, capabilities can only be modified in restricted ways. Special instructions are provided to copy
capabilities or derive a new capability using manipulations such as shrinking the bounds (YBNDSW),
reducing the permissions (YPERMC) or authorizing a capability with another one which has a superset (or
identical) bounds and permissions (YBLD).

Capability subset
      Some instructions use the concept of cap2 being a capability subset of cap1. The definition is:

       1. All permissions granted by the AP-field and the SDP-field of cap2 are also granted by those of cap1,
          and
       2. cap2 's top bound address is less than or equal to cap1 's top bound address, and
       3. cap2 's base bound address is greater than or equal to cap1 's base bound address, and
       4. cap1 and cap2 pass all integrity checks

                  A capability whose capability tag is set is assumed to satisfy the integrity checks, so this rule
                  can only affect the result for an operand whose capability tag is zero. Among the instructions
                 that use the subset relation, this is only material for the rs2 operand of YBLD (which can set a
                  capability tag on an arbitrary bit pattern) and for YSS (which can compare operands whose
                  capability tags are zero).

                          Table 12. Summary of RVY instructions that create a modified capability
    Mnemonic              Description
    YPERMC                Clear capability permissions
    YMV                   Capability register copy
           1
    YHIW                  Write capability metadata and clear capability tag (pseudo)
    YBNDSWI               Write capability bounds by immediate
    YBNDSW                Write capability bounds
    YBNDSRW               Write capability bounds, rounding up if required
    YSUNSEAL              Unseal by superset reconstruction
    YBLD                  Build capability
    YSENTRY               Create a sealed entry point capability

1
    YHIW is a pseudoinstruction for PACKY

2.8.2.1. YPERMC

Synopsis
   Clear capability permissions

Mnemonic
   YPERMC rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                       25 24                20 19                         15 14        12 11                 7       6                         0
           funct7                   rs2                          rs1               funct3             rd                             opcode
            7                       5                              5                  3              5                                7
      YPERMC=0010011               mask                           src             RVY-R=000         dest                        RVY-A=1111011

                   The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   YPERMC performs the following operations:

      1. Convert the AP-field and SDP-field fields of capability rs1 into a bit field with the format shown in
         Figure 6.
      2. The initial value in register rs2[XLEN-1:0] is treated as a bit mask that specifies bit positions to be
         cleared in the bit field. Any bit that is high in rs2 will cause the corresponding bit to be cleared in
         the bit field.

                            Future extensions may include hardwired permission bits, in which case they are not
                           cleared by set bits in rs2.

      3. Encode the resulting architectural permissions as specified by the capability encoding format in
         use. This involves applying the rules in Section 2.3.10.1, as well as any rules added by extensions or
         the capability encoding format.
          a. If the capability encoding format does not support the requested set of permissions then
             YPERMC will return a minimal set of permissions, which may be no permissions. Therefore, it
             is possible that requesting to clear a permission also clears others, but YPERMC will never add
             new permissions.
      4. Copy rs1 to rd, and update the AP-field and SDP-fields with the newly calculated versions.
      5. Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 is sealed and any bits in the AP-field or SDP-field were affected by YPERMC.
          a. Extensions such as Zylevels1 add a field to the metadata which is reduced by YPERMC even
             when the capability is sealed.
      6. Set rd.tag=0 if any integrity checks fail.
        XLEN-1                            24   23       19   18    17   16   15                 SDPLEN+5       6    5       4        2   1    0
                      Reserved 0               Reserved 1    R     X ASR           Reserved 1          SDP          C       Reserved 1 LM W
                       XLEN-24                      5        1     1     1         10-SDPLEN          SDPLEN        1            3       1   1

                                           Figure 6. Capability permissions bit field

                    If a future extension adds a new permission that is dependent on an existing permission then
                    clearing the original must also clear the new permission. This ensures software forward-
                    compatibility: for example, a kernel that does not know about finer-grained ASR permissions
                   must still be able to prevent all access to privileged instructions and CSRs simply by clearing
                    ASR-permission. Such dependent permissions must be allocated to the bits that are currently
                    reported as 1 to ensure forward-compatibility.

Operation

                 This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

  let cs1_val = C(cs1);
  let rs2_val = X(rs2);

  let cond = capIsSealed(cs1_val) | not(capReservedValid(cs1_val));
  let inCap = clearTagIf(cs1_val, cond);

  let old_perms = packPerms(getArchPermsLegalized(inCap), inCap.sd_perms).bits;

  let new_perms = old_perms & not(rs2_val);

  let (new_arch_perms, new_sd_perms) = unpackPerms(struct {bits = new_perms});
  let newCap = { setArchPerms(inCap, new_arch_perms) with sd_perms = new_sd_perms
  };

  C(cd) = newCap;
  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.2. YMV

Synopsis
   Capability register copy

Mnemonic
   YMV rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24                20 19             15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                    rs2               rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
           7                         5                 5               3               5                     7
      YADD=0000011               YMV: rs2=0           src          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

                  YMV uses the reserved encoding of YADD where rs2=0.

Description
   Copy rs1 to rd.

   This instruction can propagate valid capabilities which fail integrity checks.

Operation

      C(cd) = C(cs1);
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.3. PACKY

Synopsis
   Pack Y register

Mnemonic
   PACKY rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19               15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    rs2               rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
            7                         5                 5                3          5                     7
      PACKY=0000001                 src2              src1           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   The PACKY instruction copies rs1[XLEN-1:0] into rd[XLEN-1:0], copies rs2[XLEN-1:0] into rd[YLEN-
   1:XLEN], and sets rd.tag=0.

Operation

      let capVal = C(cs1);
      let intVal = X(rs2);
      let newCap = bitsToCap(false, intVal @ capVal.address);
      C(cd) = newCap;
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.4. YHIW

Synopsis
   Write capability metadata and clear capability tag (pseudo)

Mnemonic
   YHIW rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding
   YHIW is a pseudoinstruction for PACKY

Description
   Construct a YLEN-bit value in rd by setting the address from rs1 and the metadata from rs2. Set rd.tag
   to 0.

                 The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

     let capVal = C(cs1);
     let intVal = X(rs2);
     let newCap = bitsToCap(false, intVal @ capVal.address);
     C(cd) = newCap;
     RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.5. YBNDSW, YBNDSWI

Synopsis
   Write capability bounds

Mnemonics
   YBNDSW rd, rs1, rs2
   YBNDSWI rd, rs1, imm

Encoding

 31                       25 24             20 19              15 14       12 11             7   6                   0
           funct7                   rs2                rs1            funct3         rd                  opcode
            7                         5                 5                3           5                     7
      YBNDSW=0011011                src2              src1           RVY-R=000      dest             RVY-A=1111011

                   The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

 31      29 28                              20 19              15 14       12 11             7   6                   0
  funct3              ybndswimm[8:0]                   rs1            funct3         rd                  opcode
    3                         9                         5             3              5                     7
 YBNDSWI                     imm                       src      RVY-MISC=101        dest             RVY-A=1111011
  =111

                   The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Copy the capability from register rs1 to register rd. Set the capability base address to the value of
   rs1.address and set the length of its bounds to rs2[XLEN-1:0] for YBNDSW, or imm for YBNDSWI.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rs1.tag=0.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 is sealed.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rd 's bounds exceed rs1 's bounds.

   Set rd.tag=0 if the requested bounds cannot be encoded exactly.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 fails any integrity checks.

   YBNDSWI decodes the 9-bit immediate value imm[8:0] to the requested length result as follows:

      ⚫ If imm[8:0] = 0, result is 4096.
      ⚫ If imm[8] = 0 and imm[7:0] != 0, result is imm[7:0].
      ⚫ If imm[8] = 1 and imm[7:5] = 0, result is 256 | (imm[3:0] << 4) | (imm[4] << 3).
    ⚫ Otherwise, result is imm[7:0] << 4.
   The resulting logical encodable regions and step sizes are summarized in the table below:

Region                 Decoded range (bytes)      Immediate decoding condition
Byte granular          1, 2, …, 255               imm[8] = 0 and imm[7:0] > 0

8-byte granular        256, 264, …, 504           imm[8:5] = 4’b1000

16-byte granular       512, 528, …, 4080          imm[8:5] > 4’b1000

Region          Decoded range (bytes)    Immediate decoding condition
Page-sized      4096                     imm[8:0] = 0

             This immediate encoding scheme achieves coverage of almost all observed immediate values
             while decoding the 9-bit immediate field without any adders or variable shifts. Mapping imm =
             0 to 4096 reclaims the redundant zero encoding (already covered by YBNDSW dst, src, x0)
             to support highly common page-sized objects.

             The hardware implementation is a simple bit-remapping:
            result[12] = (imm[8:0] == 0);
             result[11:9] = imm[8] ? imm[7:5] : 0;
             result[8] = imm[8] ? (imm[7:5] == 0b000 || imm[4]) : 0;
             result[7:4] = imm[8] ? imm[3:0] : imm[7:4];
             result[3] = imm[8] ? (imm[7:4] == 0b0001) : imm[3];
             result[2:0] = imm[8] ? 0 : imm[2:0];

Operation for YBNDSW

    let cs1_val = C(cs1);
    let length = X(rs2);
    let newBase = cs1_val.address;
    let newTop : CapLenBits = zero_extend(newBase) + zero_extend(length);
    // inCapBoundsNoWrap returns false if the input bounds are malformed.
    let inBounds = inCapBoundsNoWrap(cs1_val, newBase, unsigned(length));
    let (exact, newCap) : (bool, Capability) = setCapBounds(cs1_val, newBase,
    newTop);
    let cond = not(inBounds & exact) |
                 boundsMalformed(newCap) |
                 not(capReservedValid(newCap)) |
                 capIsSealed(newCap);
    C(cd) = clearTagIf(newCap, cond);
    RETIRE_SUCCESS

Operation for YBNDSWI

            This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

 let cs1_val = C(cs1);
 // Decode the requested length from the 9-bit immediate.
 let length : xlenbits =
    if imm == 0b000000000 then to_bits(xlen, 4096)
    else if imm[8] == bitzero then zero_extend(imm[7 .. 0])
    else if imm[7 .. 5] == 0b000 then zero_extend(0b1 @ imm[3 .. 0] @ imm[4 .. 4]
 @ 0b000)
    else zero_extend(imm[7 .. 0] @ 0b0000);
 let newBase = cs1_val.address;
 let newTop : CapLenBits = zero_extend(newBase) + zero_extend(length);
 // inCapBoundsNoWrap returns false if the input bounds are malformed.
 let inBounds = inCapBoundsNoWrap(cs1_val, newBase, unsigned(length));

  let (exact, newCap) : (bool, Capability) = setCapBounds(cs1_val, newBase,
  newTop);
  let cond = not(inBounds & exact) |
                   boundsMalformed(newCap) |
                   not(capReservedValid(newCap)) |
                   capIsSealed(newCap);
  C(cd) = clearTagIf(newCap, cond);
  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.6. YBNDSRW

Synopsis
  Write capability bounds, rounding up if required

Mnemonic
  YBNDSRW rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

31                      25 24             20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
         funct7                   rs2                rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
         7                          5                 5               3               5                     7
  YBNDSRW=0100011                 src2              src1          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                 The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
  Copy the capability from register rs1 to register rd. Set the capability base address to the value of
  rs1.address and set the length of its bounds to rs2[XLEN-1:0].

  The base is rounded down and the top is rounded up by the smallest amounts needed to form a
  capability covering the requested base and top.

  Set rd.tag=0 if rs1.tag=0.

  Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 is sealed.

  Set rd.tag=0 if rd 's bounds exceed rs1 's bounds.

  Set rd.tag=0 if rs1 fails any integrity checks.

Operation

     let cs1_val = C(cs1);
     let length = X(rs2);
     let newBase = cs1_val.address;
     let newTop : CapLenBits = zero_extend(newBase) + zero_extend(length);
     // inCapBoundsNoWrap returns false if the input bounds are malformed.
     let inBounds = inCapBoundsNoWrap(cs1_val, newBase, unsigned(length));
     let (_, newCap) : (bool, Capability) = setCapBounds(cs1_val, newBase,
     newTop);
     let cond = not(inBounds) |
                      boundsMalformed(newCap) |
                      not(capReservedValid(newCap)) |
                      capIsSealed(newCap);
     C(cd) = clearTagIf(newCap, cond);
     RETIRE_SUCCESS

                  Checking only the requested region with inCapBoundsNoWrap is sufficient, since the rounding
                 performed by setCapBounds can never grow the bounds beyond those of rs1.

2.8.2.7. YSUNSEAL

Synopsis
   Unseal by superset reconstruction

Mnemonic
   YSUNSEAL rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19               15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    rs2               rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
           7                          5                 5                3          5                     7
   YSUNSEAL=0000111                 src2              src1           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Copy rs2 to rd.

   Set rd.ct=0. (That is, unseal rd.)

   Set rd.tag=1 if:

      1. rs1.tag=1, and
      2. rs1 is not sealed, and
      3. rs2.tag=1, and
      4. rs2 is sealed, and
      5. rs2 is a capability subset of rs1

        Otherwise, set rd.tag=0

                           When rs1 is x0 YSUNSEAL will copy rs2 to rd and clear rd.tag and rd.ct. However
                           future extensions may add additional behavior to update currently reserved fields, and
                          so software should not assume rs1=0 to be a pseudo-instruction for capability tag and
                           type clearing.

Operation

                  This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

  let cs1_val = C(cs1);
  let cs2_val = C(cs2);

  let tag = cs1_val.tag &
                  not(capIsSealed(cs1_val)) &
                  cs2_val.tag &
                  capIsSealed(cs2_val) &
                  /* subset checks for malformed bounds, perms, reserved bits */
                  capIsSubset(cs2_val, cs1_val);

  C(cd) = { unsealCap(cs2_val) with tag = tag };

  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.8. YBLD

Synopsis
   Build capability

Mnemonic
   YBLD rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                   rs2                rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
           7                         5                 5               3               5                     7
      YBLD=0001111                 src2              src1          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Copy rs2 to rd.

   Set rd.tag=1 if:

      1. rs1.tag=1, and
      2. rs1 is not sealed, and
      3. rs2 is a capability subset of rs1, and
      4. rs2 passes a mandatory integrity check

        Otherwise, set rd.tag=0

                   The integrity check on rs2 is mandatory to prevent authorizing a capability with a lack of
                   integrity.
      
                   The integrity check, from the capability subset definition, on rs1 is optional.

                  YBLD is typically used alongside YHIW to build capabilities from integer values.

                  YBLD can be used to speed up operations such as paging in memory after swap.

                   When rs1 is x0 YBLD will copy rs2 to rd and clear rd.tag. However future extensions may
                  add additional behavior to update currently reserved fields, and so software should not assume
                   rs1=0 to be a pseudo-instruction for capability tag clearing.

Operation

          let cs1_val = C(cs1);
          let cs2_val = C(cs2);

          let tag = cs1_val.tag &
                        not(capIsSealed(cs1_val)) &
                        capIsSubset(cs2_val, cs1_val); /* Subset checks for malformed

      bounds,
                                                                           perms, and reserved bits */

          C(cd) = { cs2_val with tag = tag };
          RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.2.9. YSENTRY

Synopsis
   Create a sealed entry point capability

Mnemonic
   YSENTRY rd, rs2

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19               15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    rs2              rs1=0            funct3        rd                  opcode
          7                           5                5                 3          5                     7
   YSENTRY=0010111                  src2            src1=0           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

                  rs1≠x0 is currently reserved to decode as a future YSEAL instruction.

Description
   Copy rs2 to rd.

   Seal the capability in rd by setting rd.ct=1.

   Set rd.tag=0 if rs2 is sealed or fails any integrity checks.

                      A future extension will allow YSEAL, which has rs1 specifying an authorizing capability, to
                     perform the sealing action and to specify the destination CT-field value.

                      If the capability encoding format does not support a CT-field of type 1, then this instruction
                     is reserved. Future capability encoding formats may redefine the behavior for CT-field
                      values greater than 1.

Operation

                  This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

  let cs2_val = C(cs2);
  let inCap = clearTagIf(cs2_val, capIsSealed(cs2_val) |
  not(capReservedValid(cs2_val)));
  C(cd) = sealCap(inCap);
  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.3. Instructions to Decode Capability Bounds

The bounds describing the range of addresses the capability gives access to are stored in a compressed
format. These instructions query the bounds and related information.

                    Table 13. Instructions which decode capability bounds summary in RVY
Mnemonic             Description
YBASER               Read capability base address
YLENR                Read capability length
YTOPR                Read capability top address

2.8.3.1. YBASER

Synopsis
   Read capability base address

Mnemonic
   YBASER rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24               20 19             15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    funct5            rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
          7                         5                   5                3          5                     7
 RVY-2OP-YX=1111010           YBASER=00000             src           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Decode the base integer address from rs1 's bounds and write the result to rd.

   If rs1 's bounds can’t be decoded, or rs1 fails any integrity checks, then return zero.

                     The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

      let capVal = C(cs1);
      X(rd) = match getCapBoundsBits(capVal) {
         None() => zeros(),
         Some(base, _) => base
      };
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.3.2. YLENR

Synopsis
   Read capability length

Mnemonic
   YLENR rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                 funct5               rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
          7                        5                   5               3               5                     7
 RVY-2OP-YX=1111010           YLENR=00011             src          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Calculate the length of rs1 's bounds and write the result in rd.

   The length is defined as the difference between the decoded top and base bound addresses, i.e., top -
   base.

   Return the maximum length, 2XLEN-1, if the length of rs1 is 2XLEN.

   If rs1 's bounds can’t be decoded, or rs1 fails any integrity checks, then return zero.

                     The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

      let capVal = C(cs1);
      // getCapLength returns 0 if the bounds are malformed
      let len = getCapLength(capVal);
      X(rd) = to_bits(xlen, if len > cap_max_addr then cap_max_addr else len);
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.3.3. YTOPR

Synopsis
   Read capability top address

Mnemonic
   YTOPR rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                 funct5               rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
          7                       5                    5               3               5                     7
 RVY-2OP-YX=1111010          YTOPR=00010              src          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Decode the top integer address from rs1 's bounds, saturated to 2XLEN-1, and write the result to rd.

   If rs1 's bounds can’t be decoded, or rs1 fails any integrity checks, then return zero.

                     The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

                 This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

  let capVal = C(cs1);
  X(rd) = match getCapBoundsBits(capVal) {
     None() => zeros(),
     Some(_, top) => {
         let top_val = unsigned(top);
         to_bits(xlen, if top_val > cap_max_addr then cap_max_addr else top_val)
     }
  };
  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.4. Instructions to Extract Capability Fields

These instructions either directly read bit fields from the metadata or capability tag, or only apply simple
transformations on the metadata.

                      Table 14. Instructions which extract capability fields summary in RVY
Mnemonic              Description
YTAGR                 Read capability tag
YPERMR                Read capability permissions
YTYPER                Read capability type
YHIR1                 Read capability metadata (pseudo)

2.8.4.1. YTAGR

Synopsis
   Read capability tag

Mnemonic
   YTAGR rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24               20 19             15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    funct5            rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
          7                        5                    5                3          5                     7
 RVY-2OP-YX=1111010           YTAGR=00100              src           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Zero extend the value of rs1.tag and write the result to rd.

Operation

      let capVal = C(cs1);
      X(rd) = zero_extend(bool_to_bits(capVal.tag));
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.4.2. YPERMR

Synopsis
   Read capability permissions

Mnemonic
   YPERMR rd, rs1

Encoding

31                      25 24                20 19                        15 14        12 11                7       6                         0
         funct7                  funct5                       rs1               funct3             rd                            opcode
          7                      5                              5                  3              5                               7
 RVY-2OP-YX=1111010         YPERMR=00001                       src             RVY-R=000         dest                       RVY-A=1111011

                 The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Convert the unpacked AP-field and SDP-fields of capability rs1 into a bit field, with the same format as
   used by YPERMC (see Figure 7), zero extend and write the result to rd.

   All bits in the [23:0] range that are reserved or assigned to extensions that are not implemented by the
   current hart are hardwired to 1.

   If rs1 fails any integrity checks, all currently allocated permission bits in rd report 0.

                    The hardwired bits described above are unaffected and still report 1.
      XLEN-1                          24    23       19   18    17   16   15                 SDPLEN+5       6   5       4        2   1    0
                    Reserved 0              Reserved 1    R     X ASR           Reserved 1          SDP         C       Reserved 1 LM W

                     XLEN-24                     5        1     1     1         10-SDPLEN          SDPLEN       1            3       1   1

                                           Figure 7. Capability permissions bit field

                 The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

     let capVal = C(cs1);
     X(rd) = packPerms(getArchPermsLegalized(capVal), capVal.sd_perms).bits;
     RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.4.3. YTYPER

Synopsis
   Read capability type

Mnemonic
   YTYPER rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24               20 19             15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    funct5            rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
          7                         5                   5                3          5                     7
 RVY-2OP-YX=1111010           YTYPER=00101             src           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Decode the architectural capability type (CT-field) from rs1, zero extend and write the result to rd.

                     The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

      let capVal = C(cs1);
      X(rd) = zero_extend(bool_to_bits(capVal.sealed));
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

                   The Sail model stores the 1-bit CT-field of RV64LYA as the boolean sealed. Capability
                  encoding formats with a wider CT-field must return the full field value.

2.8.4.4. SRLIY

Synopsis
   Logical right shift of Y register

Mnemonic
   SRLIY rd, rs1, shamt

Encoding

 31              27 26                    20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
      funct5              shamt=XLEN                 rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
       5                       7                      5               3               5                     7
  SRLIY=00000                 imm                    src        RVY-MISC=101         dest             RVY-A=1111011

                 The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Logical right shift of Y register rs1 to rd, zero-filling the upper bits of the result. Set rd.tag=0.

   The only valid shift amount is XLEN (as required by YHIR). Encodings with any other shift amount are
   reserved.

                 A future extension may add an arbitrary shift distance.

Operation

                 This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

  X(rd) = truncate(capToBits(C(rs1)) >> shamt, xlen);
  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.4.5. YHIR

Synopsis
   Read capability metadata (pseudo)

Mnemonic
   YHIR rd, rs1

Encoding

 31              27 26                     20 19               15 14      12 11            7   6                   0
      funct5               shamt=XLEN                 rs1            funct3        rd                  opcode
        5                       7                       5             3            5                     7
   YHIR=00000              shamt=XLEN                  src      RVY-MISC=101      dest             RVY-A=1111011

                 The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

                 YHIR rd, rs1 is a pseudo instruction for a XLEN-wide right shift (SRLIY).

Description
   Copy the metadata (bits [YLEN-1:XLEN]) of capability rs1 into rd.

                     The value of rs1.tag does not affect the result.

Operation

      let capVal = C(cs1);
      X(rd) = capToMetadataBits(capVal).bits;
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.5. Miscellaneous Instructions to Handle Capability Data

                     Table 15. Miscellaneous capability instruction summary in RVY
Mnemonic          Description
YEQ               Capability equality comparison including capability tag
YSS               Capability is a subset
YAMASK            Capability alignment mask

2.8.5.1. YEQ

Synopsis
   Capability equality comparison including capability tag

Mnemonic
   YEQ rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19               15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    rs2               rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
           7                          5                 5                3          5                     7
      YEQ=0000110                   src2              src1           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   Set rd to 1 if all bits (i.e., YLEN bits and the capability tag) of capabilities rs1 and rs2 are equal,
   otherwise set rd to 0.

Operation

      let cs1_val = C(cs1);
      let cs2_val = C(cs2);
      X(rd) = zero_extend(bool_to_bits(cs1_val == cs2_val));
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.5.2. YSS

Synopsis
   Capability is a subset

Mnemonic
   YSS rd, rs1, rs2

Encoding

 31                      25 24             20 19                15 14      12 11               7   6                       0
          funct7                   rs2                rs1            funct3            rd                   opcode
            7                        5                 5               3               5                     7
       YSS=0001110                 src2              src1          RVY-R=000          dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   rd is set to 1 if:

      1. the capability tags of capabilities rs1 and rs2 are equal, and
      2. rs2 is a capability subset of rs1

Otherwise set rd to 0. Extensions may further impose constraints on when rd is set to 1.

                   The implementation of this instruction is similar to YBLD, although YSS does not include the
                  sealed bit in the check.

Operation

         let cs1_val = C(cs1);
         let cs2_val = C(cs2);

         X(rd) = zero_extend(bool_bits(
            (cs1_val.tag == cs2_val.tag) &
            capIsSubset(cs2_val, cs1_val) /* capIsSubset returns false if either
       input
                                                              has malformed bounds, perms, or non-zero
                                                              reserved bits */
         ));
         RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.5.3. YAMASK

Synopsis
   Capability alignment mask

Mnemonic
   YAMASK rd, rs1

Encoding

 31                      25 24               20 19             15 14       12 11            7   6                   0
          funct7                    funct5            rs1             funct3        rd                  opcode
          7                        5                    5                3          5                     7
 RVY-2OP-XX=1111000           YAMASK=00000             src           RVY-R=000     dest             RVY-A=1111011

                  The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

Description
   rd[XLEN-1:0] is set to a mask that can be used to round addresses down to a value that is sufficiently
   aligned to set exact bounds for the nearest representable length of rs1[XLEN-1:0]. The upper bits of rd
   are zero extended. See Section 3.1.5 for the algorithm used to compute the next representable length.

                  This RVY instruction only handles XLEN operands and produces an XLEN result.

Operation

      let len = X(rs1);
      X(rd) = getRepresentableAlignmentMask(len);
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.8.6. Instructions to Load and Store Capability Data

New loads and stores are introduced to handle capability data, LY and SY. They atomically access YLEN
bits of data and the associated capability tag.

All capability memory accesses check for C-permission in the authorizing capability in rs1.

If C-permission is granted then:

 ⚫ LY reads YLEN bits of data from memory, and returns the associated capability tag.
 ⚫ SY writes YLEN bits of data to memory, and writes the associated capability tag.

If C-permission is not granted then:

 ⚫ LY reads YLEN bits from memory, but does not return the associated capability tag, instead zero is
   returned.
 ⚫ SY writes YLEN bits to memory, and writes zero to the associated capability tag.

All capability data memory access instructions require YLEN-aligned addresses, and will take an access
fault exception if this requirement is not met. They cannot be emulated.

               An access fault is raised instead of a misaligned exception since these instructions cannot be
              emulated since there is one hidden capability tag per YLEN-aligned memory region.

All memory accesses, of any type, require permission from the authorizing capability in rs1.

 ⚫ All loads require R-permission, otherwise they raise an exception.
 ⚫ All stores require W-permission, otherwise they raise an exception.

Under some circumstances LY will modify the data loaded from memory before writing it back to the
destination register. See LY for details.

                           Table 16. Capability load/store instruction summary in RVY
Mnemonic              Description
LY                    Load capability
SY                    Store capability

2.8.6.1. LY

Synopsis
   Load capability

Mnemonic
   LY rd, offset(rs1)

Encoding

 31                                        20 19               15 14      12 11            7   6                   0
                  imm[11:0]                          rs1≠0           funct3        rd                  opcode
                       12                              5                3          5                     7
                     offset                           base           LY=001       dest             RVY-A=1111011

                 The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

                  Any instance of this instruction with rs1=x0 will raise an exception, as x0 is defined to always
                 hold a NULL capability. As such, the encodings with rs1=x0 are RESERVED for use by future
                  extensions.

Description
   Calculate the effective address of the memory access by adding rs1.address to the sign-extended 12-bit
   offset.

   Authorize the memory access with the capability in rs1.

   Load a naturally aligned YLEN-bit data value and associated capability tag from memory.

                      The loaded capability tag may be set to zero under platform specified conditions, such as by
                      a hardware based use-after-free prevention scheme. Privileged mechanisms may also set
                     the loaded capability tag to zero such as PMA settings or virtual memory system page table
                      entry configuration.

                     Extensions may also specify additional conditions which set the capability tag to zero.

   The final value of rd is determined as follows:

      1. Write the loaded YLEN data to rd and the loaded capability tag into rd.tag.
      2. If rs1 does not grant C-permission then set rd.tag=0.
      3. If rd.tag=1, rs1 does not grant LM-permission and rd is not sealed, then an implicit YPERMC is
         performed to clear W-permission and LM-permission from rd.

                           The implicit YPERMC is not required to set rd.tag=0 if the loaded data fails any
                          integrity checks. A suggested implementation is to only check the AP-field for legal
                           values, and set the whole AP-field to zero if the check fails.

                           Metadata modifications on loaded capabilities are on naturally aligned data. Therefore
                          on the read path from a data cache, the modification typically happens in parallel with
                           data alignment multiplexers.

                          Zylevels1 adds to the YPERMC rules on loaded capability data.

        When sending load data to a trace interface, implementations trace the final value written to rd
        which may not match the value in memory.

Exceptions
  Raise a load access fault exception when the effective address is not aligned to YLEN/8.

  Exceptions occur when the authorizing capability fails one of the checks listed below:

   Kind                                                 Reason
   CHERI Load Access Fault                              Authorizing capability tag is set to 0.
   CHERI Load Access Fault                              Authorizing capability is sealed.
   CHERI Load Access Fault                              Authorizing capability does not grant the necessary
                                                        permissions. R-permission is required.
   CHERI Load Access Fault                              At least one byte accessed is outside the authorizing
                                                        capability bounds, or the bounds could not be decoded.
   CHERI Load Access Fault                              Authorizing capability failed any integrity check.

Operation

       let offset : xlenbits = sign_extend(imm);
       let (auth_val, vaddr) = get_cheri_mode_cap_addr(rs1_cs1, offset);
       let aq : bool = false;
       let rl : bool = false;

       match check_and_handle_load_vaddr_for_triggers(vaddr, get_arch_pc()) {
          Some (ret) => return ret,
          None () => ()
       };
       if not(capTaggedAndReservedValid(auth_val)) then {
          handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_TagViolation);
          RETIRE_FAIL
       } else if capIsSealed(auth_val) then {
          handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_SealViolation);
          RETIRE_FAIL
       } else if not(canR(auth_val)) then {
          handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_PermissionViolation);
         RETIRE_FAIL
       } else if not(validAddrRange(vaddr, cap_size) |
    capBoundsInfinite(auth_val)) then {
          handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_InvalidAddressViolation);
          RETIRE_FAIL
       } else if not(inCapBounds(auth_val, vaddr, cap_size)) then {
          handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_LengthViolation);
          RETIRE_FAIL
       } else if not(is_aligned_addr(vaddr, cap_size)) then {
          handle_mem_exception(vaddr, E_Load_Addr_Align());
          RETIRE_FAIL
       } else match translateAddr(vaddr, Read(Cap)) {
         TR_Failure(E_Extension(_)) => { internal_error(__FILE__, __LINE__,
    "unexpected cheri exception for cap load") },
          TR_Failure(e) => { handle_mem_exception(vaddr, e); RETIRE_FAIL },
          TR_Address(addr, pbmt, ptw_info) => {
             let c = mem_read_cap(addr, pbmt, aq, aq & rl, false);

                 match c {
                     MemValue(v) => {
                       let cr = clearTagIf(v, ptw_info.ptw_lc == PTW_LC_CLEAR |
      not(canC(auth_val)));
                       C(cd) = legalizeLM(cr, auth_val);
                       RETIRE_SUCCESS
                     },
                     MemException(e) => {handle_mem_exception(vaddr, e); RETIRE_FAIL }
                 }
             }
         }

2.8.6.2. SY

Synopsis
   Store capability

Mnemonic
   SY rs2, offset(rs1)

Encoding

 31                      25 24           20 19                15 14      12 11                 7   6                     0
        offset[11:5]              rs2             rs1≠0            funct3        offset[4:0]              opcode
             7                     5                5                 3               5                      7
        offset[11:5]              src              base            SY=010        offset[4:0]           RVY-A=1111011

                The instruction encoding is not final and is highly likely to change prior to v1.0

                 Any instance of this instruction with rs1=x0 will raise an exception, as x0 is defined to always
                hold a NULL capability. As such, the encodings with rs1=x0 are RESERVED for use by future
                 extensions.

Description
   Calculate the effective address of the memory access by adding rs1.address to the sign-extended 12-bit
   offset.

   Authorize the memory access with the capability in rs1.

   Store the YLEN-bit value in rs2, together with its capability tag, to the naturally aligned memory
   location.

   This instruction can propagate valid capabilities which fail integrity checks.

Stored Capability Tag Value
   Set the stored capability tag to zero if:

      1. rs2.tag=0, or
      2. rs1 does not grant C-permission, or
      3. Platform specified conditions or privileged configurations (e.g., PMAs or PTEs) specify that it must
         be set to zero.

                          Extensions may define further circumstances under which stored capabilities may have
                         their capability tags set to zero. Zylevels1 is an example of this.

Exceptions
   Raise a store/AMO access fault exception when the effective address is not aligned to YLEN/8.

   Exceptions occur when the authorizing capability fails one of the checks listed below:

      Kind                                                      Reason
      CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault                              Authorizing capability tag is set to 0.
      CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault                              Authorizing capability is sealed.
      CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault                              Authorizing capability does not grant the necessary
                                                                permissions. W-permission is required.

    Kind                                                         Reason
    CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault                                 At least one byte accessed is outside the authorizing
                                                                 capability bounds, or the bounds could not be decoded.
    CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault                                 Authorizing capability failed any integrity check.

Operation

          let offset : xlenbits = sign_extend(imm);
          let (auth_val, vaddr) = get_cheri_mode_cap_addr(rs1_cs1, offset);
          let cs2_val = C(cs2);
          let aq : bool = false;
          let rl : bool = false;
          let cs2_val = clearTagIf(cs2_val, not(canC(auth_val)));

          match check_and_handle_store_vaddr_for_triggers(vaddr, get_arch_pc()) {
            Some (ret) => return ret,
            None () => ()
          };
          if not(capTaggedAndReservedValid(auth_val)) then {
            handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_TagViolation);
            RETIRE_FAIL
          } else if capIsSealed(auth_val) then {
            handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_SealViolation);
            RETIRE_FAIL
          } else if not(canW(auth_val)) then {
            handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_PermissionViolation);
            RETIRE_FAIL
          } else if not(validAddrRange(vaddr, cap_size) |
      capBoundsInfinite(auth_val)) then {
            handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_InvalidAddressViolation);
            RETIRE_FAIL
          } else if not(inCapBounds(auth_val, vaddr, cap_size)) then {
            handle_cheri_exception(CapCheckType_Data, CapEx_LengthViolation);
            RETIRE_FAIL
          } else if not(is_aligned_addr(vaddr, cap_size)) then {
            handle_mem_exception(vaddr, E_SAMO_Addr_Align());
            RETIRE_FAIL
          } else match translateAddr(vaddr, Write(if cs2_val.tag then Cap else Data))
      {
            TR_Failure(e) => { handle_mem_exception(vaddr, e); RETIRE_FAIL },
            TR_Address(addr, pbmt, _) => {
              let eares : MemoryOpResult(unit) = mem_write_ea_cap(addr, aq & rl, rl,
      false);
               match (eares) {
                  MemException(e) => { handle_mem_exception(vaddr, e); RETIRE_FAIL },
                  MemValue(_) => {
                    let res : MemoryOpResult(bool) = mem_write_cap(addr, pbmt, cs2_val,
      aq & rl, rl, false);
                     match (res) {
                         MemValue(true)         => RETIRE_SUCCESS,

                        MemValue(false) => internal_error(__FILE__, __LINE__, "store got
false from mem_write_value"),
            MemException(e) => { handle_mem_exception(vaddr, e); RETIRE_FAIL
}
                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }

2.9. Changes to Existing RISC-V Base ISA Instructions
RVY extends existing instructions that are used for handling addresses so that they manipulate a whole
capability.

 ⚫ Whenever an input operand is used as an address (e.g., the load/store base address), all capability bits
   are fed into the instruction instead of just XLEN bits.
 ⚫ Any instruction that writes back an address (e.g., AUIPC (RVY) or CSRRW (RVY)) to the destination
   register writes a full capability register instead of just XLEN bits. For all other results the high bits of
   the register and the capability tag are set to zero.
 ⚫ Whenever a capability with a new address is returned, the result is always created using the semantics
   of the YADDRW instruction.

ADD and ADDI are not affected by the rule above. Even though they are used for handling addresses, they
also have other uses. New encodings are used for capability addition: YADD and YADDI. They must be used
for all capability address incrementing.

                  Integer add (ADD) and capability add (YADD) have separate encodings. Using a single
                  encoding for both is undesirable:

                    1. Integer ADD is most commonly used for purposes other than address calculations.

                  2. For high performance implementations which can issue multiple ADDs, it means that the
                      integer ADD units do not need the upper halves of the operands, and do not need the
                      capability check logic on the result.
                   3. The compiler and/or programmer would have to execute another metadata clearing
                      instruction after each ADD to ensure that compartments do not leak capabilities.

The rules above apply to the base ISA instructions listed in the following subsections, but also apply to
instructions added by other extensions. Any change to instruction semantics for RVY is called out in the
chapter defining the extension.

2.9.1. Changes to load/stores

All load and store instructions behave as described in Load and Store Instructions with one fundamental
difference:

 ⚫ Any memory instruction that has rs1 as a base address register reads the full capability register
   instead. The base address is unchanged, i.e., using the value from rs1. The metadata and capability tag
   are used to authorize the access.
 ⚫ For a load instruction, the lower XLEN bits of the result written to the destination register are the same
   as in the RV32[IE]/RV64[IE] specification.

All load and store instructions authorized by rs1 raise exceptions if any of these checks fail:

 ⚫ rs1 must not be x01
 ⚫ The capability tag (rs1.tag) must be set to one.
 ⚫ rs1 must be unsealed.
 ⚫ For loads, R-permission must be granted in rs1.
 ⚫ For stores, W-permission must be granted in rs1.
 ⚫ All integrity checks on rs1 must pass.

1
    All load/store encodings are reserved if rs1=x0 (since dereferencing NULL always faults).

All load instructions, except for LY, always set the capability tag and the metadata of the result register to
zero.

All store instructions, except for SY, always write zero to the capability tag or capability tags associated with
the memory locations that are written to. Therefore, misaligned stores may clear up to two associated
capability tags.

The changed interpretation of the base register also applies to all loads, stores and all other memory
operations defined in later chapters of this specification with a base operand of rs1 unless stated otherwise.

                    Under RVY all loads and stores are authorized by rs1.

These rules affect the following base ISA instructions listed in Table 17, and also apply to instructions
added by other extensions, e.g.,:

    ⚫ Floating-point loads and stores.
    ⚫ Vector load and stores.
    ⚫ Atomic memory accesses, see Zaamo (RVY added instructions) and Zalrsc (RVY added instructions).

                         Table 17. Changed RISC-V base ISA load/store instructions summary in RVY
    Mnemonic                              Description
    LD, LW[U], LH[U], LB[U]               Integer loads (authorized by the capability in rs1)
    SD, SW, SH, SB                        Integer stores (authorized by the capability in rs1)

2.9.2. Changes to PC

    ⚫ Whenever the address field of the pc is modified, it is always updated using the semantics of the
      YADDRW instruction. This includes adding an offset to the pc from direct jumps and branches for
      both the target address and the link register. In this case, e.g., new_pc = YADDRW(old_pc, offset)
    ⚫ JALR (RVY) copies rs1 into the pc, and increments the address field with the offset. In this case, e.g.,
       new_pc = YADDRW(Unseal(rs1), offset)

                     Using YADDRW to update the pc address can cause the target pc capability tag to be set to
                    zero, that raises a CHERI Instruction Access Fault on the target instruction.

                     A future extension may raise an exception on branch and jump instructions if fetching a
                    minimum-sized instruction at the target pc will raise a CHERI Instruction Access Fault.

These rules affect the following base ISA instructions listed in Table 18, and also apply to instructions
added by other extensions.

                        Table 18. Changed RISC-V base ISA PC relative instructions summary in RVY
    Mnemonic                              Description
    AUIPC (RVY)                           Add upper immediate to pc
    JAL (RVY)                             Immediate offset jump, and link to capability register
    JALR (RVY)                            Jump to capability register, and link to capability register
    BEQ (RVY)                             Immediate offset condition branch, taken if operands are equal
    BNE (RVY)                             Immediate offset condition branch, taken if operands are not equal

2.9.3. AUIPC (RVY)

Synopsis
   Add upper immediate to pc

Mnemonic
   auipc rd, imm

Encoding

 31                                                                  12 11              7   6                   0
                                  imm[31:12]                                    rd                 opcode
                                    20                                          5                     7
                             U-immediate[31:12]                                dest             AUIPC=0010111

                 This instruction is modified from the version in RV32[IE]/RV64[IE].

Description
   Form a 32-bit offset from the 20-bit immediate filling the lowest bits with zero; the number of places to
   shift is determined by the capability encoding format’s AUIPC_SHIFT parameter (defaulting to 12).
   Take the value of the AUIPC instruction’s pc, increment its address by the 32-bit offset using the
   semantics of the YADDRW instruction and write the result to rd.

   Set rd.tag=0 if the resulting capability cannot be represented exactly.

Operation

      let off : xlenbits = sign_extend(imm @ 0x000);
      let (representable, newCap) = setCapAddr(PCC, PC + off);
      C(cd) = clearTagIf(newCap, not(representable));
      RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.9.4. JAL (RVY)

Synopsis
     Immediate offset jump, and link to capability register

Mnemonic
     jal rd, offset

Encoding

 31 30                                21 20 19                           12 11               7   6                       0
[20]               imm[10:1]             [11]         imm[19:12]                     rd                    opcode
 1                     10                  1              8                          5                      7
                  offset[20:1]                                                      dest               JAL=1101111

                 This instruction is modified from the version in RV32[IE]/RV64[IE].

Description
     Direct jump with an address offset.

       1. The target address is obtained by adding the sign-extended 20-bit J-immediate to pc.address.
       2. The target pc is obtained by applying the target address to the pc of the JAL instruction, using the
          semantics of the YADDRW instruction.
       3. The pc of the next instruction is sealed as a Sealed entry point capability and written to rd.
       4. Jump to the target pc.

                          A future extension may raise an exception on the branch instruction itself if fetching a
                          minimum-sized instruction at the target pc will raise a CHERI Instruction Access
                         Fault. Performing the pc bounds check at the branch source instead of on instruction
                          fetch is helpful for debugging and can simplify the implementation of CPUs with very
                          short pipelines.

Operation

                 This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

 let off : xlenbits = sign_extend(imm);
 let newPC = PC + off;
 /* nextPC accounts for compressed instructions */
 let (_, linkCap) = setCapAddr(PCC, nextPC);
 C(cd) = sealCap(linkCap);
 set_next_pc(newPC);
 RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.9.5. JALR (RVY)

Synopsis
   Jump to capability register, and link to capability register

Mnemonic
   jalr rd, rs1, offset

Encoding

 31                                          20 19                15 14       12 11          7   6                  0
                  imm[11:0]                             rs1           funct3           rd               opcode
                      12                                 5                3            5                  7
                 offset[11:0]                           base              0           dest           JALR=1100111

                 This instruction is modified from the version in RV32[IE]/RV64[IE].

Description
   Indirect jump to the target capability in rs1 with an address offset.

      1. rs1 is written to the target pc.
      2. The target address is obtained by adding the sign-extended 12-bit I-immediate to rs1.address, then
         setting the least-significant bit of the result to zero.
      3. Unseal the target pc if it is a Sealed entry point capability, rs1.address[0] is zero, and the I-
         immediate is zero.
      4. Set the address of the target pc to the target address using the semantics of the YADDRW
         instruction.
      5. The pc of the next instruction is sealed as a Sealed entry point capability and written to rd.
      6. Jump to the target pc.

                           A future extension may raise an exception on the JALR (RVY) instruction itself if the
                          target pc will raise a CHERI Instruction Access Fault at the target.

Operation

                 This listing is manually maintained rather than extracted from the Sail model.

  let cs1_val = C(cs1);
  let off : xlenbits = sign_extend(imm);
  /* clear bit zero as for RISC-V JALR */
  let newPC = [cs1_val.address + off with 0 = bitzero];
  /* nextPC accounts for compressed instructions */
  let (_, linkCap) = setCapAddr(PCC, nextPC);
  C(cd) = sealCap(linkCap);
  set_next_pc(newPC);
  let (_, newPCC) = setCapAddr(cs1_val, newPC);
  set_next_pcc(unsealCap(newPCC));
  RETIRE_SUCCESS

2.9.6. BEQ, BNE (RVY)

For beq and bne only, if rs1≤rs2 then the encoding is reserved. This includes all encodings with rs1=rs2.

               The reserved encodings are redundant and may be used by future extensions, suggestions
              include branching on capability tag values only, or YLEN-bit compares.

               For beq rs1, rs2, offset and bne rs1, rs2, offset, assemblers must emit the operand
               order whose register-number ordering is not reserved. For example, beq x1, x2, offset is
              emitted as beq x2, x1, offset. For the reserved rs1=rs2 case, j/jal can be used instead of
               an always-taken beq rs1, rs1, offset, and a never-taken bne rs1, rs1, offset is
               equivalent to a nop.

2.10. RVY ISA summary

2.10.1. RVY added instructions

                                        Table 19. RVY added instructions
Mnemonic                       Function
LY                             Load capability
SY                             Store capability
YADD                           Capability pointer increment
YADDI                          Capability pointer increment by immediate
YADDRW                         Write capability address
YTAGR                          Read capability tag
YPERMR                         Read capability permissions
YMV                            Capability register copy
YPERMC                         Clear capability permissions
SRLIY                          Logical right shift of Y register
YHIR                           Read capability metadata (pseudo)
PACKY                          Pack Y register
YHIW                           Write capability metadata and clear capability tag (pseudo)
YEQ                            Capability equality comparison including capability tag
YSS                            Capability is a subset
YBLD                           Build capability
YSUNSEAL                       Unseal by superset reconstruction
YBNDSW                         Write capability bounds
YBNDSWI                        Write capability bounds by immediate
YBNDSRW                        Write capability bounds, rounding up if required
YAMASK                         Capability alignment mask
YBASER                         Read capability base address
YLENR                          Read capability length

Mnemonic                            Function
YTYPER                              Read capability type
YTOPR                               Read capability top address

2.10.2. RVI (RVY modified behavior)

                                   Table 20. RVI (RVY modified behavior) instructions
Mnemonic                            Function
AUIPC (RVY)                         Add upper immediate to pc
BEQ (RVY)                           Immediate offset condition branch, taken if operands are not equal
BNE (RVY)                           Immediate offset condition branch, taken if operands are not equal
JAL (RVY)                           Immediate offset jump, and link to capability register
JALR (RVY)                          Jump to capability register, and link to capability register

