                                                              13.1. Added Metadata Bits (Permissions and Flags) | Page 121

Chapter 13. "Zylevels1" Extension for CHERI 2-Level
Information Flow Control
Zylevels1 adds an Information Flow Control (IFC) mechanism to CHERI.

It adds:

 ⚫ One new "level" metadata bit (the GL flag) to classify capabilities as either global or local.
 ⚫ Checks to memory operations to control how capabilities can be shared.
 ⚫ Two new level-related permissions, Store Local (SL) and Load Global (LG).

                The behavior is an extension as it may be replaced by a future scheme with more than two
               levels.

13.1. Added Metadata Bits (Permissions and Flags)

Bit                      Type                     Comment
GL flag                  Information flow label   Used to classify capabilities as global or local.
SL-permission            Data memory              Used to filter the capability tags of stored capabilities.
                         permission
LG-permission            Data memory              Used to filter the permissions of loaded capabilities.
                         permission

13.1.1. The Capability Global (GL) Flag

The Global (GL) flag is a metadata bit used to track and control the propagation of capabilities. It works in
conjunction with LG-permission and SL-permission to enforce information flow boundaries.

Global Capability
   A global capability has GL flag=1.

Local Capability
   A local capability has GL flag=0.

Like permissions, the GL flag can be cleared when creating a new capability from an existing one, but it can
never be set unless derived from a superset capability which has the GL flag set.

13.1.2. Store Local Permission (SL)

Store Local Permission (SL) controls whether a local capability can be stored to memory.

If the authorizing capability lacks SL-permission then the stored capability has its capability tag set to zero.

SL-permission is dependent on both C-permission and W-permission as shown in Table 44.

13.1.3. Load Global Permission (LG)

Load Global Permission (LG) controls whether global capabilities can be loaded from memory. Loading a
capability using an authorizing capability that lacks LG-permission clears the GL flag bit of the loaded

13.2. Interaction with Root Capabilities | Page 122

capability, making it into a local capability. If the loaded capability is unsealed, its LG-permission is also
cleared.

                   This behavior is similar to how LM-permission affects loaded capabilities (but note the
                  difference in interaction with seals).

LG-permission is dependent on both C-permission and R-permission as shown in Table 44.

13.2. Interaction with Root Capabilities
The Root capabilities definitions are extended:

 ⚫ A Root Executable capability is required to grant LG-permission and to be a global capability.
 ⚫ A Root Data capability is required to grant both LG-permission and SL-permission and to be a global
   capability.

13.3. Interaction with YPERMC and YPERMR
       XLEN-1                                                                                       4   3   2   1       0
                                                       As is                                        GL SL LG    As is
                                                      XLEN-5                                        1   1   1       2

                              Figure 13. Extended capability permissions bit field (see Figure 6)

The GL flag, SL-permission, and LG-permission fields are mapped into the capability permissions bitfield
as used by YPERMC and YPERMR, as shown in Figure 13.

The GL flag is treated as a permission by YPERMC and YPERMR.

Unlike actual permissions it is not subject to the sealed check, and so YPERMC can produce a new
capability with its GL flag cleared, even if the source capability is sealed.

13.3.1. Additional YPERMC permission rules

The following YPERMC permission rules are added:

                                       Table 44. YPERMC permission rules for Zylevels1.
YPERMC Rule                       Permission                    Valid only if

Zylevels1-1                       LG-permission                 C-permission and R-permission

Zylevels1-2                       SL-permission                 C-permission and W-permission

13.4. Interaction with LY
Zylevels1 introduces two new constraints on capabilities loaded from memory. These constraints apply to
LY and all other instructions that can load valid capabilities.

The permissions of the loaded capability may be reduced:

 ⚫ If the authorizing capability lacks LG-permission and the loaded capability is unsealed, both GL flag
   and LG-permission are cleared in the result.
 ⚫ If the authorizing capability lacks LG-permission and the loaded capability is sealed, GL flag is cleared

                                                                                            13.5. Interaction with SY | Page 123

    in the result.

                      The absence of LG-permission affects the GL flag even of sealed capabilities because the
                     latter is an information flow label rather than an architectural permission.

                                 Table 45. LG-permission effects for loading capabilities
Auth cap field                    Data cap field
R          C           LG         Tag         Sealed    Action
                                              Yes       Load data capability with its GL flag cleared
                       0          1           No        Load data capability with both its GL flag and LG-permission
1          1                                            cleared
                       All other cases                  Load data capability with both its GL flag and LG-permission
                                                        unmodified

13.5. Interaction with SY
Zylevels1 adds a constraint to SY and all instructions which can store valid capabilities.

The capability is stored with a capability tag set to one only if:

 ⚫ The capability being stored is a global capability, or
 ⚫ The authorizing capability grants SL-permission.

Otherwise, the capability is stored with the capability tag set to zero.

                   While a lack of LG-permission restricts flow by reducing permissions (labeling the loaded
                  capability as local and stripping permissions), SL-permission restricts flow by invalidating
                   capabilities (by setting the capability tag to zero).

                                 Table 46. SL-permission effects for stored capabilities
Auth cap field                           Data cap
                                         field
W              C            SL           GL            Notes
                            1            X             Store data capability unmodified
1              1                         1             Store data capability unmodified
                            0
                                         0             Store data capability with capability tag set to zero

13.6. Interaction with Capability Subsets
The definition of capability subset has an additional rule:

 ⚫ The GL flag of cap2 is zero, or the GL flag of cap1 is one.

                  This affects the behavior of YSS, YBLD and YSUNSEAL.

13.7. Rationale and Software Use Cases
The primary goal of Zylevels1 is to prevent storing pointers to specific memory regions in order to enforce
security invariants. There are many uses of this mechanism, but two examples are listed below.

13.7. Rationale and Software Use Cases | Page 124

13.7.1. Restricting Capability Flow Between Regions or Domains (e.g., Stack-to-Heap or
Kernel-to-User)

Software can use these features to prevent pointers from leaking between different memory regions or
privilege domains that have different security properties. The general pattern is to mark sensitive
capabilities as local (by clearing their GL flag) and ensuring that destination memory regions are accessed
through authorities that lack the SL-permission.

 ⚫ Intra-program flow (e.g., Stack-to-Heap):

    To prevent pointers to short-lived memory (like the stack) from leaking into long-lived memory (like
    the heap), software marks all stack pointers as local. If the authorities for the heap lack the SL-
    permission, any attempt to store a stack pointer into the heap results in the hardware invalidating the
    stored capability. This ensures stack pointers are strictly confined to registers and the stack itself.

 ⚫ Cross-domain flow (e.g., Kernel-to-User):

    These features also apply across privilege boundaries. For example, a kernel can ensure that the
    capability authorizing a write to userspace (e.g., for a copy_to_user operation) lacks the SL-permission.
    Even if a kernel bug causes it to accidentally attempt to copy sensitive, local kernel capabilities into the
    user’s buffer, the hardware will invalidate those capabilities. This prevents unintentional leaks of
    usable capabilities to a less-privileged domain.

13.7.2. Enforcing Shallow vs. Deep No-Capture Guarantees

When passing a capability to a less-trusted function, a caller often wants to enforce "no-capture"
guarantees, ensuring the callee cannot hold onto the capability after returning. Zylevels1 provides two
levels of protection against capability capture.

 ⚫ Shallow no-capture (via GL flag and SL-permission):

    The caller makes the argument capability local by clearing its GL flag. Because the callee’s global
    variables and persistent data structures are accessed through capabilities that lack the SL-permission,
    the callee cannot store the local argument capability into them. This enforces a shallow guarantee: the
    callee cannot capture the argument itself, but it might still load a global capability through the
    argument and capture that.

 ⚫ Deep no-capture (via LG-permission):

    To solve the shallow limitation, the caller also removes the LG-permission from the argument
    capability. If the callee loads any capability through this argument, the hardware automatically
    removes the loaded capability’s GL flag and LG-permission. This enforces a deep no-capture guarantee:
    the callee is prevented from capturing the argument and anything reachable from it.

