
Chapter 19. "Supervisor-Level ISA for Virtual Memory
(RV64Y)" Extension, Version 1.0
CHERI checks are made on the effective address according to the current translation scheme. I.e., on the
virtual address if translation is enabled or the physical address if translation is disabled.

Implicit memory accesses made by the page table walker are not subject to CHERI checks.

                  A future extension may add CHERI checks to the page table walker.

19.1. Limiting Capability Propagation
                   Page table enforcement can allow the operating system to limit the flow of capabilities between
                   processes. It is highly desirable that a process should only possess capabilities that have been
                   issued for that address space by the operating system. Unix processes may share memory for
                   efficient communication, but capability pointers must not be shared across these channels
                   into a foreign address space. An operating system might defend against this by only issuing a
                   capability to the shared region that does not grant the load/store capability permission.
                   However, there are circumstances where portions of general-purpose, mmapped* memory
                   become shared, and the operating system must prevent future capability communication
                  through those pages. This is not possible without restructuring software, as the capability for
                   the original allocation, which spans both shared memory and private memory, would need to
                   be deleted and replaced with a list of distinct capabilities with appropriate permissions for
                   each range. Such a change would not be transparent to the program. Such sharing through
                   virtual memory is on the page granularity, so preventing capability writes with a PTE
                   permission is a natural solution.
                   *
                       allocated using mmap

19.2. The pte.rvy field for capability flow control
                   As RV32Y has no field allocated in the PTE, capability loads and stores operate as normal.
                   Therefore, the RVY field is reserved in the RV64 PTE formats only (e.g., Figure 28) for use by
                  RV64Y extensions. The principle is that extensions, such as Svyrg may redefine the usage of
                   the RVY field by adding an enable bit into Xstatus.

The definition of the RVY field is as follows:

                                          Table 63. Definition of the pte.rvy field
Bit                                      Name                                         Comment
pte.rvy[3]                               pte.y                                        Enable capability (Y) access
pte.rvy[2]                               reserved                                     reserved
pte.rvy[1]                               reserved                                     reserved
pte.rvy[0]                               reserved                                     reserved

If pte.y=0 then:

 ⚫ All capability loads set the loaded capability tag to zero
 ⚫ All capability stores with the to-be-stored capability tag set raise a CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault.

If pte.y=1 then:

 ⚫ All capability loads and capability stores operate as normal.

                   The reserved bits pte.rvy[2:0] follow the standard reserved behavior for PTE bits. They are
                  allocated by Svyrg, which redefines the entire pte.rvy field when enabled.

19.3. Invalid Virtual Address Handling
When address translation is in effect for RV64Y, the upper bits of virtual memory addresses must match
for the address to be valid.

The CSRs shown in Table 59 and Table 62, as well as the pc, need not hold all possible invalid addresses.

However, the bounds encoding of capabilities depends on the address value if the bounds are not infinite.

Therefore, if the bounds are not infinite, implementations must not convert an invalid address to a
different invalid address, except as permitted by the rules in the following subsections.

If the bounds could not be decoded due to the address being invalid, then a CHERI Instruction Access Fault,
CHERI Load Access Fault or CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault exception is raised as appropriate.

                   Not requiring the implementation to decode the bounds for invalid addresses reduces the size
                  of bounds comparators from 64-bits to the supported virtual address width.

19.3.1. Updating CSRs

A CSR may be updated to hold a capability with an invalid address, due to:

 ⚫ executing instructions, such as CSRRW (RVY)
 ⚫ hardware updates to CSRs such as storing the pc into mepc (RVY)/sepc (RVY) etc. when taking an
   exception.

To ensure that the bounds of a valid capability cannot be corrupted:

 ⚫ If the new address is invalid and the capability bounds are not infinite then set the capability tag to
   zero before writing to the CSR.

                   When the new address is invalid and happens to match an invalid address which the CSR can
                  hold, then it is implementation-defined whether to set the capability tag to zero.

19.3.2. Branches and Jumps

If the effective target address of the jump or branch is invalid, and the authorizing capability’s bounds are
not infinite, then set the capability tag of the target pc to zero.

                  A CHERI Instruction Access Fault exception will be raised at the target.

                   RISC-V harts that do not support RVY normally raise an instruction access fault or page fault
                   after jumping or branching to an invalid address. Therefore, RVY preserves that behavior to
                  ensure that harts supporting RVY and Zyhybrid are fully compatible with RISC-V harts
                   provided that pc and ddc are set to Root Executable and Root Data capabilities, respectively.

19.3.3. Memory Accesses

If the effective address of the memory access is invalid, and the authorizing capability’s bounds are not
infinite, then raise a CHERI Load Access Fault or CHERI Store/AMO Access Fault exception because the
bounds cannot be reliably decoded.

