Chapter 21. "Svyrg" Extension, Version 1.0 for RV64Y | Page 160

Chapter 21. "Svyrg" Extension, Version 1.0 for RV64Y
This extension specifies use of the RVY field in the Sv39, Sv48 and Sv57 PTE formats (e.g., see Figure 28).

Page-Based 39-bit Virtual-Memory System (Sv39)

   63 62 61 60 59 58 55 54 53                  28 27               19 18             10 9         8 7   6   5   4   3   2   1   0
   N PBMT       res     RVY res      PPN[2]             PPN[1]             PPN[0]           RSW    D A G U          X W R       V
   1       2     2        4    1          26                  9              9               2      1   1   1   1   1   1   1   1

                                                   Figure 28. Sv39 page table entry.

                 Diagram included in the standalone specification for reference only.

Svyrg implies Sv39.

The Svyrg extension is enabled when the sstatus.YRGE bit is set.

When sstatus.YRGE=0, only pte.rvy[3] (pte.y) has meaning: it completely enables or disables storing
capabilities to the page, as defined in pte.rvy field. When sstatus.YRGE=1, the entire pte.rvy field is
redefined as described in this chapter.

The extension adds the ability for supervisor-mode software to quickly enable trapping loads of capabilities
from all pages of memory, incrementally allow loads of capabilities from such pages, and track stores of
capabilities to all pages of memory. Applied to userspace pages, this has been shown to allow the operating
system to implement capability revocation schemes, which allow userspace memory allocators to
deterministically guard against use-after-reallocation (Filardo et al., 2024). Applied to kernel pages, they
can similarly be used against use-after-reallocation within the kernel itself.

The 4-bit pte.rvy field is subdivided into four 1-bit fields, two controlling capability loads (including the
capability loaded during an AMO) and two controlling capability stores (again, including the capability
stored as part of an AMO).

                                          Table 65. Breakdown of the 4-bit pte.rvy field.
                                      Bit            Name Comment
                                      Capability load/AMO fields
                                      pte.rvy[0]     pte.yr       Capability readable
                                      pte.rvy[1]     pte.yrg Capability read generation
                                      Capability store/AMO fields
                                      pte.rvy[2]     pte.yw       Capability writable
                                      pte.rvy[3]     pte.yd       Capability dirty

After changing sstatus.YRGE, executing an SFENCE.VMA instruction with rs1=x0 and rs2=x0 suffices to
synchronize address-translation caches with respect to the altered interpretation of pte.rvy fields.

                  Setting sstatus.YRGE is only required once per OS instance.

                  If any applications running under the OS require capability access without revocation, then the
                  setting of sstatus.YRGE=0 and pte.rvy=1 can be replicated with:
                     ⚫ pte.yw = 1, and
                      ⚫ pte.yd = 1

                                                                                    21.1. CHERI Load Capability Faults | Page 161

                        And either:

                         ⚫ pte.yr = 0, and
                         ⚫ pte.yrg = 1, and

                        Or:

                         ⚫ pte.yr = 1, and
                         ⚫ pte.yrg = sstatus.xYRG

                        Therefore sstatus.YRGE is not required to change dynamically and so requiring an
                        SFENCE.VMA on a change should not cause a performance problem.

When all of the following are true, Svyrg adds two related architectural features, CHERI Load Capability
Faults and Capability Dirty Tracking:

    1. sstatus.YRGE is set.
    2. The authorizing capability has C-permission.
    3. The PMA is set to CHERI Capability Tag.

                        It may make sense to subdivide this into two extensions as Capability Dirty Tracking is more
                       generally useful than CHERI Load Capability Faults.

21.1. CHERI Load Capability Faults
pte.yr and pte.yrg control whether capability loads or AMOs write the loaded capability tag to rd.

When pte.yr is clear, pte.yrg selects the behavior of capability loads: if pte.yrg is clear, the loaded capability
tag is written to rd as zero; if pte.yrg is set, the load operates as normal.

When pte.yr is set, pte.yrg can be used to trap on capability loads or AMOs when it does not match the
Capability Read Generation value that is represented by the value of sstatus.UYRG for userspace pages (pte
.u=1) or sstatus.SYRG for kernel pages (pte.u=0).

The implementation raises a CHERI Load Capability Fault when, in addition to the rules above, all of the
following are true:

    1. A capability load or AMO is executed.
    2. pte.yr is set.
    3. if pte.u=1, pte.yrg does not equal sstatus.UYRG.
    4. if pte.u=0, pte.yrg does not equal sstatus.SYRG.
    5. The loaded capability tag is set, unless the implementation traps conservatively1.
    6. Any other platform specific rules have not forced the loaded capability tag to be clear.
1
  Implementations that trap conservatively may raise the fault regardless of the value of the loaded
capability tag, as shown in Table 66.

                        Checking the value of the capability tag requires taking data dependent exceptions on loaded
                        capabilities for loads or AMOs. Ideally all implementations would trap precisely (taking the
                       capability tag into account in all cases) rather than conservatively (trapping more often,
                        potentially on every loaded capability). However, the loaded capability tag may not be available

21.2. Capability Dirty Tracking | Page 162

                      in all implementations when determining whether to raise the exception, and therefore
                      flexibility is permitted. As a result, the software is required to be tolerant of raising the trap
                      when the capability tag is not set, potentially resulting in spurious traps from pages that have
                      pte.yr=1, and so are likely to store valid capabilities.

                      Implementations that already take synchronous traps on loaded data, such as ECC faults, are
                      recommended to check the loaded capability tag when determining whether to raise the fault.

                          Table 66. Summary of capability load pte.yr and pte.yrg behavior in the PTEs
                  pte.yr pte.yrg               tag1 Load Capability Behavior
                  0        0                   X    Clear loaded capability tag
                  0        1                   X    Normal operation
                  1        ≠ sstatus.xYRG2 0        Implementation defined choice of
                                                    CHERI Load Capability Fault or normal operation
                  1        ≠ sstatus.xYRG2 1        CHERI Load Capability Fault
                  1        = sstatus.xYRG2 X        Normal operation

1
    The loaded capability tag.
2
    if pte.u=1, sstatus.UYRG, else sstatus.SYRG.

                      CHERI Load Capability Faults may be used to implement the load-barrier primitive from
                     (Filardo et al., 2024).

                      In the case of AMOs that could trigger both a CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault, due to storing a
                     valid capability tag, and a CHERI Load Capability Fault, the CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault
                      takes priority as shown in Table 54.

21.2. Capability Dirty Tracking
When pte.yw is clear, capability stores or AMOs where the to-be-stored capability tag is set will raise a
CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault.

When pte.yw is set, capability stores to the virtual page are permitted. In addition, the pte.yd bit indicates
that a capability was stored to the virtual page since the last time the pte.yd bit was cleared.

                      This is equivalent to the behavior of the pte.d bit except that pte.yd only tracks stores of valid
                     capabilities instead of all stores.

Capability dirty tracking behavior is enabled when, in addition to the rules above, all of the following are
true:

    1. A capability store or AMO instruction is executed.
    2. The to-be-stored capability tag is set.
    3. pte.yw is set.
    4. pte.yd is clear.

Two schemes for capability dirty tracking are permitted, and the scheme in use is determined by whether
the Svade or Svadu extensions are enabled.

    ⚫ For Svade, take a CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault.

                                                                                   21.2. Capability Dirty Tracking | Page 163

    ⚫ For Svadu, do a hardware update that sets pte.yd=1, following the same rules as setting pte.d.
        ⚫ When setting pte.yd, the hardware update also necessarily sets (or leaves set) pte.a and pte.d.

                      Table 67. Summary of capability store pte.yw and pte.yd behavior in the PTEs
                           pte.yw pte.yd tag1 Store Capability Behavior
                           0      X       0     Normal operation
                           0      X       1     CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault
                           1      0       0     Normal operation
                           1      0       1     CHERI Store/AMO Page Fault (Svade) or
                                                hardware pte.yd update (Svadu)
                           1      1       X     Normal operation

1
    The to-be-stored capability tag.

The capability dirty tracking is resolved during memory translation, but there are cases where it is not
known if there will be a capability tag stored to memory or not at this point. Capability dirty tracking must
be triggered when pte.yw=1 and pte.yd=0 and the to-be-stored capability tag is set, and may be triggered in
the following case where it is not known if there will be a stored capability tag during translation:

    ⚫ SC.Y triggers capability dirty tracking if the capability tag is set in rs2, even if the store fails. This
      matches the semantics of SC.* with regard to pte.d.

                  pte.yd must always be set when a capability with a valid capability tag is written to a virtual
                  page so that software knows which pages have had capabilities stored to them. It may be set
                  too often, which may cause software to examine the page to check for capabilities when none
                  are present. This is a situation software is required to handle anyway, as it is always possible
                  for all capabilities in a page to be overwritten by non-capability data. In this case, the pte.yd
                  bit would still be set.

                  Future AMOs fall into this category:

                    ⚫ For future AMOCAS.Y, it is not known whether the store will happen until the load has
                     executed, and the compare has been done. Therefore, AMOCAS.Y is likely to trigger
                      capability dirty tracking if the capability tag is set in rs2.
                    ⚫ For future AMOADD.Y, the stored capability tag depends upon the loaded capability tag
                      which is not known during translation and on the execution of the YADD. Therefore,
                      AMOADD.Y, is likely to always trigger capability dirty tracking.

                  Checking the stored capability tag is less of a burden to the implementation than checking the
                  loaded capability tag for CHERI Load Capability Fault, which is why checking the loaded
                  capability tag is optional behavior. However, a future extension may reduce the burden further
                  by removing the check on the to-be-stored capability tag.

                  Capability dirty tracking may be used to implement the store-barrier primitive from (Filardo et
                 al., 2024).

                  The minimum level of PTE support is to set pte.yr=1, pte.yd=1, pte.yw=1 and pte.yrg=0 in all
                  PTEs intended for storing capabilities (e.g., private anonymous mappings) and set
                 sstatus.UYRG=0 and sstatus.SYRG=0 on all harts, which will enable capabilities to be
                  loaded and stored successfully.

