
Appendix C: CHERI System Implications
                ARC-NOTE: Please advise whether this appendix should remain in this specification or move
               to supporting documentation.

CHERI processors need memory systems that support the capability tags in memory.

CHERI systems range from tiny IoT devices up to server chips.

There are two types of bus connections used in SoCs which contain CHERI CPUs:

 1. Tag-aware buses, where the bus protocol is extended to carry the capability tag along with the data.
    This is typically done using user-defined bits in the protocol.
     a. These buses will read capability tags from memory (if capability tags are present in the target
        memory) and return them to the requestor.
     b. These buses will write the capability tag to memory as an extension of the data write.
 2. Non-capability tag-aware buses, i.e., current non-CHERI-aware buses.
     a. Reads of tagged memory will not read the capability tag.
     b. Writes to tagged memory will set the capability tag of any YLEN-aligned YLEN-wide memory
        location to zero where any byte is overwritten by the memory write.

The fundamental rule for any CHERI system is that the capability tag and data are always accessed
atomically. For every naturally aligned YLEN-wide memory location, it must never be possible to:

 1. Update any data bytes without also writing the capability tag
     a. This implies setting the capability tag to zero if a non-CHERI aware bus master overwrites a
        capability in memory
 2. Read a capability tag value with mismatched (stale or newer) data
 3. Set a capability tag without also atomically writing the associated data.

               Clearing a capability tag may be performed without changing the associated data, provided
              stale tagged data can never be observed.

C.1. Small CHERI system example

                        Figure 29. Example small CHERI system with local capability tag storage

This example shows a minimum-sized system where only the local memory is extended to support
capability tags. The capability tag-aware region is highlighted. All capability tags are created by the CHERI
CPU, and only stored locally. The memory is shared with the system, probably via a secure DMA, which is
not capability tag-aware.

Therefore, the connection between CPU and memory is tag-aware, and the connection to the system is not
capability tag-aware.

All writes from the system port to the memory must clear any memory capability tags to follow the rules
from above.

C.2. Large CHERI system example

                         Figure 30. Example large CHERI system with capability tag cache

In the case of a large CHERI SoC with caches, all the cached memory visible to the CHERI CPUs must
support capability tags. All memory is backed up by DRAM, and standard DRAM does not offer the extra
bit required for CHERI capability tag storage and so a typical system will have a capability tag cache IP.

A region of DRAM is typically reserved for CHERI capability tag storage.

The capability tag cache sits on the boundary of the capability tag-aware and non-tag-aware memory
domains, and it provides the bridge between the two. It stores capability tags locally in its cache, and if
there is a miss, it will create an extra bus request to access the region of DRAM reserved for capability tag
storage. Therefore, in the case of a miss a single access is split into two - one to access the data and one to
access the capability tag.

The key property of the capability tag cache is to preserve the atomic access of data and capability tags in

the memory system so that all CPUs have a consistent view of capability tags and data.

The region of DRAM reserved for capability tag storage must only be written by the capability tag cache,
therefore no bus initiators should be able to write to the DRAM without the transactions passing through
the capability tag cache.

Therefore, the GPUs and peripherals cannot write to the capability tag storage in the DRAM or the
capability tag supporting memory data storage region. These constraints will be part of the design of the
network-on-chip. It is possible for the GPU and peripherals to read the capability tag supporting memory
data storage region of the DRAM, if required.

                 It would be possible to allow a DMA to access the capability tagged memory region of the
                 DRAM directly to allow swap to/from DRAM and external devices such as flash. This will
                require the highest level of security in the SoC, as the CHERI protection model relies on the
                 integrity of the capability tags, and so the root-of-trust will need to authenticate and encrypt
                 the transfer, with anti-rollback protection.

For further information on the capability tag cache see (Joannou et al., 2017).

C.3. Large CHERI pure-capability system example

                    Figure 31. Example large CHERI system with only tag-aware bus masters

In this example every DRAM access passes through the capability tag cache, and so all bus masters are
capability tag-aware and can access the capability tags associated with memory if permitted by the
network-on-chip.

The system topology is simpler than in Figure 30.

There is likely to be a performance difference between the two systems. The main motivation for Figure 30
is to avoid the GPU DRAM traffic needing to look-up every capability tag in the capability tag cache,
potentially adding overhead to every transaction.

