1 Introduction
This is the second in a series of five manuals:

   1. Optimizing software in C++: An optimization guide for Windows, Linux, and Mac
      platforms.

   2. Optimizing subroutines in assembly language: An optimization guide for x86
      platforms.

   3. The microarchitecture of Intel, AMD, and VIA CPUs: An optimization guide for
      assembly programmers and compiler makers.

   4. Instruction tables: Lists of instruction latencies, throughputs and micro-operation
      breakdowns for Intel, AMD, and VIA CPUs.

   5. Calling conventions for different C++ compilers and operating systems.

The latest versions of these manuals are always available from www.agner.org/optimize.
Copyright conditions are listed on page 156 below.

The present manual explains how to combine assembly code with a high level programming
language and how to optimize CPU-intensive code for speed by using assembly code.

This manual is intended for advanced assembly programmers and compiler makers. It is
assumed that the reader has a good understanding of assembly language and some
experience with assembly coding. Beginners are advised to seek information elsewhere and
get some programming experience before trying the optimization techniques described
here. I can recommend the various introductions, tutorials, discussion forums and
newsgroups on the Internet (see links from www.agner.org/optimize) and introductory books
such as "Introduction to 80x86 Assembly Language and Computer Architecture" by R. C.
Detmer, 3. ed. 2014.

The present manual covers all platforms that use the x86 and x86-64 instruction set. This
instruction set is used by most microprocessors from Intel, AMD, and VIA. Operating
systems that can use this instruction set include DOS, Windows, Linux, FreeBSD/Open
BSD, and Intel-based Mac OS. The manual covers the newest microprocessors and the
newest instruction sets. See manual 3 and 4 for details about individual microprocessor
models.

Optimization techniques that are not specific to assembly language are discussed in manual
1: "Optimizing software in C++". Details that are specific to a particular microprocessor are
covered by manual 3: "The microarchitecture of Intel, AMD, and VIA CPUs". Tables of
instruction timings etc. are provided in manual 4: "Instruction tables: Lists of instruction
latencies, throughputs and micro-operation breakdowns for Intel, AMD and VIA CPUs".
Details about calling conventions for different operating systems and compilers are covered
in manual 5: "Calling conventions for different C++ compilers and operating systems".

Programming in assembly language is much more difficult than high-level language. Making
bugs is very easy, and finding them is very difficult. Now you have been warned! Please do
not send your programming questions to me. Such mails will not be answered. There are
various discussion forums on the Internet where you can get answers to your programming
questions if you cannot find the answers in the relevant books and manuals.

Good luck with your hunt for nanoseconds!

1.1 Reasons for learning assembly language
Assembly coding is not used as much today as it was previously. However, there are still
good reasons for learning and using assembly code. The main reasons are:

   1. Educational reasons. It is important to know how microprocessors and compilers
      work at the instruction level in order to be able to predict which coding techniques
      are most efficient, to understand how various constructs in high level languages
      work, and to track hard-to-find errors.

   2. Debugging and verifying. Looking at compiler-generated assembly code or the
      disassembly window in a debugger is useful for finding errors and for checking how
      well a compiler optimizes a particular piece of code.

   3. Making compilers. Understanding assembly coding techniques is necessary for
      making compilers, debuggers, and other development tools.

   4. Embedded systems. Small embedded systems have fewer resources than PC's and
      mainframes. Assembly programming can be necessary for optimizing code for speed
      or size in small embedded systems.

   5. Hardware drivers and system code. Accessing hardware ports, system control
      registers, etc. is traditionally done in assembly code. However, this is rarely needed
      today because most system instructions can now be accessed from C++ code with
      intrinsic functions (see p. 34).

   6. Self-modifying code. Self-modifying code is generally not recommended because it
      interferes with efficient code caching. It may, however, be advantageous for example
      to include a small compiler in math programs where a user-defined function has to
      be calculated many times.

   7. Optimizing code for size. Storage space and memory is so cheap nowadays that it is
      not worth the effort to use assembly language for reducing code size. However,
      cache size is still such a critical resource that it may be useful in some cases to
      optimize a critical piece of code for size in order to make it fit into the code cache or
      µop cache.

   8. Optimizing code for speed. Previously, you could improve the performance of a
      piece of code significantly by using assembly. Today, however, the best C++
      compilers such as Gcc and Clang usually optimize code better than a proficient
      assembly programmer can do. Anyway, it is still useful to learn assembly in order to
      check the assembly code generated by a compiler to see if it has optimized the code
      as expected. There are often obstacles that prevent the compiler from optimizing the
      code, for example pointer aliasing, alignment issues, exception handling that
      prevents vectorization, etc. (see manual 1: Optimizing software in C++). Such
      problems may be identified by looking at the assembly generated by a compiler or
      looking at the disassembly generated by a debugger. Once identified, most of these
      obstacles to optimization can be overcome by using relevant compiler directives.

   9. Using vector registers. Assembly code makes it possible to use vector registers and
      vector instructions. However, it is often more efficient to use intrinsic functions or a
      vector class library for vector programming (see manual 1: Optimizing software in
      C++).

   10. Function libraries. The total benefit of optimizing code is higher in function libraries
       that are used by many programs.

   11. Solving compatibility problems. Different compilers, platforms, or operating systems
       may use different calling conventions for functions or different name mangling
       schemes (see manual 5: Calling conventions). It may be possible to solve such
       compatibility problems by making an interface in assembly code that connects a
       caller and a called function. It is also possible to use assembly to make a function
       with multiple entries for different calling conventions. Note, however, that assembly
       coding cannot solve problems with incompatible instruction sets or incompatible
       system functions.

   12. Reverse engineering. It is sometimes possible in simple cases to study how a piece
       of code works by looking at a disassembly when the source code is not available.
       (Reverse engineering may be considered a violation of copyright in some cases
       depending on the purpose and the jurisdiction. If the purpose is to create similar
       code or to circumvent copy protection then it will likely be deemed illegal. But
       reverse engineering for the purpose of establishing “interoperability” between
       different products is explicitly allowed in several jurisdictions).

The main focus in this manual is on optimizing code for speed, though some of the other
topics are also discussed.

1.2 Reasons for not using assembly code
There are so many disadvantages and problems involved in assembly programming that it
is advisable to consider the alternatives before deciding to use assembly code for a
particular task. The most important reasons for not using assembly programming are:

   1. Development time. Writing code in assembly language takes much longer time than
      in a high-level language.

   2. Reliability and security. It is easy to make errors in assembly code. The assembler is
      not checking if the calling conventions and register save conventions are obeyed.
      Nobody is checking for you if the number of PUSH and POP instructions is the same in
      all possible branches and paths. There are so many possibilities for hidden errors in
      assembly code that it affects the reliability and security of the project unless you
      have a very systematic approach to testing and verifying.

   3. Debugging and verifying. Assembly code is more difficult to debug and verify
      because there are more possibilities for errors than in high-level code.

   4. Maintainability. Assembly code is more difficult to modify and maintain because the
      language allows unstructured spaghetti code and all kinds of dirty tricks that are
      difficult for others to understand. Thorough documentation and a consistent
      programming style is needed.

   5. System code can use intrinsic functions instead of assembly. Modern C++ compilers
      have intrinsic functions for accessing system control registers and other system
      instructions (see p. 34). Assembly code is no longer needed for device drivers and
      other system code when intrinsic functions are available.

   6. Application code can use intrinsic functions or vector classes instead of assembly.
      Modern C++ compilers have intrinsic functions for vector operations and other
      special instructions that previously required assembly programming. It is no longer
      necessary to use assembly code to take advantage of the Single-Instruction-
      Multiple-Data (SIMD) instructions (see page 34).

   7. Portability. Assembly code is very platform-specific. Porting to a different platform is
      difficult. Code that uses intrinsic functions instead of assembly are portable to all x86

