       and x86-64 platforms.

   8. Compilers have been improved a lot in recent decades. The best compilers are now
      better than an experienced assembly programmer in most situations.

   9. Compiled code may be faster than assembly code because compilers can make
      inter-procedural optimization and whole-program optimization. The assembly
      programmer usually has to make well-defined functions with a well-defined calling
      interface that obeys all calling conventions in order to make the code testable and
      verifiable. This prevents many of the optimization methods that compilers use, such
      as function inlining, register allocation, constant propagation, common sub-
      expression elimination across functions, scheduling across functions, etc. These
      advantages can be obtained by using C++ code with intrinsic functions or vector
      classes instead of assembly code.

1.3 Operating systems covered by this manual
The following operating systems can use x86 family microprocessors:

16 bit: DOS, Windows 3.x.

32 bit: Windows, Linux, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD, Intel-based Mac OS X.

64 bit: Windows, Linux, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD, Intel-based Mac OS X.

All the UNIX-like operating systems (Linux, BSD, Mac OS) use the same calling
conventions, with very few exceptions. Everything that is said in this manual about Linux
also applies to other UNIX-like systems, possibly including systems not mentioned here.

2 Before you start
2.1 Things to decide before you start programming
Before you start to program in assembly, you have to think about why you want to use
assembly language, which part of your program you need to make in assembly, and what
programming method to use. If you haven't made your development strategy clear, then you
will soon find yourself wasting time optimizing the wrong parts of the program, doing things
in assembly that could have been done in C++, attempting to optimize things that cannot be
optimized further, making spaghetti code that is difficult to maintain, and making code that is
full or errors and difficult to debug.

Here is a checklist of things to consider before you start programming:

   •   Never make the whole program in assembly. That is a waste of time. Assembly code
       should be used only where speed is critical and where a significant improvement in
       speed can be obtained. Most of the program should be made in C or C++. These are
       the programming languages that are most easily combined with assembly code.

   •   If the purpose of using assembly is to make system code or use special instructions
       that are not available in standard C++ then you should isolate the part of the
       program that needs these instructions in a separate function or class with a well-
       defined functionality. Use intrinsic functions instead (see p. 34) if possible.

   •   If the purpose of using assembly is to optimize for speed, then you have to identify
       the part of the program that consumes the most CPU time, possibly with the use of a

    profiler. Check if the bottleneck is file access, memory access, CPU instructions, or
    something else, as described in manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++". Isolate the
    critical part of the program into a function or class with a well-defined functionality.

•   If the purpose of using assembly is to make a function library then you should clearly
    define the functionality of the library. Decide whether to make a function library or a
    class library. Decide whether to use static linking (.lib in Windows, .a in Linux) or
    dynamic linking (.dll in Windows, .so in Linux). Static linking is usually more
    efficient, but dynamic linking may be necessary if the library is called from other
    languages than C or C++. You may possibly make both a static and a dynamic link
    version of the library.

•   If the purpose of using assembly is to optimize an embedded application for size or
    speed, then find a development tool that supports both C/C++ and assembly and
    make as much as possible in C or C++.

•   Decide if the code is reusable or application-specific. Spending time on careful
    optimization is more justified if the code is reusable. A reusable code is most
    appropriately implemented as a function library or class library.

•   Decide if the code should support multithreading. A multithreading application can
    take advantage of microprocessors with multiple cores. Any data that must be
    preserved from one function call to the next on a per-thread basis should be stored
    in a C++ class or a per-thread buffer supplied by the calling program.

•   Decide if portability is important for your application. Should the application work in
    both Windows, Linux, and Intel-based Mac OS? Should it work in both 32 bit and 64
    bit mode? Should it work on non-x86 platforms? This is important for the choice of
    compiler, assembler, and programming method.

•   Decide if your application should work on old microprocessors. If so, then you may
    make one version for microprocessors with, for example, the AVX512 instruction set,
    and another version which is compatible with old microprocessors. You may even
    make several versions, each optimized for a particular CPU. It is recommended to
    make automatic CPU dispatching (see page 132).

•   There are three assembly programming methods to choose between: (1) Use
    intrinsic functions and vector classes in a C++ compiler. (2) Use inline assembly in a
    C++ compiler. (3) Use an assembler. These three methods and their relative
    advantages and disadvantages are described in chapter 5, 6, and 7 respectively
    (page 34, 36, and 45 respectively).

•   If you are using an assembler, then you have to choose between different syntax
    dialects. It may be preferred to use an assembler that is compatible with the
    assembly code that your C++ compiler can generate.

•   Make your code in C++ first and optimize it as much as you can, using the methods
    described in manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++". Make the compiler translate
    the code to assembly. Look at the compiler-generated code and see if there are any
    possibilities for improvement in the code.

•   Highly optimized code tends to be very difficult to read and understand for others
    and even for yourself when you get back to it after some time. In order to make it
    possible to maintain the code, it is important that you organize it into small logical
    units (procedures or macros) with a well-defined interface and calling convention and
    appropriate comments. Decide on a consistent strategy for code comments and

       documentation.

   •   Save the compiler, assembler, and all other development tools together with the
       source code and project files for later maintenance. Compatible tools may not be
       available in a few years when updates and modifications in the code are needed.

2.2 Make a test strategy
Assembly code is error prone, difficult to debug, difficult to make in a clearly structured way,
difficult to read, and difficult to maintain, as I have already mentioned. A consistent test
strategy can ameliorate some of these problems and save you a lot of time.

My recommendation is to make the assembly code as an isolated module, function, class or
library with a well-defined interface to the calling program. Make it all in C++ first. Then
make a test program which can test all aspects of the code you want to optimize. It is easier
and safer to use a test program than to test the module in the final application.

The test program has two purposes. The first purpose is to verify that the assembly code
works correctly in all situations. And the second purpose is to test the speed of the
assembly code without invoking the user interface, file access and other parts of the final
application program that may make the speed measurements less accurate and less
reproducible.

You should use the test program repeatedly after each step in the development process and
after each modification of the code.

Make sure the test program works correctly. It is quite common to spend a lot of time
looking for an error in the code under test when in fact the error is in the test program.

There are different test methods that can be used for verifying that the code works correctly.
A white box test supplies a carefully chosen series of different sets of input data to make
sure that all branches, paths and special cases in the code are tested. A black box test
supplies a series of random input data and verifies that the output is correct. A very long
series of random data from a good random number generator can sometimes find rarely
occurring errors that the white box test hasn't found.

The test program may compare the output of the assembly code with the output of a C++
implementation to verify that it is correct. The test should cover all boundary cases and
preferably also illegal input data to see if the code generates the correct error responses.

The speed test should supply a realistic set of input data. A significant part of the CPU time
may be spent on branch mispredictions in code that contains a lot of branches. The amount
of branch mispredictions depends on the degree of randomness in the input data. You may
experiment with the degree of randomness in the input data to see how much it influences
the computation time, and then decide on a realistic degree of randomness that matches a
typical real application.

An automatic test program that supplies a long stream of test data will typically find more
errors and find them much faster than testing the code in the final application. A good test
program will find most errors, but you cannot be sure that it finds all errors. It is possible that
some errors show up only in combination with the final application.

2.3 Common coding pitfalls
The following list points out some of the most common programming errors in assembly
code.

1. Forgetting to save registers. Some registers have callee-save status, for example
   EBX. These registers must be saved in the prolog of a function and restored in the
   epilog if they are modified inside the function. Remember that the order of POP
   instructions must be the opposite of the order of PUSH instructions. See page 28 for a
   list of callee-save registers.

2. Unmatched PUSH and POP instructions. The number of PUSH and POP instructions
   must be equal for all possible paths through a function. Example:

   Example 2.1. Unmatched push/pop
   push ebx
   test ecx, ecx
   jz   Finished
   ...
   pop ebx
   Finished:       ; Wrong! Label should be before pop ebx
   ret

   Here, the value of EBX that is pushed is not popped again if ECX is zero. The result is
   that the RET instruction will pop the former value of EBX and jump to a wrong
   address.

3. Using a register that is reserved for another purpose. Some compilers reserve the
   use of EBP or EBX for a frame pointer or other purpose. Using these registers for a
   different purpose in inline assembly can cause errors.

4. Stack-relative addressing after push. When addressing a variable relative to the
   stack pointer, you must take into account all preceding instructions that modify the
   stack pointer. Example:

   Example 2.2. Stack-relative addressing
   mov [esp+4], edi
   push ebp
   push ebx
   cmp esi, [esp+4]          ; Wrong!

   Here, the programmer probably intended to compare ESI with EDI, but the value of
   ESP that is used for addressing has been changed by the two PUSH instructions, so
   that ESI is in fact compared with EBP instead.

5. Confusing value and address of a variable. Example:

   Example 2.3. Value versus addresssection .data
   ; NASM syntax:
   MyVariable DD 0           ; Define variable

   section .text
   mov eax, [MyVariable]            ; Gets value of MyVariable
   mov eax, MyVariable              ; Gets address of MyVariable
   lea eax, [MyVariable]            ; Gets address of MyVariable
   mov ebx, [eax]                   ; Gets value of MyVariable through pointer

   ; MASM syntax is even more confusing:
   mov eax, MyVariable       ; Gets value of MyVariable
   mov eax, offset MyVariable; Gets address of MyVariable
   lea eax, MyVariable       ; Gets address of MyVariable
   mov ebx, [eax]            ; Gets value of MyVariable through pointer
   mov ebx, [100]            ; Gets the constant 100 despite brackets
   mov ebx, ds:[100]         ; Gets value from address 100

6. Ignoring calling conventions. It is important to observe the calling conventions for
   functions, such as the order of parameters, whether parameters are transferred on
   the stack or in registers, and whether the stack is cleaned up by the caller or the
   called function. See page 28.

7. Function name mangling. A C++ code that calls an assembly function should use
   extern "C" to avoid name mangling. Some systems require that an underscore (_)
   is put in front of the name in the assembly code. See page 31.

8. Forgetting return. A function declaration must end with both RET and ENDP. Using
   one of these is not enough. The execution will continue in the code after the
   procedure if there is no RET.

9. Forgetting stack alignment. The stack pointer must point to an address divisible by
   16 before any call statement, except in 16-bit systems and 32-bit Windows. See
   page 28.

10. Forgetting shadow space in 64-bit Windows. It is required to reserve 32 bytes of
    empty stack space before any function call in 64-bit Windows. See page 30.

11. Mixing calling conventions. The calling conventions in 64-bit Windows and 64-bit
    Linux are different. See page 28.

12. Forgetting to clean up floating point register stack. All floating point stack registers
    that are used by a function must be cleared, typically with FSTP ST(0), before the
    function returns, except for ST(0) if it is used for return value. It is necessary to keep
    track of exactly how many floating point registers are in use. If a functions pushes
    more values on the floating point register stack than it pops, then the register stack
    will grow each time the function is called. An exception is generated when the stack
    is full. This exception may occur somewhere else in the program.

13. Forgetting to clear MMX state. A function that uses MMX registers must clear these
    with the EMMS instruction before any call or return.

14. Forgetting to clear YMM state. A function that uses YMM or ZMM registers must
    clear these with the VZEROUPPER or VZEROALL instruction before any call or return.

15. Forgetting to clear direction flag. Any function that sets the direction flag with STD
    must clear it with CLD before any call or return.

16. Mixing signed and unsigned integers. Unsigned integers are compared using the JB
    and JA instructions. Signed integers are compared using the JL and JG instructions.
    Mixing signed and unsigned integers can have unintended consequences.

17. Forgetting to scale an array index. An array index must be multiplied by the size of
    one array element. For example mov eax, MyIntegerArray[ebx*4].

18. Exceeding array bounds. An array with n elements is indexed from 0 to n - 1, not
    from 1 to n. A defective loop writing outside the bounds of an array can cause errors
    elsewhere in the program that are hard to find.

19. Loop with ECX = 0. A loop that ends with the LOOP instruction will repeat 232 times if
    ECX is zero. Be sure to check if ECX is zero before the loop.

20. Reading carry flag after INC or DEC. The INC and DEC instructions do not change the
    carry flag. Do not use instructions that read the carry flag, such as ADC, SBB, JC, JBE,
    SETA, etc. after INC or DEC. Use ADD and SUB instead of INC and DEC to avoid this
