7 Using an assembler
There are certain limitations on what you can do with intrinsic functions and inline assembly.
These limitations can be overcome by using an assembler. The principle is to write one or
more assembly files containing the most critical functions of a program and writing the less
critical parts in C++. The different modules are then linked together into an executable file.

The advantages of using an assembler are:

   •   There are almost no limitations on what you can do.

   •   You have complete control of all details of the final executable code.

   •   All aspects of the code can be optimized, including function prolog and epilog,
       parameter transfer methods, register usage, data alignment, etc.

   •   It is possible to make functions with multiple entries.

   •   It is possible to make code that is compatible with multiple compilers and multiple
       operating systems (see page 52).

   •   Good assemblers have powerful macro features that opens up metaprogramming
       possibilities that are absent in most compiled high-level languages (see page 103).

The disadvantages of using an assembler are:

   •   Assembly language is difficult to learn. There are many instructions to remember.

   •   Coding in assembly takes more time than coding in a high-level language.

   •   The assembly language syntax is not standardized.

   •   Assembly code tends to become poorly structured and spaghetti-like. It takes a lot of
       discipline to make assembly code well-structured and readable for others.

   •   Assembly code is not portable between different microprocessor architectures.

   •   The programmer must know all details of the calling conventions and obey these
       conventions in the code.

   •   The assembler provides very little syntax checking. Many programming errors are
       not detected by the assembler.

   •   There are many things that you can do wrong in assembly code and the errors can
       have serious consequences.

   •   It is difficult to remember which instructions belong to which instruction set
       extensions. Using a wrong instruction can cause the program to crash.

   •   You may inadvertently mix VEX and non-VEX vector instructions. This incurs a large
       performance penalty on some Intel CPUs (see chapter 13.1).

   •   Errors in assembly code can be difficult to trace. For example, the error of not saving
       a register can cause a completely different part of the program to malfunction.

   •   Assembly language is not suitable for making a complete program. Most of the
       program has to be made in a different programming language.

The best way to start if you want to make assembly code is to first make the entire program
in C or C++. Optimize the program with the use of the methods described in manual 1:
"Optimizing software in C++". If any part of the program needs further optimization, then
isolate this part in a separate module. Then translate the critical module from C++ to
assembly. There is no need to do this translation manually. Most C++ compilers can
produce assembly code. Turn on all relevant optimization options in the compiler when
translating the C++ code to assembly. The assembly code produced by the compiler is a
good starting point for further optimization. The compiler-generated assembly code is sure
to have the calling conventions right. (The output produced by 64-bit compilers for Windows
is possibly not fully compatible with any assembler).

Inspect the assembly code produced by the compiler to see if there are any possibilities for
further optimization. Sometimes compilers are very smart and produce code that is better
optimized than what an average assembly programmer can do. In other cases, compilers
are incredibly stupid and do things in very awkward and inefficient ways. It is in the latter
case that it is justified to spend time on assembly coding.

Most IDE's (Integrated Development Environments) provide a way of including assembly
modules in a C++ project. For example in Microsoft Visual Studio, you can define a "custom
build step" for an assembly source file. The specification for the custom build step may, for
example, look like this. Command line: ml /c /Cx /Zi /coff $(InputName).asm.
Outputs: $(InputName).obj. Alternatively, you may use a makefile (see page 50) or a
batch file.

The C++ files that call the functions in the assembly module should include a header file
(*.h) containing function prototypes for the assembly functions. It is recommended to add
extern "C" to the function prototypes to remove the compiler-specific name mangling
codes from the function names.

Examples of assembly functions for different platforms are provided in paragraph 4.5, page
32ff.

7.1 Static link libraries
It is convenient to collect assembled code from multiple assembly files into a function
library. The advantages of organizing assembly modules into function libraries are:

   •   The library can contain many functions and modules. The linker will automatically
       pick the modules that are needed in a particular project and leave out the rest so
       that no superfluous code is added to the project.

   •   A function library is easy and convenient to include in a C++ project. All C++
       compilers and IDE's support function libraries.

   •   A function library is reusable. The extra time spent on coding and testing a function
       in assembly language is better justified if the code can be reused in different
       projects.

   •   Making as a reusable function library forces you to make well tested and well
       documented code with a well-defined functionality and a well-defined interface to the
       calling program.

   •   A reusable function library with a general functionality is easier to maintain and verify
       than an application-specific assembly code with a less well-defined responsibility.

   •   A function library can be used by other programmers who have no knowledge of
       assembly language.

A static link function library for Windows is built by using the library manager (e.g. lib.exe)
to combine one or more *.obj files into a *.lib file.

A static link function library for Linux is built by using the archive manager (ar) to combine
one or more *.o files into an *.a file.

A function library must be supplemented by a header file (*.h) containing function
prototypes for the functions in the library. This header file is included in the C++ files that
call the library functions (e.g. #include "mylibrary.h").

It is convenient to use a makefile (see page 50) for managing the commands necessary for
building and updating a function library.

7.2 Dynamic link libraries
The difference between static linking and dynamic linking is that the static link library is
linked into the executable program file so that the executable file contains a copy of only the
necessary parts of the library. A dynamic link library (*.dll) is distributed as a separate file
which is loaded at runtime by the executable file in Windows systems. Linux and Mac OS
use a slightly different type of dynamic libraries called shared objects (*.so). These are
described in the next section.

The advantages of dynamic link libraries are:

   •   Only one instance of the dynamic link library is loaded into memory when multiple
       programs running simultaneously use the same library.

   •   The dynamic link library can be updated without modifying the executable file.

   •   A dynamic link library can be called from most programming languages, such as
       Pascal, C#, and Visual Basic. Calling from Java is possible but difficult.

The disadvantages of dynamic link libraries are:

   •   The whole library is loaded into memory even when only a small part of it is needed.

   •   Loading a dynamic link library takes extra time when the executable program file is
       loaded.

   •   Calling a function in a dynamic link library is less efficient than a static library
       because of extra call overhead and because of less efficient code cache use.

   •   The dynamic link library must be distributed together with the executable file.

   •   Multiple programs installed on the same computer must use the same version of a
       dynamic link library if different versions have the same name. This can cause many
       compatibility problems.

A DLL for Windows is made with the Microsoft linker (link.exe). The linker must be
supplied one or more .obj or .lib files containing the necessary library functions and a
DllEntry function, which just returns 1. A module definition file (*.def) is also needed.
Note that DLL functions in 32-bit Windows use the __stdcall calling convention, while
static link library functions use the __cdecl calling convention by default. An example
source code can be found in www.agner.org/random/randoma.zip.

7.3 Shared object libraries
Linux, BSD, and Mac OS use shared objects (*.so) rather than DLLs. Shared objects are
very similar to DLLs and used in the same way.

It is possible to override a symbol name in a shared object just like in a static library. This
makes it different from a DLL. This feature, called symbol interposition, is rarely used and it
comes at a high cost. All functions with public visibility are accessed through a procedure
linkage table (PLT), and all variables and data objects with public visibility are accessed
through a global offset table (GOT). Static variables with only local visibility are also
accessed through the GOT in 32-bit mode. These complications make shared objects less
efficient than static link libraries. See the section "Position-independent code" in manual 1:
"Optimizing software in C++" for a further discussion.

7.4 Libraries in source code form
A problem with subroutine libraries in binary form is that the compiler cannot optimize the
function call. This problem can be solved by supplying the library functions as C++ source
code.

If the library functions are supplied as C++ source, code then the compiler can optimize
away the function calling overhead by inlining the function. It can optimize register allocation
across the function. It can do constant propagation. It can move invariant code when the
function is called inside a loop, etc.

The compiler can only do these optimizations with C++ source code, not with pure assembly
code. The code may contain inline assembly or intrinsic function calls. The compiler can do
further optimizations if the code uses intrinsic function calls, but less so if it uses inline
assembly. Different compilers will not optimize the code equally well.

If the compiler uses whole program optimization, then the library functions can simply be
supplied as a C++ source file. If not, then the library code must be included with #include
statements in order to enable optimization across the function calls. A function defined in an
included file should be declared static and/or inline in order to avoid clashes between
multiple instances of the function.

Some compilers with whole program optimization features can produce half-compiled object
files that allow further optimization at the link stage. Unfortunately, the format of such files is
not standardized – not even between different versions of the same compiler. It is possible
that future compiler technology will allow a standardized format for half-compiled code. This
format should, as a minimum, specify which registers are used for parameter transfer and
which registers are modified by each function. It should preferably also allow register
allocation at link time, constant propagation, common subexpression elimination across
functions, and invariant code motion.

As long as such facilities are not available, we may consider using the alternative strategy of
putting the entire innermost loop into an optimized library function rather than calling the
library function from inside a C++ loop. This solution is used in Intel's Math Kernel Library. If,
for example, you need to calculate a thousand logarithms then you can supply an array of
thousand arguments to a vector logarithm function in the library and receive an array of
thousand results back from the library. This has the disadvantage that intermediate results
have to be stored in RAM memory rather than transferred in registers.

7.5 Making classes in assembly
Classes are coded as structures in assembly, and member functions are coded as functions
that receive a pointer to the class/structure as a parameter.

It is not possible to apply the extern "C" declaration to a member function in C++
because extern "C" refers to the calling conventions of the C language which does not
have classes and member functions. The most logical solution is to use the mangled
function name. Returning to example 6.2a and b page 40, we can write the member function
int MyList::Sum() with a mangled name as follows:

    ; Example 7.1a (Example 6.2b translated to stand alone assembly)
    ; Member function, 32-bit Windows

    section .text
    global ?Sum@MyList@@QAEHXZ:function

    ; Define structure corresponding to class MyList:
    struc    MyList
    length: resd 1                     ; int length
    buffer: resd 100                   ; int buffer[100];
    endstruc

    ; int MyList::Sum()
    ; Mangled function name compatible with Microsoft compiler (32 bit):
    ?Sum@MyList@@QAEHXZ:
    ;32-bit Windows has 'this' pointer in ECX
          xor eax, eax                 ; sum = 0
          xor edx, edx                 ; Loop index i = 0
          cmp dword [ecx+length], 0    ; this->length
          je L9                        ; Skip if length = 0
    L1:   add eax, [ecx+buffer+edx*4] ; sum += buffer[i]
          add edx, 1                   ; i++
          cmp edx, [ecx+length]        ; while (i < length)
          jb L1                        ; Loop
    L9:   ret                          ; Return value is in eax

The mangled function name ?Sum@MyList@@QAEHXZ is compiler specific. Gnu and Clang
compilers have other name-mangling codes. Furthermore, other compilers may put 'this'
on the stack rather than in a register. These incompatibilities can be solved by using a
friend function rather than a member function. This solves the problem that a member
function cannot be declared extern "C". The declaration in the C++ header file must then
be changed to the following:

    // Example 7.1b. Member function changed to friend function:

    // An incomplete class declaration is needed here:
    class MyList;

    // Function prototype for friend function with 'this' as parameter:
    extern "C" int MyList_Sum(MyList * ThisP);

    // Class declaration:
    class MyList {
       protected:
       int length;                      // Data members:
       int buffer[100];

          public:
          MyList();                         // Constructor
          void AttItem(int item);           // Add item to list

          // Make MyList_Sum a friend:
          friend int MyList_Sum(MyList * ThisP);

          // Translate Sum to MyList_Sum by inline call:
          int Sum() {return MyList_Sum(this);}
     };

The prototype for the friend function must come before the class declaration because some
compilers do not allow extern "C" inside the class declaration. An incomplete class
declaration is needed because the friend function needs a pointer to the class.

The above declarations will make the compiler replace any call to MyList::Sum by a call to
MyList_Sum because the latter function is inlined into the former. The assembly
implementation of MyList_Sum does not need a mangled name. The pointer will be on the
stack in 32-bit mode, and in rcx or rdi in 64-bit mode.

7.6 Thread-safe functions
A thread-safe or reentrant function is a function that works correctly when it is called
simultaneously from more than one thread. Multithreading is used for taking advantage of
computers with multiple CPU cores. It is reasonable to require that a function library
intended for speed-critical applications should be thread-safe.

Functions are thread-safe when no variables are shared between threads, except for
intended communication between the threads. Constant data can be shared between
threads without problems. Variables that are stored on the stack are thread-safe because
each thread has its own stack. The problem arises only with static variables stored in a data
segment. Static variables are used when data have to be saved from one function call to the
next. It is possible to make thread-local static variables, but this is inefficient and system-
specific.

The best way to store data from one function call to the next in a thread-safe way is to let
the calling function allocate storage space for these data. The most elegant way to do this is
to encapsulate the data and the functions that need them in a class. Each thread must
create an object of the class and call the member functions on this object. The previous
paragraph shows how to make member functions in assembly.

If the thread-safe assembly function has to be called from C or another language that does
not support classes, or does so in an incompatible way, then the solution is to allocate a
storage buffer in each thread and supply a pointer to this buffer to the function.

7.7 Makefiles
A make utility is a universal tool to manage software projects. It keeps track of all the source
files, object files, library files, executable files, etc. in a software project. It does so by means
of a general set of rules based on the date/time stamps of all the files. If a source file is
newer than the corresponding object file, then the object file has to be re-made. If the object
file is newer than the executable file then the executable file has to be re-made.

Any IDE (Integrated Development Environment) contains a make utility which is activated
from a graphical user interface, but in most cases it is also possible to use a command-line
version of the make utility. The command line make utility (called make or nmake) is based
on a set of rules that you can define in a so-called makefile. The advantage of using a
makefile is that it is possible to define rules for any type of files, such as source files in any
programming language, object files, library files, module definition files, resource files,
executable files, zip files, etc. The only requirement is that a tool exists for converting one
type of file to another and that this tool can be called from a command line with the file
names as parameters.

The syntax for defining rules in a makefile is almost the same for all the different make
utilities that come with different compilers for Windows and Linux.

Many IDE's also provide features for user-defined make rules for file types not known to the
IDE, but these utilities are often less general and flexible than a stand-alone make utility.

The following is an example of a makefile for making a function library mylibrary.lib
from three assembly source files func1.asm, func2.asm, func3.asm and packing it
together with the corresponding header file mylibrary.h into a zip file mylibrary.zip.

    # Example 7.2. makefile for mylibrary, NMAKE syntax
    mylibrary.zip: mylibrary.lib mylibrary.h
       zip $@ $?

    mylibrary.lib: func1.obj func2.obj func3.obj
       lib /out:$@ $**

    .asm.obj
        nasm -f win32 -o $@.obj $*.asm
        # or MASM: ml /c /Cx /coff /Fo$@ $*.asm

The line mylibrary.zip: mylibrary.lib mylibrary.h tells that the file
mylibrary.zip is built from mylibrary.lib and mylibrary.h, and that it must be re-
built if any of these has been modified later than the zip file. The next line, which must be
indented by a tab, specifies the command needed for building the target file
mylibrary.zip from its dependents mylibrary.lib and mylibrary.h. The next two
lines tell how to build the library file mylibrary.lib from the three object files. The line
.asm.obj is a generic rule. It tells that any file with extension .obj can be built from a file
with the same name and extension .asm by using the rule in the following indented line.

The build rules for makefiles can use the following macros for specifying file names:

                                                      Gnu make               MS nmake
 Current target's full name                          $@                     $@
 Full name of dependent file                         $<                     $<
 Current target's base name without extension        $*                     $*
 All dependents of the current target, separated     $^ $+                  $**
 by spaces
 All dependents with a later timestamp than the      $?                     $?
 current target
Table 7.1. Makefile macros

The make utility is activated with the command
nmake /Fmakefile or
make -f makefile.

See the manual for the particular make utility for details.

