9 Optimizing for speed
9.1 Identify the most critical parts of your code
Optimizing software is not just a question of fiddling with the right assembly instructions.
Many modern applications use much more time on loading modules, resource files,
databases, interface frameworks, etc. than on actually doing the calculations the program is
made for. Optimizing the calculation time does not help when the program spends 99.9% of
its time on something other than calculation. It is important to find out where the biggest
time consumers are before you start to optimize anything. Sometimes the solution can be to
change from Java or C# to C++, to use a different user interface framework, to organize file
input and output differently, to cache network data, to avoid dynamic memory allocation,
etc., rather than using assembly language. See manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++" for
further discussion.

The use of assembly code for optimizing software is relevant only for highly CPU-intensive
programs such as sound and image processing, encryption, sorting, data compression and
complicated mathematical calculations.

In CPU-intensive software programs, you will often find that more than 99% of the CPU time
is used in the innermost loop. Identifying the most critical part of the code is therefore
necessary if you want to improve the speed of computation. Optimizing less critical parts of
the code will not only be a waste of time, it also makes the code less clear, and less easy to
debug and maintain. Most compiler packages include a profiler that can tell you which part
of the code is most critical. If you do not have a profiler and if it is not obvious which part of
the code is most critical, then set up a number of counter variables that are incremented at
different places in the code to see which part is executed most times. Use the methods
described on page 154 for measuring how long time each part of the code takes.

It is important to study the algorithm used in the critical part of the code to see if it can be
improved. Often you can gain more speed simply by choosing the optimal algorithm than by
any other optimization method.

9.2 Out of order execution
All modern x86 processors can execute instructions out of order. Consider this example:

    ; Example 9.1a, Out-of-order execution
    mov eax, [mem1]
    imul eax, 6
    mov [mem2], eax
    mov ebx, [mem3]
    add ebx, 2
    mov [mem4], ebx

This piece of code is doing two things that have nothing to do with each other: multiplying
[mem1] by 6 and adding 2 to [mem3]. If it happens that [mem1] is not in the cache then the
CPU has to wait many clock cycles while this operand is being fetched from main memory.
The CPU will look for something else to do in the meantime. It cannot do the second
instruction imul eax,6 because it depends on the output of the first instruction. But the
fourth instruction mov ebx,[mem3] is independent of the preceding instructions so it is
possible to execute mov ebx,[mem3] and add ebx,2 while it is waiting for [mem1]. The
CPUs have many features to support efficient out-of-order execution. Most important is, of
course, the ability to detect whether an instruction depends on the output of a previous
instruction. Another important feature is register renaming. Assume that the we are using
the same register for multiplying and adding in example 9.1a because there are no more
spare registers:

    ; Example 9.1b, Out-of-order execution with register renaming
    mov eax, [mem1]
    imul eax, 6
    mov [mem2], eax
    mov eax, [mem3]
    add eax, 2
    mov [mem4], eax

Example 9.1b will work exactly as fast as example 9.1a because the CPU is able to use
different physical registers for the same logical register eax. This works in a very elegant
way. The CPU assigns a new physical register to hold the value of eax every time eax is
written to. This means that the above code is changed inside the CPU to a code that uses
four different physical registers for eax. The first register is used for the value loaded from
[mem1]. The second register is used for the output of the imul instruction. The third register
is used for the value loaded from [mem3]. And the fourth register is used for the output of
the add instruction. The use of different physical registers for the same logical register
enables the CPU to make the last three instructions in example 9.1b independent of the first
three instructions. The number of physical registers is different for different microprocessors.
The best microprocessors today have several hundred physical registers. This makes it
possible reorder instructions at a large scale.

Partial registers
Some CPUs can keep different parts of a register separate, while other CPUs always treat a
register as a whole. If we change example 9.1b so that the second part uses 16-bit registers
then we have the problem of a false dependence:

    ; Example 9.1c, False dependence of partial register
    mov eax, [mem1]       ; 32 bit memory operand
    imul eax, 6
    mov [mem2], eax
    mov ax, [mem3]        ; 16 bit memory operand
    add ax, 2
    mov [mem4], ax

Here the instruction mov ax,[mem3] changes only the lower 16 bits of register eax, while
the upper 16 bits retain the value they got from the imul instruction. Some CPUs from both
Intel, AMD and VIA are unable to rename a partial register. The consequence is that the mov
ax,[mem3] instruction has to wait for the imul instruction to finish because it needs to
combine the 16 lower bits from [mem3] with the 16 upper bits from the imul instruction.

Other CPUs are able to split the register into parts in order to avoid the false dependence,
but this has another disadvantage in case the two parts have to be joined together again.
Assume, for example, that the code in example 9.1c is followed by PUSH EAX. On some
processors, this instruction has to wait for the two parts of EAX to retire in order to join them
together, at the cost of 5-6 clock cycles. Other processors will generate an extra µop for
joining the two parts of the register together.

These problems are avoided by replacing mov ax,[mem3] with movzx eax,[mem3]. This
resets the high bits of eax and breaks the dependence on any previous value of eax. In 64-
bit mode, it is sufficient to write to the 32-bit register because this always resets the upper
part of a 64-bit register. Thus, movzx eax,[mem3] and movzx rax,[mem3] are doing
exactly the same thing. The 32-bit version of the instruction is one byte shorter than the 64-
bit version. Any use of the high 8-bit registers AH, BH, CH, DH should be avoided because it
can cause false dependences and less efficient code.

The flags register can cause similar problems for instructions that modify some of the flag
bits and leave other bits unchanged. For example, the INC and DEC instructions leave the
carry flag unchanged but modifies the zero and sign flags.
Micro-operations
Another important feature is the splitting of instructions into micro-operations (abbreviated
µops or uops). The following example shows the advantage of this:

    ; Example 9.2, Splitting instructions into uops
    push eax
    call SomeFunction

The push eax instruction does two things. It subtracts 4 from the stack pointer and stores
eax to the address pointed to by the stack pointer. Assume now that eax is the result of a
long and time-consuming calculation. This delays the push instruction. The call instruction
depends on the value of the stack pointer which is modified by the push instruction. If
instructions were not split into µops then the call instruction would have to wait until the
push instruction was finished. But the CPU splits the push eax instruction into sub esp,4
followed by mov [esp],eax. The sub esp,4 micro-operation can be executed before eax
is ready, so the call instruction will wait only for sub esp,4, not for mov [esp],eax.

Execution units
Out-of-order execution becomes even more efficient when the CPU can do more than one
thing at the same time. Modern CPUs can execute up to four, six, or even eight instructions
at the same time if the input data of each instruction are independent of the output of the
other instructions and if they are not using the same execution units in the CPU. Modern
CPUs have at least two integer ALU's (Arithmetic Logic Units) so that they can do two or
more integer additions per clock cycle. Modern CPUs also have two or more floating point
arithmetic units so that it is possible to do two or more floating point operations at the same
time. There may be two or more memory read units and one or two memory write units so
that it is possible to read and write to memory at the same time. For example, it may be
possible to issue two integer operations, a floating point operation, and a memory operation
in the same clock cycle. Manual 3: “The microarchitecture of Intel, AMD, and VIA CPUs”
lists how many execution units of each type a particular microprocessor has. Manual 4:
“Instruction tables” lists the throughput for each instruction on the different microprocessors.

Pipelined instructions
Floating point operations typically take more than one clock cycle, but they are often
pipelined so that e.g. a new floating point addition can start before the previous addition is
finished. Vector instructions are using the floating point execution units even for integer
instructions on most CPUs. The details about which instructions can be executed
simultaneously or pipelined and how many clock cycles each instruction takes are CPU
specific. The details for each type of CPU are explained manual 3: "The microarchitecture of
Intel, AMD and VIA CPUs" and manual 4: "Instruction tables".

Summary
The most important things you have to be aware of in order to take maximum advantage of
out-or-order execution are:

   •   At least the following registers can be renamed: all general purpose registers, the
       stack pointer, the flags register, floating point registers, and vector registers. Some
       CPUs can also rename segment registers and the floating point control word.

   •   Prevent false dependences by writing to a full register rather than a partial register.

   •   The INC and DEC instructions are inefficient on some CPUs because they write to
       only part of the flags register (excluding the carry flag). Use ADD or SUB instead to
       avoid false dependences or inefficient splitting of the flags register, especially if they
       are followed by an instruction that reads the flags.

   •   A chain of instructions where each instruction depends on the previous one cannot
       execute out of order. Avoid long dependency chains. (See page 64).

   •   Memory operands cannot be renamed.

   •   A memory read can execute before a preceding memory write to a different address
       in most cases. Any pointer or index registers should be calculated as early as
       possible so that the CPU can verify that the addresses of memory operands are
       different.

   •   A memory write may not be able to execute before a preceding write, but the write
       buffers can hold a number of pending writes, typically four or more.

   •   A memory read can execute before or simultaneously with another preceding read
       on most processors.

   •   The CPU can do more things simultaneously if the code contains a good mixture of
       instructions from different categories, such as: simple integer instructions, floating
       point or vector instructions, memory read, memory write.

9.3 Instruction fetch, decoding and retirement
Instruction fetching can be a bottleneck. Many processors cannot fetch more than 16 bytes
of instruction code per clock cycle. It may be necessary to make instructions as short as
possible if this limit turns out to be critical. One way of making instructions shorter is to
replace memory operands by pointers (see chapter 10 page 73). The address of memory
operands can possibly be loaded into pointer registers outside of a loop if instruction
fetching is a bottleneck. Large constants can likewise be loaded into registers.

Instruction fetching is delayed by jumps on most processors. It is important to minimize the
number of jumps in critical code. Branches that are not taken and correctly predicted do not
delay instruction fetching. It is therefore advantageous to organize if-else branches so that
the branch that is followed most commonly is the one where the conditional jump is not
taken.

Most processors fetch instructions in aligned 16-byte or 32-byte blocks. It can be
advantageous to align critical loop entries and subroutine entries by 16 in order to minimize
the number of 16-byte boundaries in the code. Alternatively, make sure that there is no 16-
byte boundary in the first few instructions after a critical loop entry or subroutine entry.

Instruction decoding is often a bottleneck. The organization of instructions that gives the
optimal decoding is processor-specific. On older AMD processors it is preferred to avoid
instructions that generate more than 2 µops.

Instructions with multiple prefixes can slow down decoding. There is a maximum number of
prefixes that an instruction can have without slowing down decoding, depending on the
CPU. Avoid address size prefixes. Avoid operand size prefixes on instructions with an
immediate operand. For example, it is preferred to replace MOV AX,2 by MOV EAX,2.

Modern CPUs have a µop cache or a tiny loopback buffer that helps remove the bottleneck
of instruction decoding in small loops. Keep loops small so that they are likely to fit into the
µop cache or loopback buffer. Avoid unnecessary loop unrolling.

All these details are processor-specific. See manual 3: "The microarchitecture of Intel, AMD
and VIA CPUs" for details.

9.4 Instruction latency and throughput
The latency of an instruction is the number of clock cycles it takes from the time the
instruction starts to execute till the result is ready. The time it takes to execute a
dependency chain is the sum of the latencies of all instructions in the chain.

The throughput of an instruction is the maximum number of instructions of the same kind
that can be executed per clock cycle if the instructions are independent. I prefer to list the
reciprocal throughputs because this makes it easier to compare latency and throughput.
The reciprocal throughput is the average time it takes from the time an instruction starts to
execute till another independent instruction of the same type can start to execute, or the
number of clock cycles per instruction in a series of independent instructions of the same
kind. For example, floating point addition on a Core 2 processor has a latency of 3 clock
cycles and a reciprocal throughput of 1 clock per instruction. This means that the processor
uses 3 clock cycles per addition if each addition depends on the result of the preceding
addition, but only 1 clock cycle per addition if the additions are independent.

Manual 4: "Instruction tables" contains detailed lists of latencies and throughputs for almost
all instructions on many different microprocessors from Intel, AMD and VIA.

The following list shows some typical values.

  Instruction                                        Typical latency     Typical reciprocal
                                                                         throughput
 Integer move                                               1                 0.17-0.5
 Integer addition                                           1                 0.17-0.5
 Integer Boolean                                            1                 0.17-0.5
 Integer shift                                              1                  0.33-1
 Integer multiplication                                   3-10                    1
 Integer division                                         12-80                 4-40
 Floating point addition                                   2-6                 0.5-1
 Floating point multiplication                             3-8                 0.5-2
 Floating point division                                  10-45                 3-45
 Integer vector addition                                   1-2                 0.25-2
 Integer vector multiplication                             3-7                 0.5-2
 Floating point vector addition                            2-5                 0.5-2
 Floating point vector multiplication                      3-7                 0.5-2
 Floating point vector division                           10-60                 4-60
 Memory read (cached)                                      3-4                 0.25-1
 Memory write (cached)                                     3-4                 0.5-1
 Jump or call                                               0                  0.5-2
 Table 9.1. Typical instruction latencies and throughputs

9.5 Break dependency chains
A dependency chain is a series of instructions where the result of each instruction is an
input for the next instruction. Each instruction must wait for the preceding instruction to
finish. This prevents the execution of multiple instructions in parallel or out of order.

It is important to avoid long dependency chains in order to take advantage of out-of-order
execution. Consider the following C++ example, which calculates the sum of 100 numbers:

    // Example 9.3a, Loop-carried dependency chain
    double list[100], sum = 0.;
    for (int i = 0; i < 100; i++) sum += list[i];

This code is doing a hundred additions, and each addition depends on the result of the
preceding one. This is a loop-carried dependency chain. A loop-carried dependency chain
can be very long and completely prevent out-of-order execution for a long time. Only the
calculation of i can be done in parallel with the floating point additions.

Assuming that floating point addition has a latency of 4 and a reciprocal throughput of 1, the
optimal implementation will have four accumulators so that we always have four additions in
the pipeline of the floating point adder. In C++ this will look like:

    // Example 9.3b, Multiple accumulators
    double list[100], sum1 = 0., sum2 = 0., sum3 = 0., sum4 = 0.;
    for (int i = 0; i < 100; i += 4) {
       sum1 += list[i];
       sum2 += list[i+1];
       sum3 += list[i+2];
       sum4 += list[i+3];
    }
    sum1 = (sum1 + sum2) + (sum3 + sum4);

Here we have four dependency chains running in parallel and each dependency chain is
one fourths as long as the original one. The optimal number of accumulators is the latency
of the instruction (in this case floating point addition), divided by the reciprocal throughput.
The optimization of loops is further discussed on page 87.

It may not be possible to obtain the theoretical maximum throughput. The more parallel
dependency chains there are, the more difficult is it for the CPU to schedule and reorder the
µops optimally. It is particularly difficult if the dependency chains are branched or entangled.

Modern microprocessors can execute four or more instructions per clock cycle. The more
instruction-level parallelism the microprocessor supports, the more important it is to avoid
long dependency chains.

Dependency chains occur not only in loops but also in linear code. Such dependency chains
can also be broken up. For example, y = a + b + c + d can be changed to
y = (a + b) + (c + d) so that the two parentheses can be calculated in parallel.

Sometimes there are different possible ways of implementing the same calculation with
different latencies. For example, you may have the choice between a branch and a
conditional move. The branch has the shortest latency, but the conditional move avoids the
risk of branch misprediction (see page 66). Which implementation is optimal depends on
how predictable the branch is and how long the dependency chain is.

A common way of setting a register to zero is XOR EAX,EAX or SUB EAX,EAX. Some
processors recognize that these instructions are independent of the prior value of the
register. Any instruction that uses the new value of the register will not have to wait for the
value prior to the XOR or SUB instruction to be ready. These instructions are useful for
breaking an unnecessary dependence. Most modern processors will recognize an XOR
instruction with two identical input registers as independent of the prior value for 32-bit and
64-bit general purpose registers, as well as vector registers of 128 bits or more.

You should not break a dependence by an 8-bit or 16-bit part of a register. For example
XOR AX,AX breaks a dependence on some processors, but not all. But XOR EAX,EAX is
sufficient for breaking the dependence on RAX in 64-bit mode.

The SBB EAX,EAX is of course dependent on the carry flag, even when it does not depend
on EAX.

You may also use these instructions for breaking dependences on the flags. For example,
rotate instructions have a false dependence on the flags in some Intel processors. This can
be removed in the following way:

    ; Example 9.4, Break dependence on flags
    ror eax, 1
    xor edx, edx     ; Remove false dependence on the flags
    ror ebx, 1

You cannot use CLC for breaking dependences on the carry flag.

9.6 Jumps and calls
Jumps, branches, calls and returns do not necessarily add to the execution time of a code
because they will typically be executed in parallel with something else. The number of
jumps etc. should nevertheless be kept at a minimum in critical code for the following
reasons:

   •   The fetching of code after an unconditional jump or a taken conditional jump is
       delayed by typically 1-3 clock cycles, depending on the microprocessor. The delay is
       worst if the target is near the end of a 16-bytes or 32-bytes code fetch block (i.e.
       before an address divisible by 16).

   •   The code cache becomes fragmented and less efficient when jumping around
       between noncontiguous subroutines.

   •   Microprocessors with a µop cache or trace cache are likely to store multiple
       instances of the same code in this cache when the code contains many jumps.

   •   The branch target buffer (BTB) can store only a limited number of jump target
       addresses. A BTB miss will cost many clock cycles.

   •   Conditional jumps are predicted according to advanced branch prediction
       mechanisms. Mispredictions are expensive, as explained below.

   •   On most processors, branches can interfere with each other in the global branch
       pattern history table and the branch history register. One branch may therefore
       reduce the prediction rate of other branches.

   •   Returns are predicted by the use of a return stack buffer, which can only hold a
       limited number of return addresses, typically 16.

   •   Indirect jumps and indirect calls are poorly predicted on older processors.

All modern CPUs have an execution pipeline that contains stages for instruction prefetching,
decoding, register renaming, µop reordering and scheduling, execution, retirement, etc. The
number of stages in the pipeline range from 12 to 22, depending on the specific micro-
architecture. When a branch instruction is fed into the pipeline then the CPU does not know
for sure which instruction is the next one to fetch into the pipeline. It takes 12-22 more clock
cycles before the branch instruction is executed so that it is known with certainty which way
the branch goes. This uncertainty is likely to break the flow through the pipeline. Rather than
waiting 12 or more clock cycles for an answer, the CPU attempts to guess which way the
branch will go. The guess is based on the previous behavior of the branch. If the branch has
gone the same way the last several times then it is predicted that it will go the same way
this time. If the branch has alternated regularly between the two ways then it is predicted
that it will continue to alternate.

If the prediction is right then the CPU has saved a lot of time by loading the right branch into
the pipeline and started to decode and speculatively execute the instructions in the branch.
If the prediction was wrong then the mistake is discovered after several clock cycles and the
mistake has to be fixed by flushing the pipeline and discarding the results of the speculative
executions. The cost of a branch misprediction ranges from 12 to more than 50 clock
cycles, depending on the length of the pipeline and other details of the microarchitecture.
This cost is so high that very advanced algorithms have been implemented in order to refine
the branch prediction. These algorithms are explained in detail in manual 3: "The
microarchitecture of Intel, AMD and VIA CPUs".

In general, you can assume that branches are predicted correctly most of the time in these
cases:

   •   If the branch always goes the same way.

   •   If the branch follows a simple repetitive pattern and is inside a loop with few or no
       other branches.

   •   If the branch is correlated with a preceding branch.

   •   If the branch is a loop with a constant, small repeat count and there are few or no
       conditional jumps inside the loop.

The worst case is a branch that goes either way approximately 50% of the time, does not
follow any regular pattern, and is not correlated with any preceding branch. Such a branch
will be mispredicted 50% of the time. This is so costly that the branch should be replaced by
conditional moves or a table lookup if possible.

In general, you should try to keep the number of poorly predicted branches at a minimum
and keep the number of branches inside a loop at a minimum. It may be useful to split up or
unroll a loop if this can reduce the number of branches inside the loop.

Indirect jumps and indirect calls are often poorly predicted. Older processors will simply
predict an indirect jump or call to go the same way as it did last time. Many newer
processors are able to recognize simple repetitive patterns for indirect jumps.

Returns are predicted by means of a so-called return stack buffer which is a first-in-last-out
buffer that mirrors the return addresses pushed on the stack. A return stack buffer with 16
entries can correctly predict all returns for subroutines at a nesting level up to 16. If the
subroutine nesting level is deeper than the size of the return stack buffer then the failure will
be seen at the outer nesting levels, not the presumably more critical inner nesting levels. A
return stack buffer size of 8 or more is therefore sufficient in most cases, except for deeply
nested recursive functions.

The return stack buffer will fail if there is a call without a matching return or a return without
a preceding call. It is therefore important to always match calls and returns. Do not jump out
of a subroutine by any other means than by a RET instruction, except in tail calls as
explained below. And do not use the RET instruction as an indirect jump. Far calls should be
matched with far returns.

Make conditional jumps most often not taken
The efficiency and throughput for not-taken branches is better than for taken branches on
most processors. Therefore, it is good to place the most frequent branch first:

    ; Example 9.5, Place most frequent branch first
    Func1:
        cmp eax,567
        je L1
        ; frequent branch
        ret
    L1: ; rare branch
        ret

Tail calls
It is possible to replace a call followed by a return by a jump:

    ; Example 9.6a, call/ret sequence (32-bit)
    Func1:
        ...
        call Func2
        ret

This can be changed to:

    ; Example 9.6b, call+ret replaced by jmp
    Func1:
        ...
        jmp   Func2 ; tail call

This modification does not conflict with the return stack buffer mechanism because the call
to Func1 is matched with the return from Func2. In systems with stack alignment, it is
necessary to restore the stack pointer before the jump:

    ; Example 9.7a, call/ret sequence (64-bit Windows or Linux)
    Func1:
        sub   rsp, 8           ; Align stack by 16
        ...
        call Func2             ; This call can be eliminated
        add   rsp, 8
        ret

This can be changed to:

    ; Example 9.7b, call+ret replaced by jmp with stack aligned
    Func1:
        sub   rsp, 8
        ...
        add   rsp, 8           ; Restore stack pointer before jump
        jmp   Func2

Eliminating unconditional jumps
It is often possible to eliminate a jump by copying the code that it jumps to. The code that is
copied can typically be a loop epilog or function epilog. The following example is a function
with an if-else branch inside a loop:

    ; Example 9.8a, Function with jump that can be eliminated
    FuncA:
            push    ebp
            mov     ebp, esp
            sub     esp, StackSpaceNeeded
            lea     edx, [EndOfSomeArray]
            xor     eax, eax

    Loop1:                                             ; Loop starts here
               cmp        [edx+eax*4], eax             ; if-else
               je         ElseBranch
               ...                                     ; First branch
               jmp        End_If

    ElseBranch:
            ...                                      ; Second branch
    End_If:
            add         eax, 1                       ; Loop epilog
            jnz         Loop1

              mov       esp, ebp                     ; Function epilog
              pop       ebp
              ret

The jump to End_If may be eliminated by duplicating the loop epilog:

    ; Example 9.8b, Loop epilog copied to eliminate jump
    FuncA:
            push    ebp
            mov     ebp, esp
            sub     esp, StackSpaceNeeded
            lea     edx, [EndOfSomeArray]
            xor     eax, eax

    Loop1:                                           ; Loop starts here
            cmp         [edx+eax*4], eax             ; if-else
            je          ElseBranch
            ...                                      ; First branch
            add         eax, 1                       ; Loop epilog for first branch
            jnz         Loop1
            jmp         AfterLoop
    ElseBranch:
            ...                                      ; Second branch
            add         eax, 1                       ; Loop epilog for second branch
            jnz         Loop1
    AfterLoop:
            mov         esp, ebp                     ; Function epilog
            pop         ebp
            ret

In example 9.8b, the unconditional jump inside the loop has been eliminated by making two
copies of the loop epilog. The branch that is executed most often should come first because
the first branch is fastest. The unconditional jump to AfterLoop can also be eliminated. This
is done by copying the function epilog:

    ; Example 9.8b, Function epilog copied to eliminate jump
    FuncA:
            push    ebp
            mov     ebp, esp
            sub     esp, StackSpaceNeeded
            lea     edx, [EndOfSomeArray]
            xor     eax, eax

    Loop1:                                           ; Loop starts here
              cmp       [edx+eax*4], eax             ; if-else
              je        ElseBranch
              ...                                    ; First branch
              add       eax, 1                       ; Loop epilog for first branch
              jnz       Loop1

              mov       esp, ebp                     ; Function epilog 1
              pop       ebp
              ret

    ElseBranch:
            ...                                      ; Second branch
            add         eax, 1                       ; Loop epilog for second branch

              jnz        Loop1

              mov        esp, ebp                     ; Function epilog 2
              pop        ebp
              ret

The gain that is obtained by eliminating the jump to AfterLoop is less than the gain
obtained by eliminating the jump to End_If because it is outside the loop. But I have shown
it here to illustrate the general method of duplicating a function epilog.

Replacing conditional jumps with conditional moves
The most important jumps to eliminate are conditional jumps, especially if they are poorly
predicted. Example:

    // Example 9.9a. C++ branch to optimize
    a = b > c ? d : e;

This can be implemented with either a conditional jump or a conditional move:

            ; Example 9.9b. Branch implemented with conditional jump
            mov     eax, [b]
            cmp     eax, [c]
            jng     L1
            mov     eax, [d]
            jmp     L2
    L1:     mov     eax, [e]
    L2:     mov     [a], eax

            ; Example 9.9c. Branch implemented with conditional move
            mov     eax, [b]
            cmp     eax, [c]
            mov     eax, [d]
            cmovng eax, [e]
            mov     [a], eax

The advantage of a conditional move is that it avoids branch mispredictions. But it has the
disadvantage that it increases the length of a dependency chain, while a predicted branch
breaks the dependency chain. If the code in example 9.9c is part of a dependency chain
then the cmov instruction adds to the length of the chain. If the same code is implemented
with a conditional jump as in example 9.9b and if the branch is predicted correctly, then the
result does not have to wait for b and c to be ready. It only has to wait for either d or e,
whichever is chosen. This means that the dependency chain is broken by the predicted
branch, while the implementation with a conditional move has to wait for both b, c, d and e
to be available. If d and e are complicated expressions, then both have to be calculated
when the conditional move is used, while only one of them has to be calculated if a
conditional jump is used.

As a rule of thumb, we can say that a conditional jump is faster than a conditional move if
the code is part of a dependency chain and the prediction rate is better than 75%. A
conditional jump is also preferred if we can avoid a lengthy calculation of d or e when the
other operand is chosen.

Loop-carried dependency chains are particularly sensitive to the disadvantages of
conditional moves. For example, the code in example 12.14a on page 104 works more
efficiently with a branch inside the loop than with a conditional move, even if the branch is
poorly predicted. This is because the floating point conditional move adds to the loop-
carried dependency chain and because the implementation with a conditional move has to
calculate all the power*xp values, even when they are not used.

Another example of a loop-carried dependency chain is a binary search in a sorted list. If
the items to search for are randomly distributed over the entire list then the branch
prediction rate will be close to 50% and it will be faster to use conditional moves. But if the
items are often close to each other so that the prediction rate will be better, then it is more
efficient to use conditional jumps than conditional moves because the dependency chain is
broken every time a correct branch prediction is made.

It is also possible to do conditional moves in vector registers on an element-by-element
basis. See page 113ff for details. There are special vector instructions for getting the
minimum or maximum of two numbers. It may be faster to use vector registers than integer
or floating point registers for finding minimums or maximums.

Replacing conditional jumps with conditional set instructions
If a conditional jump is used for setting a Boolean variable to 0 or 1 then it is often more
efficient to use the conditional set instruction. Example:

     // Example 9.10a. Set a bool variable on some condition
     int b, c;
     bool a = b > c;

     ; Example 9.10b. Implementation with conditional set
     mov    eax, [b]
     cmp    eax, [c]
     setg   al
     mov    [a], al

The conditional set instruction writes only to 8-bit registers. If a 32-bit result is needed then
set the rest of the register to zero before the compare:

     ; Example 9.10c. Implementation with conditional set, 32 bits
     mov    eax, [b]
     xor    ebx, ebx    ; zero register before cmp to avoid changing flags
     cmp    eax, [c]
     setg   bl
     mov    [a], ebx

If there is no vacant register then use movzx:

     ; Example 9.10d. Implementation with conditional set, 32 bits
     mov    eax, [b]
     cmp    eax, [c]
     setg   al
     movzx eax, al
     mov    [a], eax

If a value of all ones is needed for true then use neg eax.

An implementation with conditional jumps may be faster than conditional set if the prediction
rate is good and the code is part of a long dependency chain, as explained in the previous
section (page 70).

Replacing conditional jumps with bit-manipulation instructions
It is sometimes possible to obtain the same effect as a branch by ingenious manipulation of
bits and flags. The carry flag is particularly useful for bit manipulation tricks:

     ; Example 9.11, Set carry flag if eax is zero:
     cmp eax, 1

     ; Example 9.12, Set carry flag if eax is not zero:
     neg eax
    ; Example 9.13, Increment eax if carry flag is set:
    adc eax, 0

    ; Example 9.14, Copy carry flag to all bits of eax:
    sbb eax, eax

    ; Example 9.15, Copy bits one by one from carry into a bit vector:
    rcl eax, 1

It is possible to calculate the absolute value of a signed integer without branching:

    ; Example 9.16, Calculate absolute value of eax
    cdq               ; Copy sign bit of eax to all bits of edx
    xor eax, edx      ; Invert all bits if negative
    sub eax, edx      ; Add 1 if negative

The following example finds the minimum of two unsigned numbers: if (b > a) b = a;

    ; Example 9.17a, Find minimum of eax and ebx (unsigned):
    sub eax, ebx      ; = a-b
    sbb edx, edx      ; = (b > a) ? 0xFFFFFFFF : 0
    and edx, eax      ; = (b > a) ? a-b : 0
    add ebx, edx      ; Result is in ebx

Or, for signed numbers, ignoring overflow:

    ; Example 9.17b, Find minimum of eax and ebx (signed):
    sub eax, ebx      ; Will not work if overflow here
    cdq               ; = (b > a) ? 0xFFFFFFFF : 0
    and edx, eax      ; = (b > a) ? a-b : 0
    add ebx, edx      ; Result is in ebx

The next example chooses between two numbers: if (a < 0) d = b; else d = c;

    ; Example 9.18a, Choose between two numbers
    test eax, eax
    mov   edx, ecx
    cmovs edx, ebx    ; = (a < 0) ? b : c

Conditional moves are not very efficient on older Intel processors. Alternative implementa-
tions may be faster in some cases. The following example gives the same result as example
9.18a.

    ; Example 9.18b, Choose between two numbers without conditional move:
    cdq               ; = (a < 0) ? 0xFFFFFFFF : 0
    xor ebx, ecx      ; b ^ c = bits that differ between b and c
    and edx, ebx      ; = (a < 0) ? (b ^ c) : 0
    xor edx, ecx      ; = (a < 0) ? b : c

Example 9.18b may be faster than 9.18a on processors where conditional moves are
inefficient. Example 9.18b destroys the value of ebx.

Whether these tricks are faster than a conditional jump depends on the prediction rate, as
explained above.

