Processors supporting the AVX instruction set use VEX prefixes, which are 2 or 3 bytes
long. A 2-bytes VEX prefix can always be replaced by a 3-bytes VEX prefix. A VEX prefix
can be preceded by segment prefixes but not by any other prefixes. No other prefix is
allowed after the VEX prefix. Most instructions using XMM or YMM registers can have a
VEX prefix. Do not mix YMM vector instructions with VEX prefix and XMM instructions
without VEX prefix (see chapter 13.1). A few newer instructions on general purpose
registers also use VEX prefix.

The AVX512 instruction set uses a 4-bytes prefix names EVEX. Instructions may be made
longer by replacing a VEX prefix by an EVEX prefix when AVX512VL is supported.

It is recommended to check hand-coded instructions with a debugger or disassembler to
make sure they are correct.

10.7 Using multi-byte NOPs for alignment
The multi-byte NOP instruction has the opcode 0F 1F + a dummy memory operand. The
length of the multi-byte NOP instruction can be adjusted by optionally adding 1 or 4 bytes of
displacement and a SIB byte to the dummy memory operand and by adding one or more
66H prefixes. An excessive number of prefixes can cause delay on older microprocessors,
but at least two prefixes is acceptable on most processors. NOPs of any length up to 10
bytes can be constructed in this way with no more than two prefixes. If the processor can
handle multiple prefixes without penalty then the length can be up to 15 bytes.

The multi-byte NOP is more efficient than the commonly used pseudo-NOPs such as MOV
EAX,EAX or LEA RAX,[RAX+0]. The multi-byte NOP instruction is supported on all Intel P6
family processors and later, as well as AMD Athlon, K7 and later, i.e. almost all processors
that support conditional moves.

11 Optimizing memory access
Reading from the level-1 cache takes approximately 3 clock cycles. Reading from the level-
2 cache takes in the order of magnitude of 10 clock cycles. Reading from main memory
takes in the order of magnitude of 100 clock cycles. The access time is even longer if a
DRAM page boundary is crossed, and extremely long if the memory area has been
swapped to disk. I cannot give exact access times here because it depends on the
hardware configuration. The figures keep changing thanks to the fast technological
development.

However, it is obvious from these numbers that caching of code and data is extremely
important for performance. If the code has many cache misses, and if each cache miss
costs more than a hundred clock cycles, then this can be a very serious bottleneck for the
performance.

More advice on how to organize data for optimal caching are given in manual 1: "Optimizing
software in C++". Processor-specific details are given in manual 3: "The microarchitecture of
Intel, AMD and VIA CPUs" and in Intel's and AMD's software optimization manuals.

11.1 How caching works
A cache is a means of temporary storage that is closer to the microprocessor than the main
memory. Data and code that is used often, or expected to be used soon, is stored in a
cache so that it is accessed faster. Different microprocessors have one, two, or three levels
of cache. The level-1 cache is close to the microprocessor kernel and is accessed in just a
few clock cycles. A bigger level-2 cache is placed on the same chip or at least in the same
housing.

The level-1 data cache in the Intel Skylake processor, for example, can contain 32 kb of
data. It is organized as 512 lines of 64 bytes each. The cache is 8-way set-associative. This
means that the data from a particular memory address cannot be assigned to an arbitrary
cache line, but only to one of eight possible lines. The line length in this example is 64, so
each line must be aligned to an address divisible by 64. The least significant 6 bits, i.e. bit 0
- 5, of the memory address are used for addressing a byte within the 64 bytes of the cache
line. As each set comprises 8 lines, there will be 512 / 8 = 64 different sets. The next six
bits, i.e. bits 6 - 11, of a memory address will therefore select between these 64 sets. The
remaining bits can have any value. The conclusion of this mathematical exercise is that if
bits 6 - 11 of two memory addresses are equal, then they will be cached in the same set of
cache lines. The 64-byte memory blocks that contend for the same set of cache lines are
spaced 212 = 4096 bytes apart. No more than eight such addresses can be cached at the
same time.

The cache sizes, cache line sizes, and set associativity on different microprocessors are
described in manual 3: "The microarchitecture of Intel, AMD and VIA CPUs". The
performance penalty for level-1 cache line contention can be quite considerable on older
microprocessors, but on newer processors we are losing only a few clock cycles because
the data are likely to be prefetched from the level-2 cache, which is accessed quite fast
through a full-speed 256 bit data bus.

The cache lines are always aligned to physical addresses divisible by the cache line size
(typically 64 bytes). When we have read a byte at an address divisible by 64, then the next
63 bytes will be cached as well, and can be read or written to at almost no extra cost. We
can take advantage of this by arranging data items that are used near each other together
into aligned blocks of 64 bytes of memory.

The level-1 code cache works in the same way as the data cache, except on processors
with a trace cache. The level-2 cache is usually shared between code and data.

11.2 Trace cache
The old Intel processors with the NetBurst microarchitecture (Pentium 4) had a trace cache
instead of a code cache. The trace cache stores the code after it has been translated to
micro-operations (µops) while a normal code cache stores the raw code without translation.
The trace cache removes the bottleneck of instruction decoding and attempts to store the
code in the order in which it is executed rather than the order in which it occurs in memory.
The main disadvantage of a trace cache is that the code takes more space in a trace cache
than in a code cache. Later Intel processors do not have a trace cache, but possibly a µop
cache.

11.3 µop cache
Intel microprocessors since Sandy Bridge, and AMD processors since Zen 1, have a
traditional code cache before the decoders and a µop cache after the decoders. The µop
cache is a big advantage because instruction decoding is often a bottleneck. The maximum
capacity of the µop cache is 1536 µops in Intel Skylake and later processors, 2048 µops in
AMD Zen 1, and 4096 µops in AMD Zen 2 - 3. The µop cache is such a critical resource that
the programmer should economize its use and make sure the critical part of the code fits
into the µop cache. Avoid unnecessary loop unrolling.

Later Intel processors also have a small loopback buffer which can store the last 30 - 60
µops. A tiny loop that fits into the loopback buffer will run particularly fast if there are no
other bottlenecks.

Older AMD processors have instruction boundaries marked in the code cache. This relieves
the critical bottleneck of instruction length decoding and can therefore be seen as an
alternative to a µop cache. I do not know why this technique is rarely used in Intel
processors.

11.4 Alignment of data
All data in RAM should be aligned at addresses divisible by a power of 2 according to this
scheme:

                 Operand size                       Alignment
                   1 (byte)                              1
                   2 (word)                              2
                  4 (dword)                              4
                  6 (fword)                              8
                  8 (qword)                              8
                  10 (tbyte)                            16
             16 (oword, xmmword)                        16
                 32 (ymmword)                           32
                 64 (zmmword)                           64
Table 11.1. Preferred data alignment

The following example illustrates alignment of static data.

    ; Example 11.1, alignment of static data
    section .data align=16
    A:    DQ 0, 0          ; A is aligned by 16
    B:    times 32 DB 0
    C:    DD 0
    D:    DW 0
    ALIGN 16               ; E must be aligned by 16
    E:    DQ 0, 0

    section .text
          default rel
          movdqa xmm0, [A]
          movdqa [E], xmm0

In the above example, A, B and C all start at addresses divisible by 16. D starts at an address
divisible by 4, which is more than sufficient because it only needs to be aligned by 2. An
alignment directive must be inserted before E because the address after D is not divisible by
16 as required by the MOVDQA instruction. Alternatively, E could be placed after A or B to
make it aligned.

Some microprocessors have a penalty of several clock cycles when accessing misaligned
data that cross a cache line boundary.

Most XMM instructions without VEX prefix that read or write 16-byte memory operands
require that the operand is aligned by 16. Instructions that accept unaligned 16-byte
operands can be quite inefficient on older processors. However, this restriction is largely
relieved with the AVX and later instruction sets. AVX instructions do not require alignment of
memory operands, except for the explicitly aligned instructions. Processors that support the
AVX instruction set generally handle misaligned memory operands very efficiently.

Aligning data stored on the stack can be done by rounding down the value of the stack
pointer. The old value of the stack pointer must of course be restored before returning. A
function with aligned local data typically look like this:
    ; Example 11.2a, Explicit alignment of stack (64-bit Windows)
    FuncWithAlign:
            push    rbp                ; Prolog code
            mov     rbp, rsp           ; Save value of stack pointer
            sub     rsp, LocalSpace    ; Allocate space for local data
            and     rsp, -32           ; Align RSP by 32
            mov     eax, [rbp+8]       ; Function parameter = array
            vmovdqu ymm0,[rax]         ; Load from unaligned array
            vmovdqa [rsp],ymm0         ; Store in aligned space
            call    SomeOtherFunction ; Call some other function
            ...
            mov     rsp, rbp           ; Epilog code. Restore rsp
            pop     rbp                ; Restore rbp
            ret

This function uses RBP to address function parameters, and RSP to address aligned local
data. RSP is rounded down to the nearest value divisible by 32 simply by AND'ing it with -32.
You can align the stack by any power of 2 by AND'ing the stack pointer with the negative
value.

All 64-bit operating systems, and some 32-bit operating systems (Mac OS, optional in Linux)
keep the stack aligned by 16 at all CALL instructions. This eliminates the need for the AND
instruction and the frame pointer. It is necessary to propagate this alignment from one CALL
instruction to the next by proper adjustment of the stack pointer in each function:

    ; Example 11.2b, Propagate stack alignment (32-bit Linux)
    FuncWithAlign:
            sub     rsp, 24            ; Allocate space for local data
            mov     rax, [rsp+32]      ; Function parameter = array
            movdqu xmm0,[rax]          ; Load from unaligned array
            movdqa [rsp],xmm0          ; Store in aligned space
            call    SomeOtherFunction ; This call must be aligned
            ...
            retFuncWithAlign ENDP

In example 11.2b we are relying on the fact that the stack pointer is aligned by 16 before the
call to FuncWithAlign. The CALL FuncWithAlign instruction (not shown here) has pushed
the return address on the stack, whereby 8 is subtracted from the stack pointer. We have to
subtract another 8 from the stack pointer before it is aligned by 16 again. The 8 is not
enough for the local variable that needs 16 bytes so we have to subtract 24 to keep the
stack pointer aligned by 16. 8 for the return address + 24 = 32, which is divisible by 16.
Remember to include any PUSH instructions in the calculation. If, for example, there had
been one PUSH instruction in the function prolog then we would subtract 16 or 32 from RSP to
keep it aligned by 16. Example 11.2b needs to align the stack for two reasons. The MOVDQA
instruction needs an aligned operand, and the CALL SomeOtherFunction needs to be
aligned in order to propagate the correct stack alignment to SomeOtherFunction.

Alignment issues are also important when mixing C++ and assembly language. Consider
this C++ structure:

    // Example 11.3a, C++ structure
    struct abcd {
       unsigned char a;    // takes 1 byte storage
       int b;              // 4 bytes storage
       short int c;        // 2 bytes storage
       double d;           // 8 bytes storage
    } x;

Most compilers (but not all) will insert three empty bytes between a and b, and six empty
bytes between c and d in order to give each element its natural alignment. You may change
the structure definition to:

    // Example 11.3b, C++ structure
    struct abcd {
       double d;           // 8 bytes storage
       int b;              // 4 bytes storage
       short int c;        // 2 bytes storage
       unsigned char a;    // 1 byte storage
       char unused[1];     // fill up to 16 bytes
    } x;

This has several advantages: The implementation is identical on compilers with and without
automatic alignment, the structure is easily translated to assembly, all members are properly
aligned, and there are fewer unused bytes. The extra unused character in the end makes
sure that all elements in an array of structures are properly aligned.

See page 151 for how to move unaligned blocks of data efficiently.

11.5 Alignment of code
Most microprocessors fetch code in aligned 16-byte or 32-byte blocks. If an important
subroutine entry or jump label happens to be near the end of a 16-byte block then the
microprocessor will only get a few useful bytes of code when fetching that block of code. It
may have to fetch the next 16 bytes too before it can decode the first instructions after the
label. This can be avoided by aligning important subroutine entries and loop entries by 16.
Aligning by 8 will assure that at least 8 bytes of code can be loaded with the first instruction
fetch, which may be sufficient if the instructions are small. We may align subroutine entries
by the cache line size (typically 64 bytes) if the subroutine is part of a critical hot spot and
the preceding code is unlikely to be executed in the same context.

A disadvantage of code alignment is that some cache space is lost to empty spaces before
the aligned code entries.

In most cases, the effect of code alignment is minimal. My recommendation is to align code
only in the most critical cases like critical subroutines and critical innermost loops.

Aligning a subroutine entry is as simple as putting as many NOP's as needed before the
subroutine entry to make the address divisible by 8, 16, 32 or 64, as desired. The assembler
does this with the ALIGN directive. The NOP's that are inserted will not slow down the
performance because they are never executed.

It is more problematic to align a loop entry because the preceding code is also executed. It
may require up to 15 NOP's to align a loop entry by 16. These NOP's will be executed before
the loop is entered and this will cost processor time. Some assemblers are using pseudo-
NOPs such as MOV RAX,RAX and LEA RBX,[RBX+0] as fillers. This has the disadvantage
that it has a false dependence on the register, and it uses execution resources. It is better to
use the multi-byte NOP instruction which can be adjusted to the desired length.

An alternative way of aligning a loop entry is to code the preceding instructions in ways that
are longer than necessary. In most cases, this will not add to the execution time, but
possibly to the instruction fetch time. See page 78 for details on how to code instructions in
longer versions.

The most efficient way to align an innermost loop is to move the preceding subroutine entry.
The following example shows how to do this:

; Example 11.4, Aligning loop entry. NASM assembler
section .text

align 16
; calculate where to place innerfunction in order to align innerloop:
times -(innerloop - innerfunction) % 16 nop

innerfunction:                       ; This address will be adjusted
    mov rax, [rsp+8]                 ; array
    mov ecx, 0x10000                 ; size of array
    add rax, rcx                     ; end of array
    xor edx, edx                     ; sum
    neg rcx                          ; negative index
innerloop:                           ; This loop entry will be aligned by 16
    add edx, [rax+rcx]               ; calculate sum of array elements
    inc rcx
    jnz innerloop
    ret

This code will adjust the start address of the function to such a value that the loop inside the
function is aligned by 16. This works with the NASM assembler, but other assemblers may
not be able to do the necessary calculations with forward references.

The cost of misaligning innerfunction is negligible compared to the gain by aligning
innerloop because the latter label is jumped to 0x4000 times as often.

11.6 Organizing data for improved caching
The caching of data works best if critical data are contained in a small contiguous area of
memory. The best place to store critical data is on the stack. The stack space that is
allocated by a subroutine is released when the subroutine returns. The same stack space is
then reused by the next subroutine that is called. Reusing the same memory area gives the
optimal caching. Variables should therefore be stored on the stack rather than in the data
segment when possible.

Floating point constants are typically stored in the data segment. This is a problem because
it is difficult to keep the constants used by different subroutines contiguous. An alternative is
to store the constants in the code. In 64-bit mode it is possible to load a double precision
constant via an integer register to avoid using the data segment. Example:

    ; Example 11.5a. Loading double constant from data segment
    section .data
    C1 DQ SomeConstant

    section .text
    movsd xmm0, C1

This can be changed to:

    ; Example 11.5b. Loading double constant from register (64-bit mode)
    section .text
    mov rax, SomeConstant
    movq xmm0, rax      ; Some assemblers use 'movd' for this instruction

See page 124 for various methods of generating constants without loading data from
memory. This is advantageous if data cache misses are expected, but not if data caching is
efficient.

