Thread-local storage should preferably use the stack. Static thread-local memory is
inefficient and should be avoided.

14.1 Simultaneous multithreading
Most modern microprocessors have multiple CPU cores so that they can run multiple
threads simultaneously. Furthermore, many Intel and AMD processors can run two threads
in each core. The Knight's Corner and Knight's Landing processors can even run four
threads per core. "Hyperthreading" is Intel's term for simultaneous multithreading.

Two or more threads running in the same core will always compete for the same resources,
such as cache, instruction decoder, and execution units. If any of the shared resources are
limiting factors for the performance of a single thread then there is no advantage in running
two threads in each core. On the contrary, each thread may run at less than half speed
because of cache evictions and other resource conflicts. But if a large fraction of the time
goes to cache misses, branch misprediction, or long dependency chains, then each thread
will run at more than half the single-thread speed. In this case there is an advantage to
using simultaneous multithreading, but the performance is not doubled. A thread that shares
the resources of the core with another thread will always run slower than a thread that runs
alone in the core.

The higher the capacity of a CPU core, the higher the advantage of simultaneous
multithreading. The Knight's Landing processor has a quite low capacity so that it is rarely
advantageous to run two threads – and much less four threads – in this processor.
Simultaneous multithreading is more useful on the older Knight's Corner processor because
it has no out-of-order processing capability.

It may be necessary to do experiments in order to determine whether it is advantageous to
use simultaneous multithreading or not in a particular application.

A particular disadvantage of simultaneous multithreading is that a low priority thread may
steal resources from a high priority thread running in the same CPU core. Current operating
systems are not always handling this problem optimally.

See manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++" for more details on multithreading and
simultaneous multithreading.

15 CPU dispatching
We often want to take advantage of the advanced instruction sets such as AVX2 or
AVX512. There is a problem if we want the same program to be able to run on
microprocessors without these instruction sets. The solution is to have multiple versions of
the most critical part of the program, each optimized for a different instruction set. The
appropriate version of the code is selected at run time after checking the capabilities of the
CPU it is running on. This is called automatic CPU dispatching.

It is not worth the effort to optimize for each specific CPU model because the software will
often end up running on a CPU model that did not exist at the time the code was written.
Instead, you may write one code version optimized for a newer instruction set that your
code can take advantage of, and one or more versions for older instruction sets. See
manual 1 "Optimizing software in C++" chapter 13 which explains the pitfalls of model-
specific CPU dispatching.

CPU dispatching can be implemented with branches or with a function pointer, as shown in
the following example.

Example 15.1. Function with CPU dispatching

section .data
MyFunctionPoint: DQ MyFunctionDispatch           ; Function pointer

section .text
default rel
extern InstructionSet

MyFunction:
    ; Jump through pointer. The code pointer initially points to
    ; MyFunctionDispatch. MyFunctionDispatch changes the pointer
    ; so that it points to the appropriate version of MyFunction.
    ; The next time MyFunction is called, it jumps directly to
    ; the right version of the function
    jmp     [MyFunctionPoint]

; Code for each version:

MyFunctionAVX512:
    ; AVX512 version of MyFunction
    ...
    ret

MyFunctionAVX2:
    ; AVX2 version of MyFunction
    ...
    ret

MyFunctionSSE2:
    ; Generic/SSE2 version of MyFunction
    ; (All microprocessors with x64 also support SSE2.
    ; If the program is running in 32-bit mode then you may need a
    ; 80386 compatible generic version)
    ...
    ret

MyFunctionDispatch:
    ; Detect which instruction set is supported.
    ; Function InstructionSet is in asmlib
    push   rcx                     ; Save any registers that may be used
                                   ; for parameters to MyFunction
    push   rdx
    call   InstructionSet          ; eax indicates CPU instruction set
    lea    rdx, [MyFunctionSSE2]
    cmp    eax, 13                 ; eax >= 13 if AVX2
    jb     DispEnd
    lea    rdx, [MyFunctionAVX2]
    cmp    eax, 16                 ; eax >= 16 if AVX512BW/DQ/VL
    jb     DispEnd
    lea    rdx, [MyFunctionAVX512]

DispEnd:
    ; Save pointer to appropriate version of MyFunction
    mov    [MyFunctionPoint], rdx
    mov    rax, rdx               ; address of function
    pop    rdx                    ; restore registers
    pop    rcx
    jmp    rax                    ; Jump to this version of the function

The function InstructionSet detects which instruction set is supported. This function is
provided in the library that can be downloaded from /www.agner.org/optimize/asmlib.zip.
Most operating systems also have functions for this purpose.
15.1 Checking for operating system support for XMM, YMM, and ZMM registers
Unfortunately, the information that can be obtained from the CPUID instruction is not
sufficient for determining whether it is possible to use vector registers. The operating system
has to save these registers during a task switch and restore them when the task is resumed.
The microprocessor can disable the use of the vector registers in order to prevent their use
under old operating systems that do not save these registers. Operating systems that
support the use of XMM registers must set bit 9 of the control register CR4 to enable the use
of XMM registers and indicate its ability to save and restore these registers during task
switches. (Saving and restoring registers is actually faster when XMM registers are
enabled).

Unfortunately, the CR4 register can only be read in privileged mode. Application programs
therefore have a problem determining whether they are allowed to use the XMM registers or
not. According to official Intel documents, the only way for an application program to
determine whether the operating system supports the use of XMM registers is to try to
execute an XMM instruction and see if you get an invalid opcode exception. This is
ridiculous, because not all operating systems, compilers, and programming languages
provide facilities for application programs to catch invalid opcode exceptions. The
advantage of using XMM registers evaporates completely if you have no way of knowing
whether you can use these registers without crashing your software.

These serious problems led me to search for an alternative way of checking if the operating
system supports the use of XMM registers, and fortunately I have found a way that works
reliably. If XMM registers are enabled, then the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions can read
and modify the XMM registers. If XMM registers are disabled, then FXSAVE and FXRSTOR
cannot access these registers. It is therefore possible to check if XMM registers are
enabled, by trying to read and write these registers with FXSAVE and FXRSTOR. The
subroutines in www.agner.org/optimize/asmlib.zip use this method. These subroutines can
be called from assembly as well as from high-level languages, and provide an easy way of
detecting whether XMM registers can be used.

In order to verify that this detection method works correctly with all microprocessors, I first
checked various manuals. The 1999 version of Intel's software developer's manual says
about the FXRSTOR instruction: "The Streaming SIMD Extension fields in the save image
(XMM0-XMM7 and MXCSR) will not be loaded into the processor if the CR4.OSFXSR bit is
not set." AMD's Programmer’s Manual says effectively the same. However, the 2003
version of Intel's manual says that this behavior is implementation dependent. In order to
clarify this, I contacted Intel Technical Support and got the reply, "If the OSFXSR bit in CR4
in not set, then XMMx registers are not restored when FXRSTOR is executed". They further
confirmed that this is true for all versions of Intel microprocessors and all microcode
updates. I regard this as a guarantee from Intel that my detection method will work on all
Intel microprocessors. We can rely on the method working correctly on AMD processors as
well since the AMD manual is unambiguous on this question. It appears to be safe to rely on
this method working correctly on future microprocessors as well, because any micropro-
cessor that deviates from the above specification would introduce a security problem as well
as failing to run existing programs. Compatibility with existing programs is of great concern
to microprocessor producers.

The detection method recommended in Intel manuals has the drawback that it relies on the
ability of the compiler and the operating system to catch invalid opcode exceptions. A
Windows application, for example, using Intel's detection method would therefore have to be
tested in all compatible operating systems, including various Windows emulators running
under a number of other operating systems. My detection method does not have this
problem because it is independent of compiler and operating system. My method has the
further advantage that it makes modular programming easier, because a module,
