subroutine library, or DLL using XMM instructions can include the detection procedure so
that the problem of XMM support is of no concern to the calling program, which may even
be written in a different programming language. Some operating systems provide system
functions that tell which instruction set is supported, but the method mentioned above is
independent of the operating system.

It is easier to check for operating support for YMM and ZMM registers. Execute CPUID with
eax = 1. Check that bit 27 and 28 in ecx are both 1 (OSXSAVE and AVX feature flags). If
so, then execute XGETBV with ecx = 0 to get the XFEATURE_ENABLED_MASK. Check that
bit 1 and 2 in eax are both set (XMM and YMM state support). If so, then it is safe to use
YMM registers. ZMM registers are enabled if bit 5, 6, and 7 are also all set.

The above discussion has relied on the following documents:

Intel application note AP-900: "Identifying support for Streaming SIMD Extensions in the
Processor and Operating System". 1999.

Intel application note AP-485: "Intel Processor Identification and the CPUID Instruction".
2002.

"Intel Architecture Software Developer's Manual, Volume 2: Instruction Set Reference",
1999.

"IA-32 Intel Architecture Software Developer's Manual, Volume 2: Instruction Set
Reference", 2003.

"Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual", 2018.

"AMD64 Architecture Programmer’s Manual, Volume 4: 128-Bit Media Instructions", 2003.

"Intel Advanced Vector Extensions Programming Reference", 2008, 2010.

16 Problematic Instructions
16.1 LEA instruction (all processors)
The LEA instruction is useful for many purposes because it can do a shift operation, two
additions, and a move in just one instruction. Example:

    ; Example 16.1a, LEA instruction
    lea rax, [rbx+8*rcx-1000]

is much faster than

    ; Example 16.1b
    mov rax, rcx
    shl rax, 3
    add rax, rbx
    sub rax, 1000

A typical use of LEA is as a three-register addition: lea rax,[rbx+rcx]. The LEA
instruction can also be used for doing an addition or shift without changing the flags.

The processors have no documented addressing mode with a scaled index register and
nothing else. Therefore, an instruction like lea rax,[rbx*2] is actually coded as lea
rax,[rbx*2+00000000H] with an immediate displacement of 4 bytes. The size of this

instruction can be reduced by writing lea rax,[rbx+rbx]. If you happen to have a register
that is zero (like a loop counter after a loop) then you may use it as a base register to
reduce the code size:

    ; Example 16.2, LEA instruction without base pointer
    lea rax, [rbx*4]        ; 8 bytes
    lea rax, [rcx+rbx*4]    ; 4 bytes

The size of the base and index registers can be changed with an address size prefix. The
size of the destination register can be changed with an operand size prefix (See prefixes,
page 26). If the operand size is less than the address size then the result is truncated. If the
operand size is more than the address size then the result is zero-extended.

The shortest version of LEA in 64-bit mode has 32-bit operand size and 64-bit address size,
e.g. LEA EAX,[RBX+RCX], see page 76. Use this version when the result is sure to be less
than 232. The upper half of RBX and RCX are ignored in this case. Use the version with a 64-
bit destination register for address calculation in 64-bit mode when the address may be
bigger than 232.

LEA is slower than addition on some processors. The more complex forms of LEA with scale
factor and offset are slower than the simple form on many processors. See manual 4:
"Instruction tables" for details on each processor.

The preferred version in 32-bit mode has 32-bit operand size and 32-bit address size. LEA
with a 16-bit operand size is slow on AMD processors. LEA with a 16-bit address size in 32-
bit mode should be avoided because the decoding of the address size prefix is slow on
many processors.

LEA can also be used in 64-bit mode for loading a RIP-relative address. A RIP-relative
address cannot be combined with base or index registers.

16.2 INC and DEC
The INC and DEC instructions do not modify the carry flag but they do modify the other
arithmetic flags. Writing to only part of the flags register costs an extra µop on some CPUs.
It can cause a partial flags stalls on some older Intel processors if a subsequent instruction
reads the carry flag or all the flag bits. On all processors, it can cause a false dependence
on the carry flag from a previous instruction.

Use ADD and SUB when optimizing for speed. Use INC and DEC when optimizing for size or
when no penalty is expected.

16.3 XCHG (all processors)
The XCHG register,[memory] instruction is dangerous. This instruction always has an
implicit LOCK prefix which forces synchronization with other processors or cores. This
instruction is therefore very time consuming, and should always be avoided unless the lock
is intended.

The XCHG instruction with register operands may be useful when optimizing for size as
explained on page 73.

16.4 Rotates through carry (all processors)
RCR and RCL with CL or with a count different from one are slow on all processors and
should be avoided.

16.5 Bit test (all processors)
BT, BTC, BTR, and BTS instructions should preferably be replaced by instructions like TEST,
AND, OR, XOR, or shifts on older processors. Bit tests with a memory operand should be
avoided on Intel processors. BTC, BTR, and BTS use 2 µops on AMD processors. Bit test
instructions are useful when optimizing for size.

16.6 LAHF and SAHF (all processors)
LAHF is slow on P4 and P4E. Use SETcc instead for storing the value of a flag.

SAHF is slow on P4E and older AMD processors. Use TEST instead for testing a bit in AH.
Use FCOMI if available as a replacement for the sequence FCOM / FNSTSW AX / SAHF.

LAHF and SAHF are not available in 64 bit mode on some of the oldest 64-bit Intel
processors.

16.7 Integer multiplication (all processors)
An integer multiplication takes from 3 to 14 clock cycles, depending on the processor. It is
therefore often advantageous to replace a multiplication by a constant with a combination of
other instructions such as SHL, ADD, SUB, and LEA. For example IMUL EAX,5 can be
replaced by LEA EAX,[RAX+4*RAX] in 64-bit mode or LEA EAX,[EAX+4*EAX] in 32-bit
mode.

16.8 Division (all processors)
Both integer division and floating point division are quite time consuming on all processors.
Various methods for reducing the number of divisions are explained in manual 1:
"Optimizing software in C++". Several methods to improve code that contains division are
discussed below.

Integer division by a power of 2 (all processors)
Integer division by a power of two can be done by shifting right. Dividing an unsigned
integer by 2N:

    ; Example 16.3. Divide unsigned integer eax by 2^N
    shr eax, N

Dividing a signed integer by 2N:

    ; Example 16.4. Divide signed integer eax by 2^N
    cdq
    and edx, (1 shl N) - 1     ; (Or: shr edx,32-N)
    add eax, edx
    sar eax, N

Obviously, the unsigned version is preferred if the dividend is certain to be non-negative.

Integer division by a constant (all processors)
A floating point number can be divided by a constant by multiplying with the reciprocal. If we
want to do the same with integers, we have to scale the reciprocal by 2n and then shift the
product to the right by n. There are various algorithms for finding a suitable value of n and
compensating for rounding errors. The algorithm described below was invented by Terje
Mathisen, Norway, and not published elsewhere. Other methods can be found in the book
Hacker's Delight, by Henry S. Warren, Addison-Wesley 2003, and the paper: T. Granlund

and P. L. Montgomery: Division by Invariant Integers Using Multiplication, Proceedings of
the SIGPLAN 1994 Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation.

The following algorithm will give you the correct result for unsigned integer division with
truncation, i.e. the same result as the DIV instruction:

       b = (the number of significant bits in d) - 1
       r=w+b
       f = 2r / d
       If f is an integer then d is a power of 2: go to case A.
       If f is not an integer, then check if the fractional part of f is < 0.5
       If the fractional part of f < 0.5: go to case B.
       If the fractional part of f > 0.5: go to case C.

       case A (d = 2b):
       result = x SHR b

       case B (fractional part of f < 0.5):
       round f down to nearest integer
       result = ((x+1) * f) SHR r

       case C (fractional part of f > 0.5):
       round f up to nearest integer
       result = (x * f) SHR r

Example:
Assume that you want to divide by 5.
5 = 101B.
w = 32.
b = (number of significant binary digits) - 1 = 2
r = 32+2 = 34
f = 234 / 5 = 3435973836.8 = 0CCCCCCCC.CCC...(hexadecimal)

The fractional part is greater than a half: use case C.
Round f up to 0CCCCCCCDH.

The following code divides EAX by 5 and returns the result in EDX:

    ; Example 16.5a. Divide unsigned integer eax by 5
    mov   edx, 0CCCCCCCDH
    mul   edx
    shr   edx, 2

After the multiplication, EDX contains the product shifted right 32 places. Since r = 34 you
have to shift 2 more places to get the result. To divide by 10, just change the last line to SHR
EDX,3.

In case B we would have:

    ; Example 16.5b. Divide unsigned integer eax, case B
    add   eax, 1
    mov   edx, f
    mul   edx
    shr   edx, b

This code works for all values of x except 0FFFFFFFFH which gives zero because of
overflow in the ADD EAX,1 instruction. If x = 0FFFFFFFFH is possible, then change the code
to:

    ; Example 16.5c. Divide unsigned integer, case B, check for overflow
             mov     edx, f
             add     eax, 1
             jc      DOVERFL
             mul     edx
    DOVERFL: shr     edx, b

If the value of x is limited, then you may use a lower value of r, i.e. fewer digits. There can
be several reasons for using a lower value of r:

   •   You may set r = w = 32 to avoid the SHR EDX,b in the end.

   •   You may set r = 16+b and use a multiplication instruction that gives a 32-bit result
       rather than 64 bits. This will free the EDX register:

          ; Example 16.5d. Divide unsigned integer by 5, limited range
          imul eax,0CCCDH
          shr eax,18

   •   You may choose a value of r that gives case C rather than case B in order to avoid
       the ADD EAX,1 instruction

The maximum value for x in these cases is at least 2r-b-1, sometimes higher. You have to do
a systematic test if you want to know the exact maximum value of x for which the code
works correctly.

You may want to replace the multiplication instruction with shift and add instructions as
explained on page 137 if multiplication is slow.

The following example divides EAX by 10 and returns the result in EAX. I have chosen r=17
rather than 19 because it happens to give code that is easier to optimize, and covers the
same range for x. f = 217 / 10 = 3333H, case B: q = (x+1)*3333H:

          ; Example 16.5e. Divide unsigned integer by 10, limited range
          lea   ebx, [eax+2*eax+3]
          lea   ecx, [eax+2*eax+3]
          shl   ebx, 4
          mov   eax, ecx
          shl   ecx, 8
          add   eax, ebx
          shl   ebx, 8
          add   eax, ecx
          add   eax, ebx
          shr   eax, 17

A systematic test shows that this code works correctly for all x < 10004H.

The division method can also be used for vector operands. Example 16.5f divides eight
unsigned 16-bit integers by 10:

    ; Example 16.5f. Divide vector of unsigned integers by 10
    section .data
    align 16
    RECIPDIV times 8 DW 0CCCDH ; Vector of reciprocal divisor

    section .text
    pmulhuw xmm0, [RECIPDIV]
    psrlw   xmm0, 3

Repeated integer division by the same value (all processors)
If the divisor is not known at assembly time, but you are dividing repeatedly with the same
divisor, then it is advantageous to use the same method as above. The division is done only
once while the multiplication and shift operations are done for each dividend. A branch-free
variant of the algorithm is provided in the paper by Granlund and Montgomery cited above.

This method is implemented in the asmlib function library and in the C++ vector class library
for signed and unsigned integers as well as for vector registers.

Floating point division (all processors)
Two or more floating point divisions can be combined into one, using the method described
in manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++".

The time it takes to make a floating point division depends on the precision. When x87 style
floating point registers are used, you can make division faster by specifying a lower
precision in the floating point control word. This also speeds up the FSQRT instruction, but
not any other instructions. When XMM registers are used, you do not have to change any
control word. Just use single-precision instructions if your application allows this.

It is not possible to do a floating point division and an integer division at the same time
because they are using the same execution unit on most processors.

Using reciprocal instruction for fast division
The following instructions are calculating the approximate reciprocals of single precision
floating point numbers with various precisions.

 instruction           precision           instruction set
 rcpss, rcpps          12 bits             SSE
 vrcp14ss, vrcp14ps    14 bits             AVX512
 vrcp28ss, vrcp28ps    28 bits             AVX512ER
 Table 16.1. Approximate reciprocal instructions

You can make approximate divisions by using one of the fast reciprocal instructions on the
divisor and then multiply with the dividend. The precision can be increased from 12 to 23
bits by using the principle of Newton-Raphson iteration:

    x0 = rcpss(d);
    x1 = x0 * (2 - d * x0) = 2 * x0 - d * x0 * x0;

where x0 is the first approximation to the reciprocal of the divisor d, and x1 is a better
approximation. You must use this formula before multiplying by the dividend.

    ; Example 16.6, fast division, single precision (SSE)
    movaps xmm1, [divisors]          ; load divisors
    rcpps   xmm0, xmm1               ; approximate reciprocal
    mulps   xmm1, xmm0               ; newton-raphson formula
    mulps   xmm1, xmm0
    addps   xmm0, xmm0
    subps   xmm0, xmm1
    mulps   xmm0, [dividends]        ; results in xmm0

It is possible to increase the precision further by repeating the Newton-Raphson formula
with double precision, but this is not very advantageous.

16.9 String instructions (all processors)
String instructions without a repeat prefix are too slow and should be replaced by simpler
instructions. The same applies to the LOOP instruction and to JECXZ on some processors.

REP MOVSD and REP STOSD are quite fast if the repeat count is not too small. The largest
word size (DWORD in 32-bit mode, QWORD in 64-bit mode) is preferred. Both source and
destination should be aligned by the word size or better. In many cases, however, it is faster
to use vector registers. Moving data in the largest available registers is faster than REP
MOVSD and REP STOSD in most cases, especially on older processors. See page 151 for
details.

Note that while the REP MOVS instruction writes a word to the destination, it reads the next
word from the source in the same clock cycle. This may cause cache bank conflicts on
some old processors. The easiest way to avoid cache bank conflicts is to align both source
and destination by 8.

On many processors, REP MOVS and REP STOS can perform quite fast by moving 16 bytes
or an entire cache line at a time. This happens only when certain conditions are met.
Depending on the processor, the conditions for fast string instructions are, typically, that the
count must be high, both source and destination must be aligned, the direction must be
forward, the distance between source and destination must be at least the cache line size,
and the memory type for both source and destination must be either write-back or write-
combining (you can normally assume the latter condition is met).

Under these conditions, the speed is as high as you can obtain with vector register moves.

While the string instructions can be quite convenient, it must be emphasized that other
solutions are faster in many cases. If the above conditions for fast move are not met, then
there is a lot to gain by using other methods. See page 151 for alternatives to REP MOVS.

REP LOADS, REP SCAS, and REP CMPS take more time per iteration than simple loops. See
page 130 for alternatives to REPNE SCASB.

16.10 Vectorized string instructions (processors with SSE4.2)
The SSE4.2 instruction set contains four very powerful instructions for string search and
compare operations: PCMPESTRI, PCMPISTRI, PCMPESTRM, PCMPISTRM. There are two vector
operands each containing a string and an immediate operand determining what operation to
do on these strings. These four instructions can all do each of the following kinds of
operations, differing only in the input and output operands:

   •   Find characters from a set: Finds which of the bytes in the second vector operand
       belong to the set defined by the bytes in the first vector operand, comparing all 256
       possible combinations in one operation.
   •   Find characters in a range: Finds which of the bytes in the second vector operand
       are within the range defined by the first vector operand.
   •   Compare strings: Determine if the two strings are identical.
   •   Substring search: Finds all occurrences of a substring defined by the first vector
       operand in the second vector operand.

The lengths of the two strings can be specified explicitly (PCMPESTRx) or implicitly with a
terminating zero (PCMPISTRx). The latter is faster on current Intel processors because it has
fewer input operands. Any terminating zeroes and bytes beyond the ends of the strings are
ignored. The output can be a bit mask or byte mask (PCMPxSTRM) or an index (PCMPxSTRI).
Further output is provided in the following flags. Carry flag: result is nonzero. Sign flag: first
string ends. Zero flag: second string ends. Overflow flag: first bit of result.
These instructions are very efficient for various string parsing and processing tasks because
they do large and complicated tasks in a single operation. However, the current
implementations are slower than the best alternatives for simple tasks such as strlen and
strcopy.

Examples can be found in my function library at www.agner.org/optimize/asmlib.zip.

16.11 WAIT instruction (all processors)
The WAIT instruction (also known as FWAIT) has three functions:

A. The old 8087 coprocessor requires a WAIT before every floating point instruction to make
sure the coprocessor is ready to receive it.

B. WAIT is used for coordinating memory access between the floating point unit and the
integer unit. Examples:

    ; Example 16.7. Uses of WAIT:
    B1:   fistp [mem32]
          wait             ; wait for FPU to write before..
          mov eax,[mem32] ; reading the result with the integer unit

    B2:     fild [mem32]
            wait                 ; wait for FPU to read value..
            mov [mem32],eax      ; before overwriting it with integer unit

    B3:     fld qword [ESP]
            wait                 ; prevent an accidental interrupt from..
            add esp,8            ; overwriting value on stack

C. WAIT is sometimes used to check for exceptions. It will generate an interrupt if an
unmasked exception bit in the floating point status word has been set by a preceding
floating point instruction.

Regarding A:
The functionality in point A is never needed on any other processors than the old 8087.
Unless you want your 16-bit code to be compatible with the 8087, you should tell your
assembler not to put in these WAIT's by specifying a higher processor. An 8087 floating
point emulator under DOS also inserts WAIT instructions. You should therefore tell your
assembler not to generate emulation code unless you need it.

Regarding B:
WAIT instructions to coordinate memory access are definitely needed on the 8087 and
80287 coprocessors but not on later processors.

Regarding C:
The assembler automatically inserts a WAIT for this purpose before the following
instructions: FCLEX, FINIT, FSAVE, FSTCW, FSTENV, FSTSW. You can omit the WAIT by writing
FNCLEX, etc. My tests show that the WAIT is unnecessary in most cases because these
instructions without WAIT will still generate an interrupt on exceptions except for FNCLEX and
FNINIT on the 80387. There is some inconsistency about whether the IRET from the
interrupt points to the FN.. instruction or to the next instruction.

Almost all other x87 floating point instructions will also generate an interrupt if a previous
x87 instruction has set an unmasked exception bit, so the exception is likely to be detected
sooner or later anyway. You may insert a WAIT after the last x87 instruction in your program
to be sure to catch all exceptions.
16.12 FCOM + FSTSW AX (all processors)
The FNSTSW instruction is very slow on all processors. Most processors have FCOMI
instructions to avoid the slow FNSTSW. Using FCOMI instead of the common sequence FCOM /
FNSTSW AX / SAHF will save 4 - 8 clock cycles. You should therefore use FCOMI to avoid
FNSTSW wherever possible, even in cases where it costs some extra code.

It is sometimes faster to use integer instructions for comparing floating point values, as
described on page 148 and 150.

16.13 FPREM (all processors)
The FPREM and FPREM1 instructions are slow on all processors. You may replace it by the
following algorithm: Multiply by the reciprocal divisor, get the fractional part by subtracting
the truncated value, and then multiply by the divisor.

Some documents say that these instructions may give incomplete reductions and that it is
therefore necessary to repeat the FPREM or FPREM1 instruction until the reduction is
complete. I have tested this on several processors beginning with the old 8087 and I have
found no situation where a repetition of the FPREM or FPREM1 was needed.

16.14 FRNDINT (all processors)
This instruction is slow on all processors. Replace it by:

     ; Example 16.8.
         fistp qword [TEMP]
         fild qword [TEMP]

This code is faster despite a possible penalty for attempting to read from [TEMP] before the
write is finished on older processors. You may put other instructions in between in order to
avoid this penalty.

The conversion instructions such as CVTSS2SI and CVTTSS2SI. should be used instead on
processors with SSE.

16.15 FSCALE and exponential function (all processors)
FSCALE is slow on all processors. Computing integer powers of 2 can be done much faster
by inserting the desired power in the exponent field of the floating point number. To
calculate 2N, where N is a signed integer, select from the examples below the one that fits
your range of N:

Single precision, for |N| < 27-1:

     ; Example 16.9a. 2 to the power of i, single precision
         mov     eax, [N]
         shl     eax, 23
         add     eax, 3f800000h
         movd    xmm0, eax

Single precision, for |N| < 210-1:

     ; Example 16.9b. 2 to the power of i, double precision
         mov     eax, [N]
         shl     eax, 20

          add       eax, 3ff00000h
          movd      xmm0, eax
          psllq     xmm0, 32

16.16 FPTAN (all processors)
According to the manuals, FPTAN returns two values, X and Y, and leaves it to the
programmer to divide Y with X to get the result; but in fact it always returns 1 in X so you can
save the division. My tests show that on all 32-bit Intel processors with floating point unit or
coprocessor, FPTAN always returns 1 in X regardless of the argument. If you want to be
absolutely sure that your code will run correctly on all processors, then you may test if X is
1, which is faster than dividing with X. The Y value may be very high, but never infinity, so
you do not have to test if Y contains a valid number if you know that the argument is valid.

When optimizing for speed, it is usually faster to use a library function with SSE2.

16.17 FSQRT, SQRTSS
The following instructions are available for calculation of reciprocal square roots:

 instruction            precision                  instruction set
 rsqrtss, rsqrtps       12 bits, float             SSE
 vrsqrt14ss, vrsqrt14ps 14 bits, float             AVX512
 vrsqrt14sd, vrsqrt14pd 14 bits, double            AVX512
 vrsqrt28ss, vrsqrt28ps 28 bits, float             AVX512ER
 vrsqrt28sd, vrsqrt28pd 28 bits, double            AVX512ER
 Table 16.2. Approximate reciprocal square root instructions

A fast way of calculating an approximate square root is to multiply the reciprocal square root
of x by x:

    sqrt(x) = x * rsqrt(x)

The reciprocal square root instructions give the reciprocal square root with a precision of at
least 12 bits. You can improve the precision to 23 bits by using the Newton-Raphson
iteration formula:

    x0 = rsqrtss(a)
    x1 = 0.5 * x0 * (3 - (a * x0) * x0)

where x0 is the first approximation to the reciprocal square root of a, and x1 is a better
approximation. The order of evaluation is important. You must use this formula before
multiplying with x to get the square root.

16.18 FLDCW
Many processors have a serious stall after the FLDCW instruction if followed by any floating
point instruction which reads the control word (which almost all floating point instructions
do).

When C or C++ code is compiled without SSE2, it often generates a lot of FLDCW
instructions because conversion of floating point numbers to integers is done with truncation
while other floating point instructions use rounding. After translation to assembly, you can
improve this code by using rounding instead of truncation where possible, or by moving the
FLDCW out of a loop where truncation is needed inside the loop.

A better solution is to compile for the SSE or SSE2 instruction set and use truncation
instructions such as CVTTSS2SI.
