16.19 MASKMOV instructions
The masked memory write instructions MASKMOVQ and MASKMOVDQU are extremely slow
because they are bypassing the cache and writing to main memory (a so-called non-
temporal write).

The VEX-coded alternatives VPMASKMOVD, VPMASKMOVQ, VMASKMOVPS, VMASKMOVPD are
writing to the cache, and therefore much faster on Intel processors. The VEX versions are
still extremely slow on AMD Bulldozer and Piledriver processors.

These instructions should be avoided at all costs. The AVX512 instruction set provides
masked writes, which are much faster. See also chapter 13.9 for alternative methods.

16.20 RDRAND and RDSEED instructions
These instructions are sampling physical noise over a period of time in order to generate an
unpredictable random number. These instructions may take hundreds, or even thousands,
of clock cycles if called repeatedly. A program that needs many random numbers should
use a pseudo random number generator and use RDRAND or RDSEED only to generate an
initial seed for this random number generator.

17 Special topics
17.1 XMM versus floating point registers
Processors with the SSE instruction set can do single precision floating point calculations in
XMM registers. Processors with the SSE2 instruction set can also do double precision
calculations in XMM registers. Floating point calculations are approximately equally fast in
XMM registers and the old x87 floating point registers. The decision of whether to use the
x87 floating point registers ST(0) - ST(7) or XMM registers depends on the following
factors.

Advantages of using x87 registers:

   •   Compatible with old processors without SSE or SSE2.

   •   Compatible with old operating systems without XMM support.

   •   Supports long double precision.

   •   Intermediate results are calculated with long double precision.

   •   Precision conversions are free in the sense that they require no extra instructions
       and take no extra time. You may use ST() registers for expressions where operands
       have mixed precision.

   •   Mathematical functions such as logarithms and trigonometric functions are
       supported by hardware instructions. These functions are useful when optimizing for
       size, but not faster than library functions using XMM registers.

   •   Conversions to and from decimal numbers can use the FBLD and FBSTP instructions
       when optimizing for size, but these instructions are slow.

   •   Floating point instructions using ST() registers are smaller than the corresponding
       instructions using XMM registers. For example, FADD ST(0),ST(1) is 2 bytes,
       while ADDSD XMM0,XMM1 is 4 bytes.

Advantages of using XMM, YMM, or ZMM registers:

   •   Can do multiple operations with a single vector instruction.

   •   Avoids the need to use FXCH for getting the desired register to the top of the stack.

   •   No need to clean up the register stack after use.

   •   Can be used together with MMX instructions.

   •   No need for memory intermediates when converting between integers and floating
       point numbers.

   •   64-bit systems have 16 XMM/YMM or 32 ZMM registers, but only 8 ST() registers.

   •   ST() registers cannot be used in device drivers in 64-bit Windows.

   •   The instruction set for ST() registers is no longer developed. The instructions will
       probably still be supported for many years for the sake of backwards compatibility,
       but the instructions may work less efficiently in future processors.

17.2 MMX versus XMM registers
Integer vector instructions can use either the 64-bit MMX registers or the 128-bit XMM
registers in processors with SSE2.

Advantages of using MMX registers:

   •   Compatible with older microprocessors since the PMMX.

   •   Compatible with old operating systems without XMM support.

   •   No need for data alignment.

Advantages of using XMM registers:

   •   The number of elements per vector is doubled in XMM registers as compared to
       MMX registers, and increased further in YMM and ZMM registers.

   •   MMX registers cannot be used together with ST() registers.

   •   A series of MMX instructions must end with EMMS.

   •   64-bit systems have 16 or 32 XMM registers, but only 8 MMX registers.

   •   MMX registers cannot be used in device drivers in 64-bit Windows.

   •   The instruction set for MMX registers is no longer developed and is going out of use.
       The MMX registers will probably still be supported in many years for reason of
       backwards compatibility.

17.3 XMM versus YMM and ZMM registers
The 128-bit XMM registers are extended to 256 or 512 bits in the YMM and ZMM registers
when the newer instruction sets are available. See page 107 for details. Advantages of
using the AVX instruction set and YMM or ZMM registers:

   •   More elements per vector

   •   Non-destructive 3-operand version of all XMM, YMM, and ZMM instructions

   •   Masked instructions are available with AVX512

Advantages of using XMM registers:

   •   Compatible with older processors

   •   There is a penalty for switching between VEX instructions and XMM instructions
       without VEX prefix, see page 108. The programmer may inadvertently mix VEX and
       non-VEX instructions.

   •   YMM and ZMM registers cannot be used in device drivers without saving everything
       with XSAVE / XRESTOR., see page 111.

17.4 Freeing floating point registers
You have to free all used x87 style floating point registers before exiting a subroutine,
except for any register used for the result.

The fastest way of freeing one register is FSTP ST. To free two registers you may use either
FCOMPP or twice FSTP ST, whichever fits best into the decoding sequence or port load.

It is not recommended to use FFREE.

17.5 Transitions between floating point and MMX instructions
It is not possible to use 64-bit MMX registers and 80-bit floating point ST() registers in the
same part of the code. You must issue an EMMS instruction after the last instruction that uses
MMX registers if there is a possibility that later code uses floating point registers. You may
avoid this problem by using 128-bit XMM registers instead.

On PMMX there is a high penalty for switching between floating point and MMX instructions.
The first floating point instruction after an EMMS takes approximately 58 clocks extra, and the
first MMX instruction after a floating point instruction takes approximately 38 clocks extra.
There is no such penalty on processors with out-of-order execution.

17.6 Converting from floating point to integer
All conversions between x87 style floating point registers and integer registers must go via a
memory location:
    ; Example 17.1.
    fistp dword [TEMP]
    mov eax, [TEMP]

On older processors, and especially the P4, this code is likely to have a penalty for
attempting to read from [TEMP] before the write to [TEMP] is finished. It doesn't help to put
in a WAIT. It is recommended that you put in other instructions between the write to [TEMP]

and the read from [TEMP] if possible in order to avoid this penalty. This applies to all the
examples that follow.

The specifications for the C and C++ language requires that conversion from floating point
numbers to integers use truncation rather than rounding. The method used by most C
libraries is to change the floating point control word to indicate truncation before using an
FISTP instruction, and changing it back again afterwards. This method is very slow on all
processors. On many processors, the floating point control word cannot be renamed, so all
subsequent floating point instructions must wait for the FLDCW instruction to retire. See page
144.

You can avoid all these problems by using XMM registers instead of floating point registers
and use the CVT.. instructions to avoid the memory intermediate on processors with SSE2.

17.7 Using integer instructions for floating point operations
It is often advantageous to use integer instructions for doing simple floating point
operations, because integer instructions are generally faster than floating point instructions.
The most obvious example is moving data. For example

    ; Example 17.2a. Moving floating point data
    fld qword [esi]
    fstp qword [edi]

can be replaced by:

    ; Example 17.2b
    mov rax,[rsi]
    mov [rdi],rax

Many other manipulations are possible if you know how floating point numbers are
represented in binary format. See the chapter "Using integer operations for manipulating
floating point variables" in manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++".

The bit positions are shown in this table:

 precision                mantissa            always 1         exponent           sign
 single (32 bits)         bit 0 - 22                           bit 23 - 30        bit 31
 double (64 bits)         bit 0 - 51                           bit 52 - 62        bit 63
 long double (80 bits)    bit 0 - 62          bit 63           bit 64 - 78        bit 79
 Table 17.1. Floating point formats

From this table we can find that the value 1.0 is represented as 3F80,0000H in single
precision format, 3FF0,0000,0000,0000H in double precision, and
3FFF,8000,0000,0000,0000H in long double precision.

It is possible to generate simple floating point constants without using data in memory as
explained on page 124.

Testing if a floating point value is zero
To test if a floating point number is zero, we have to test all bits except the sign bit, which
may be either 0 or 1. For example:

    ; Example 17.3a. Testing floating point value for zero
    fld    dword [ebx]
    ftst
    fnstsw ax
     and      ah, 40h
     jnz      IsZero

can be replaced by

     ; Example 17.3b. Testing floating point value for zero
     mov    eax, [ebx]
     add    eax, eax
     jz     IsZero

where the ADD EAX,EAX shifts out the sign bit. Double precision floats have 63 bits to test,
but if subnormal numbers can be ruled out, then you can be certain that the value is zero if
the exponent bits are all zero. Example:

     ; Example 17.3c. Testing double value for zero
     fld    qword [ebx]
     ftst
     fnstsw ax
     and    ah, 40h
     jnz    IsZero

can be replaced by

     ; Example 17.3d. Testing double value for zero
     mov    eax, [ebx+4]
     add    eax, eax
     jz     IsZero

Manipulating the sign bit
A floating point number is negative if the sign bit is set and at least one other bit is set.
Example (single precision):

     ; Example 17.4. Testing floating point value for negative
     mov    eax, [NumberToTest]
     cmp    eax, 80000000H
     ja     IsNegative

You can change the sign of a floating point number simply by flipping the sign bit. This is
useful when XMM registers are used, because there is no XMM change sign instruction.
Example:

     ; Example 17.5. Change sign of four single-precision floats in xmm0
     cmpeqd xmm1, xmm1    ; generate all 1's
     pslld xmm1, 31       ; 1 in the leftmost bit of each dword only
     xorps xmm0, xmm1     ; change sign of xmm0

You can get the absolute value of a floating point number by AND'ing out the sign bit:

     ; Example 17.6. Absolute value of four single-precision floats in xmm0
     cmpeqd xmm1, xmm1    ; generate all 1's
     psrld xmm1,1         ; 1 in all but the leftmost bit of each dword
     andps xmm0 ,xmm1     ; set sign bits to 0

You can extract the sign bit of a floating point number:

     ; Example 17.7. Generate a bit-mask if single-precision floats in
     ; xmm0 are negative or -0.0
     psrad   xmm0,31      ; copy sign bit into all bit positions

Manipulating the exponent
You can multiply a non-zero number by a power of 2 by simply adding to the exponent:

    ; Example 17.8. Multiply vector by power of 2
    movaps xmm0, [x]    ; four single-precision floats
    movdqa xmm1, [n]    ; four 32-bit positive integers
    pslld   xmm1, 23    ; shift integers into exponent field
    paddd   xmm0, xmm1 ; x * 2^n

Likewise, you can divide by a power of 2 by subtracting from the exponent. Note that this
code does not work if X is zero or if overflow or underflow is possible.

Manipulating the mantissa
You can convert an integer to a floating point number in an interval of length 1.0 by putting
bits into the mantissa field. The following code computes x = n / 232, where n in an unsigned
integer in the interval 0 ≤ n < 232, and the resulting x is in the interval 0 ≤ x < 1.0.

    ; Example 17.9. Convert bits to value between 0 and 1
    section .data
    one    dq   1.0
    x      dq   0
    n      dd   0

    section .text
    movsd xmm0, [one]          ; 1.0, double precision
    movd   xmm1, [n]           ; n, 32-bit unsigned integer
    psllq xmm1, 20             ; align n left in mantissa field
    orpd   xmm1, xmm0          ; combine mantissa and exponent
    subsd xmm1, xmm0           ; subtract 1.0
    movsd [x], xmm1            ; store result

In the above code, the exponent from 1.0 is combined with a mantissa containing the bits of
n. This gives a double-precision value in the interval 1.0 ≤ x < 2.0. The SUBSD instruction
subtracts 1.0 to get x into the desired interval. This is useful for random number generators.

Comparing numbers
Thanks to the fact that the exponent is stored in the biased format and to the left of the
mantissa, it is possible to use integer instructions for comparing positive floating point
numbers. Example (single precision):

    ; Example 17.10a. Compare single precision float numbers
    fld    dword [a]
    fcomp dword [b]
    fnstsw ax
    and    ah, 1
    jnz    ASmallerThanB

can be replaced by:

    ; Example 17.10b. Compare single precision float numbers
    mov eax, [a]
    mov ebx, [b]
    cmp eax, ebx
    jb   ASmallerThanB

This method works only if you are certain that none of the numbers have the sign bit set.
You may compare absolute values by shifting out the sign bit of both numbers. For double-
precision numbers, you can make an approximate comparison by comparing the upper 32
bits using 32-bit integer instructions.

17.8 Moving blocks of data
There are several ways of moving large blocks of data. The most common methods are:

   1. REP MOVS instruction.

   2. If data are aligned: Read and write in a loop with the largest available register size.

   3. If size is constant: inline move instructions.

   4. If data are misaligned: First move as many bytes as required to make the destination
      aligned. Then read unaligned and write aligned in a loop with the largest available
      register size.

   5. If data are misaligned: Read aligned, shift to compensate for misalignment and write
      aligned.

   6. If the data size is too big for caching, use non-temporal writes to bypass the cache.
      Shift to compensate for misalignment, if necessary.

Which of these methods is fastest depends on the microprocessor, the data size and the
alignment. If a large fraction of the CPU time is used for moving data, then it is important to
select the fastest method. I will therefore discuss the advantages and disadvantages of
each method here.

The REP MOVS instruction (1) is a simple solution which is useful when optimizing for code
size rather than for speed. This instruction is implemented as microcode in the CPU. The
microcode implementation may actually use one of the other methods internally. In some
cases it is well optimized, in other cases not. Usually, the REP MOVS instruction has a large
overhead for choosing and setting up the right method. Therefore, it is not optimal for small
blocks of data. For large blocks of data, it may be quite efficient when certain conditions for
alignment etc. are met. These conditions depend on the specific CPU (see page 141). On
Intel Nehalem and later processors, this is sometimes as fast as the other methods when
the memory block is large.

Aligned moves with the largest available registers (2) is an efficient method on all
processors. Therefore, it is worthwhile to align big blocks of data and, if necessary, pad the
data in the end to make the size of each data block a multiple of the register size.

Inlined move instructions (3) is often the fastest method if the size of the data block is
known at compile time, and the alignment is known. Part of the block may be moved in
smaller registers to fit the specific alignment and data size. The loop of move instructions
may be fully rolled out if the size is very small.

Unaligned read and aligned write (4) is fast on most newer processors. Typically, older
processors have slow unaligned reads while newer processors have a better cache
interface that optimizes unaligned read. The unaligned read method is reasonably fast on all
newer processors, and on many processors it is the fastest method.

The aligned read - shift - aligned write method (5) is the fastest method for moving
unaligned data on older processors. On processors with SSE2, use PSRLDQ/PSLLDQ/POR. On
processors with SSSE3, use PALIGNR (except on Bobcat, where PALIGNR is particularly
slow). It is necessary to have 16 different branches for the 16 possible shift counts. This can
be avoided on AMD processors with XOP instructions, by using the VPPERM instruction, but
the unaligned read method (4) may be at least as fast on these processors.

Using non-temporal writes (6) to bypass the cache can be advantageous when moving very
large blocks of data. This is not always faster than the other methods, but it saves the cache
for other purposes. As a rule of thumb, it can be good to use non-temporal writes when
moving data blocks bigger than half the size of the last-level cache.

As you can see, it can be very difficult to choose the optimal method in a given situation.
The best advice I can give for a universal memcpy function, based on my testing, is as
follows:

   •   On Intel Wolfdale and earlier, Intel Atom, AMD K8 and earlier, and VIA Nano, use
       the aligned read - shift - aligned write method (5).
   •   On Intel Nehalem and later, method (4) is up to 33% faster than method (5).
   •   On AMD K10 and later and Bobcat, use the unaligned read - aligned write method
       (4).
   •   The non-temporal write method (6) can be used for data blocks bigger than half the
       size of the largest-level cache.

Another consideration is what size of registers to use for moving data. The size of vector
registers has been increased from 64 bits to 128, 256, and 512 bits with various instruction
set extensions. Historically, the first processors to support a new register size have often
had limited bandwidth for operations on the larger registers. Some or all of the execution
units, physical registers, data buses, read ports and write ports have had the size of the
previous version, so that an operation on the largest register size is split internally into two
operations of half the size. The first processors with SSE would split a 128-bit read into two
64-bit reads; and the first processors with AVX would split a 256-bit read into two 128-bit
reads. Therefore, there is no increase in bandwidth by using the largest registers on these
processors. In some cases, e.g. AMD Bulldozer, there is significant decrease in
performance by using the 256-bit registers. In these cases, it is not advantageous to use a
new register size for moving data until the second generation of processors that support it.
The use of 512-bit registers is advantageous on the first Intel processors to support 512-bit
registers.

There is a further complication when copying blocks of memory, namely false memory
dependence. Whenever the CPU reads a piece of data from memory, it checks if it overlaps
with any preceding write. If this is the case, then the read must wait for the preceding write
to finish or it must do a store forwarding. Unfortunately, the CPU may not be able to check
the full physical address, but only the offset within the memory page, i.e. the lower 12 bits of
the address. If the lower 12 bits of the read address overlaps with the lower 12 bits of any
unfinished preceding write then the read is delayed. This happens when the source address
relative to the destination address is a little less than a multiple of 4 kbytes. This false
memory dependence can slow down memory copying by a factor of 3 - 4 in the worst case.
The problem can be avoided by copying backwards, from the end to the beginning of the
memory block, in the case where there is a false memory dependence. This is of course
only allowed when no part of the source and the destination memory blocks truly overlaps.

The asmlib library includes optimized functions for moving data, and automatically selecting
the optimal method for the processor it is running on.

Prefetching
It is sometimes advantageous to prefetch data items before they are needed, and some
manuals recommend this. However, modern processors have automatic prefetching. The
processor hardware is constructed so that it can predict which data addresses will be
needed next, and prefetch it automatically, when data items are accessed in a linear
manner, both forwards and backwards. Explicit prefetching is rarely needed. The optimal
prefetch strategy is processor specific. Therefore, it is easier to rely on automatic
prefetching. Explicit prefetching is particularly bad on Intel Ivy Bridge and AMD Jaguar
processors.

Moving data on future processors
We must bear in mind that the code that is written today will run on the processors of
tomorrow. Therefore, it is important to optimize for future processors as explained in the
section "CPU dispatch strategies" in Manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++". Therefore, I
will discuss here which method is likely to be fastest on future processors. First, we can
predict that the AVX512 (and later) instruction sets are likely to be supported on all future
high-end Intel x86 processors. Smaller low power processors with 128 or 256-bit execution
units can implement a 512-bit instruction as two 256-bit µops or four 128-bit µops. All
processors with AVX will have reasonably fast unaligned read operations because the AVX
instructions have few restrictions on alignment. As the trend goes towards having two read
ports, the memory read operations are unlikely to be a bottleneck, even if unaligned.
Therefore, we can expect that the unaligned read method (method 4) will be fast on future
processors.

Many modern processors have optimized the REP MOVS instruction (method 1) to use the
largest available register size and the fastest method, at least in simple cases. But there are
still cases where the REP MOVS method is slow, for example for certain misalignment cases
and false memory dependence. However, the REP MOVS instruction has the advantage that
it will probably use the largest available register size on processors in a more distant future
with registers bigger than 512 bits. As instructions with the expected future register sizes
cannot yet be coded and tested, the REP MOVS instruction is the only way we can write code
today that will take advantage of future extensions to the register size. Therefore, it may be
useful to use the REP MOVS instruction for favorable cases of large aligned memory blocks.

It would be useful if CPU vendors provided information in the CPUID instruction to help
select the optimal code or, alternatively, implemented the best method as microcode in the
REP MOVS instruction.

Examples of the abovementioned methods can be found in the function library at
www.agner.org/optimize/asmlib.zip. See manual 1: "Optimizing software in C++" for a
discussion of automatic CPU dispatching, and for a comparison of available function
libraries.

Processor-specific advice on improving memory access can be found in Intel's "Intel 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Optimization Reference Manual" and AMD's "Software Optimization
Guide for AMD Family xx Processors".

17.9 Self-modifying code
The penalty for executing a piece of code immediately after modifying it is approximately 19
clocks for P1, 31 for PMMX, and 150-300 for PPro, P2, P3, PM. The P4 will purge the entire
trace cache after self-modifying code. The 80486 and earlier processors require a jump
between the modifying and the modified code in order to flush the code cache.

To get permission to modify code in a protected operating system you need to call special
system functions: In 16-bit Windows call ChangeSelector, in 32-bit and 64-bit Windows call
VirtualProtect and FlushInstructionCache. The trick of putting the code in a data
segment does not work in newer systems that use the execute disable bit.

Self-modifying code is not considered good programming practice. It should be used only if
the gain in speed is substantial and the modified code is executed so many times that the
advantage outweighs the penalties for using self-modifying code.

Self-modifying code can be useful for example in a math program where a user-defined
function has to be evaluated many times. The program may contain a small compiler that
converts the function to binary code.

