18 Measuring performance
18.1 Testing speed
Many compilers have a profiler that makes it possible to measure how many times each
function in a program is called and how long time it takes. This is very useful for finding any
hot spot in the program. If a particular hot spot is taking a high proportion of the total
execution time, then this hot spot should be the target for your optimization efforts.

Many profilers are not very accurate, and certainly not accurate enough for fine-tuning a
small part of the code. A more accurate way of testing the speed of a piece of code is to use
the so-called time stamp counter. This is an internal 64-bit clock counter which can be read
into EDX:EAX using the instruction RDTSC (read time stamp counter). The time stamp counter
counts at the CPU clock frequency so that one count equals one clock cycle, which is the
smallest relevant time unit.

Many microprocessors are able to change the clock frequency in the CPU core in response
to changing workloads. The clock frequency is increased when the workload is high, and
decreased when the workload is low, in order to save power. Intel processors have a "core
clock counter" which counts at the actual core clock frequency. The core clock counter gives
more consistent and reproducible results. This is useful when comparing alternative
implementations of a piece of code, while the time stamp counter gives a more realistic
measure of how long time the code actually takes to execute. A device driver is needed to
enable the core clock counter because this requires privileged access. Once the core clock
counter is activated, it can be read without privileged mode. A test program that can enable
the core clock counter is mentioned below.

You have to insert XOR EAX,EAX / CPUID before and after each read of the counters in
order to prevent it from executing in parallel with anything else on processors with out-of-
order execution. CPUID is a serializing instruction, which means that it flushes the pipeline
and waits for all pending operations to finish before proceeding. This is very useful for
testing purposes.

A serious problem when counting clock cycles is to avoid interrupts. Protected operating
systems do not allow you to clear the interrupt flag, so you cannot avoid interrupts and task
switches during the test. This makes test results inaccurate and irreproducible. There are
several alternative ways to overcome this problem:

   1. Run the test code with a high priority to minimize the risk of interrupts and task
      switches.

   2. If the piece of code you are testing is not too long then you may repeat the test
      several times and assume that the lowest of the clock counts measured represents a
      situation where no interrupt has occurred.

   3. If the piece of code you are testing takes so long time that interrupts are unavoidable
      then you may repeat the test many times and take the average of the clock count
      measurements.

   4. Make a virtual device driver to clear the interrupt flag.

   5. Use an operating system that allows clearing the interrupt flag (e.g. Windows 98
      without network, in console mode).

   6. Start the test program in real mode using the old DOS operating system.

I have made a series of test programs that use method 1 and 2. These programs are
available at www.agner.org/optimize/testp.zip.

A further complication occurs on processors with multiple cores if a thread can jump from
one core to another. The time stamp counters on different cores are not necessarily
synchronized. This is not a problem when testing small pieces of code if the above
precautions are taken to minimize interrupts. But it can be a problem when measuring
longer time intervals. You may need to lock the process to a single CPU core, for example
with the function SetProcessAffinityMask in Windows. This is discussed in the document
"Game Timing and Multicore Processors", Microsoft 2005 http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/ee417693.aspx. The RDTSCP instruction allows you to detect if the task has
jumped to a different CPU core.

You will soon observe when measuring clock cycles that a piece of code always takes
longer time the first time it is executed where it is not in the cache. Furthermore, it may take
two or three iterations before the branch predictor has adapted to the code. The first
measurement gives the execution time when code and data are not in the cache. The
subsequent measurements give the execution time with the best possible caching.

Alignment effects on some old Intel processors can make time measurements difficult.
Assume that you have a piece code and you want to make a change which you expect to
make the code a few clocks faster. The modified code does not have exactly the same size
as the original. This means that the code below the modification point will be aligned
differently and the instruction fetch blocks will be different. If instruction fetch and decoding
is a bottleneck, then the change in the alignment may make the code several clock cycles
faster or slower. AMD processors may also have alignment effects on tiny loops.

Most x86 processors also have a set of so-called performance monitor counters. These
counters can count events such as cache misses, misalignments, branch mispredictions,
etc. They are very useful for diagnosing performance problems. The performance monitor
counters are processor-specific. You need a different test setup for each type of CPU.

Details about the performance monitor counters can be found in Intel's Software
Developer’s Manual, and in AMD's BIOS and Kernel Developer's Guide.

You need privileged access to set up the performance monitor counters. This is done most
conveniently with a device driver. The test programs at www.agner.org/optimize/testp.zip
give access to the performance monitor counters under Linux and Windows. These test
program support the different kinds of performance monitor counters in most Intel, AMD,
and VIA processors.

Intel and AMD are providing profilers that use the performance monitor counters of their
respective processors. Intel's profiler is called Vtune and AMD's profiler is called CodeXL.

18.2 The pitfalls of unit-testing
If you want to find out which version of a function performs best, then it is not sufficient to
measure clock cycles in a small test program that calls the function many times. Such a test
is unlikely to give a realistic measure of cache misses because the test program may use
less memory than the cache size. For example, an isolated test may show that it is
advantageous to roll out a loop, while a test where the function is inserted in the final
program shows a large amount of cache misses when the loop is rolled out.

Therefore, it is important not only to count clock cycles when evaluating the performance of
a function, but also to consider how much space it uses in the code cache, data cache, and
branch target buffer.

