                         Foreword

When I first met James Forshaw, I worked in what
Popular Science described in 2007 as one of the
top ten worst jobs in science: a “Microsoft Security
Grunt.” This was the broad-swath label the magazine
used for anyone working in the Microsoft Security
Response Center (MSRC). What positioned our jobs
as worse than “whale-feces researcher” but somehow better than “elephant
vasectomist” on this list (so famous among those of us who suffered in
Redmond, WA, that we made t-shirts) was the relentless drumbeat of
incoming security bug reports in Microsoft products.
     It was here in MSRC that James, with his keen and creative eye toward
the uncommon and overlooked, first caught my attention as a security
strategist. James was the author of some of the most interesting security
bug reports. This was no small feat, considering the MSRC was receiving
upwards of 200,000 security bug reports per year from security researchers.
James was finding not only simple bugs—he had taken a look at the .NET
                  framework and found architecture-level issues. While these architecture-
                  level bugs were harder to address in a simple patch, they were much more
                  valuable to Microsoft and its customers.
                       Fast-forward to the creation of Microsoft’s first bug bounty programs,
                  which I started at the company in June of 2013. We had three programs in
                  that initial batch of bug bounties—programs that promised to pay security
                  researchers like James cash in exchange for reporting the most serious
                  bugs to Microsoft. I knew that for these programs to prove their efficacy,
                  we needed high-quality security bugs to be turned in.
                       If we built it, there was no guarantee that the bug finders would come.
                  We knew we were competing for some of the most highly skilled bug hunt-
                  ing eyes in the world. Numerous other cash rewards were available, and
                  not all of the bug markets were for defense. Nation-states and criminals
                  had a well-established offense market for bugs and exploits, and Microsoft
                  was relying on the finders who were already coming forward at the rate of
                  200,000 bug reports per year for free. The bounties were to focus the atten-
                  tion of those friendly, altruistic bug hunters on the problems Microsoft
                  needed the most help with eradicating.
                       So of course, I called on James and a handful of others, because I was
                  counting on them to deliver the buggy goods. For these first Microsoft bug
                  bounties, we security grunts in the MSRC really wanted vulnerabilities for
                  Internet Explorer (IE) 11 beta, and we wanted something no software ven-
                  dor had ever tried to set a bug bounty on before: we wanted to know about
                  new exploitation techniques. That latter bounty was known as the Mitigation
                  Bypass Bounty, and worth $100,000 at the time.
                       I remember sitting with James over a beer in London, trying to get
                  him excited about looking for IE bugs, when he explained that he’d never
                  looked at browser security much before and cautioned me not to expect
                  much from him.
                       James nevertheless turned in four unique sandbox escapes for IE 11 beta.
                       Four.
                       These sandbox escapes were in areas of the IE code that our internal
                  teams and private external penetration testers had all missed. Sandbox
                  escapes are essential to helping other bugs be more reliably exploitable.
                  James earned bounties for all four bugs, paid for by the IE team itself, plus
                  an extra $5,000 bonus out of my bounty budget. Looking back, I probably
                  should have given him an extra $50,000. Because wow. Not bad for a bug
                  hunter who had never looked at web browser security before.
                       Just a few months later, I was calling James on the phone from outside
                  a Microsoft cafeteria on a brisk autumn day, absolutely breathless, to tell
                  him that he had just made history. This particular Microsoft Security Grunt
                  couldn’t have been more thrilled to deliver the news that his entry for one
                  of the other Microsoft bug bounty programs—the Mitigation Bypass Bounty
                  for $100,000—had been accepted. James Forshaw had found a unique new
                  way to bypass all the platform defenses using architecture-level flaws in
                  the latest operating system and won the very first $100,000 bounty from
                  Microsoft.

xvi    Foreword
    On that phone call, as I recall the conversation, he said he pictured
me handing him a comically-huge novelty check onstage at Microsoft’s
internal BlueHat conference. I sent the marketing department a note
after that call, and in an instant, “James and the Giant Check” became
part of Microsoft and internet history forever.

    What I am certain readers will gain in the following pages of this
book are pieces of James’s unparalleled brilliance—the same brilliance
that I saw arching across a bug report or four so many years ago. There
are precious few security researchers who can find bugs in one advanced
technology, and fewer still who can find them in more than one with any
consistency. Then there are people like James Forshaw, who can focus on
deeper architecture issues with a surgeon’s precision. I hope that those
reading this book, and any future book by James, treat it like a practical
guide to spark that same brilliance and creativity in their own work.
    In a bug bounty meeting at Microsoft, when the IE team members
were shaking their heads, wondering how they could have missed some of
the bugs James reported, I stated simply, “James can see the Lady in the
Red Dress, as well as the code that rendered her, in the Matrix.” All of
those around the table accepted this explanation for the kind of mind at
work in James. He could bend any spoon; and by studying his work, if you
have an open mind, then so might you.
    For all the bug finders in the world, here is your bar, and it is high.
For all the untold numbers of security grunts in the world, may all your
bug reports be as interesting and valuable as those supplied by the one
and only James Forshaw.

Katie Moussouris
Founder and CEO, Luta Security
October 2017

                                                                 Foreword   xvii
               A cknowledg m ents

I’d like to thank you for reading my book; I hope you
find it enlightening and of practical use. I’m grateful
for the contributions from many different people.
    I must start by thanking my lovely wife Huayi, who made sure I stuck to
writing even if I really didn’t want to. Through her encouragement, I fin-
ished it in only four years; without her maybe it could have been written in
two, but it wouldn’t have been as much fun.
    Of course, I definitely wouldn’t be here today without my amazing par-
ents. Their love and encouragement has led me to become a widely recog-
nized computer security researcher and published author. They bought the
family a computer—an Atari 400—when I was young, and they were instru-
mental in starting my interest in computers and software development. I
can’t thank them enough for giving me all my opportunities.
    Acting as a great counterpoint to my computer nerdiness was my oldest
friend, Sam Shearon. Always the more confident and outgoing person and
an incredible artist, he made me see a different side to life.
    Throughout my career, there have been many colleagues and friends
who have made major contributions to my achievements. I must highlight
                       Richard Neal, a good friend and sometimes line manager who gave me the
                       opportunity to find an interest in computer security, a skill set that suited
                       my mindset.
                           I also can’t forget Mike Jordon who convinced me to start working at
                       Context Information Security in the UK. Along with owners Alex Church
                       and Mark Raeburn, they gave me the time to do impactful security research,
                       build my skills in network protocol analysis, and develop tools such as
                       Canape. This experience of attacking real-world, and typically completely
                       bespoke, network protocols is what much of the content of this book is
                       based on.
                           I must thank Katie Moussouris for convincing me to go for the
                       Microsoft Mitigation Bypass Bounty, raising my profile massively in the
                       information security world, and of course for giving me a giant novelty
                       check for $100,000 for my troubles.
                           My increased profile didn’t go amiss when the team for Google Project
                       Zero—a group of world leading security researchers with the goal of mak-
                       ing the platforms that we all rely on more secure—was being set up. Will
                       Harris mentioned me to the current head of the team, Chris Evans, who
                       convinced me to interview, and soon I was a Googler. Being a member of
                       such an excellent team makes me proud.
                           Finally, I must thank Bill, Laurel, and Liz at No Starch Press for hav-
                       ing the patience to wait for me to finish this book and for giving me solid
                       advice on how to tackle it. I hope that they, and you, are happy with the
                       final result.

xx   Acknowledgments
