                     I ntrod u ction

When first introduced, the technology that allowed
devices to connect to a network was exclusive to large
companies and governments. Today, most people
carry a fully networked computing device in their
pocket, and with the rise of the Internet of Things
(IoT), you can add devices such as your fridge and
our home’s security system to this interconnected world. The security of
these connected devices is therefore increasingly important. Although you
might not be too concerned about someone disclosing the details of how
many yogurts you buy, if your smartphone is compromised over the same net-
work as your fridge, you could lose all your personal and financial informa-
tion to a malicious attacker.
     This book is named Attacking Network Protocols because to find secu-
rity vulnerabilities in a network-connected device, you need to adopt the
mind-set of the attacker who wants to exploit those weaknesses. Network
protocols communicate with other devices on a network, and because these
                      protocols must be exposed to a public network and often don’t undergo the
                      same level of scrutiny as other components of a device, they’re an obvious
                      attack target.

     Why Read This Book?
                      Many books discuss network traffic capture for the purposes of diagnostics
                      and basic network analysis, but they don’t focus on the security aspects of
                      the protocols they capture. What makes this book different is that it focuses
                      on analyzing custom protocols to find security vulnerabilities.
                           This book is for those who are interested in analyzing and attacking
                      network protocols but don’t know where to start. The chapters will guide you
                      through learning techniques to capture network traffic, performing analy-
                      sis of the protocols, and discovering and exploiting security vulnerabilities.
                      The book provides background information on networking and network
                      security, as well as practical examples of protocols to analyze.
                           Whether you want to attack network protocols to report security vulner-
                      abilities to an application’s vendor or just want to know how your latest IoT
                      device communicates, you’ll find several topics of interest.

     What’s in This Book?
                      This book contains a mix of theoretical and practical chapters. For the
                      practical chapters, I’ve developed and made available a networking library
                      called Canape Core, which you can use to build your own tools for protocol
                      analysis and exploitation. I’ve also provided an example networked applica-
                      tion called SuperFunkyChat, which implements a user-to-user chat protocol.
                      By following the discussions in the chapters, you can use the example appli-
                      cation to learn the skills of protocol analysis and attack the sample network
                      protocols. Here is a brief breakdown of each chapter:
                      Chapter 1: The Basics of Networking
                         This chapter describes the basics of computer networking with a particu-
                         lar focus on TCP/IP, which forms the basis of application-level network
                         protocols. Subsequent chapters assume that you have a good grasp of the
                         network basics. This chapter also introduces the approach I use to model
                         application protocols. The model breaks down the application protocol
                         into flexible layers and abstracts complex technical detail, allowing you
                         to focus on the bespoke parts of the protocol you’re analyzing.

                      Chapter 2: Capturing Application Traffic
                         This chapter introduces the concepts of passive and active capture of
                         network traffic, and it’s the first chapter to use the Canape Core net-
                         work libraries for practical tasks.

xxii   Introduction
Chapter 3: Network Protocol Structures
   This chapter contains details of the internal structures that are common
   across network protocols, such as the representation of numbers or
   human-readable text. When you’re analyzing captured network traf-
   fic, you can use this knowledge to quickly identify common structures,
   speeding up your analysis.

Chapter 4: Advanced Application Traffic Capture
   This chapter explores a number of more advanced capture techniques
   that complement the examples in Chapter 2. The advanced capture
   techniques include configuring Network Address Translation to redi-
   rect traffic of interest and spoofing the address resolution protocol.

Chapter 5: Analysis from the Wire
   This chapter introduces methods for analyzing captured network traffic
   using the passive and active techniques described in Chapter 2. In this
   chapter, we begin using the SuperFunkyChat application to generate
   example traffic.

Chapter 6: Application Reverse Engineering
   This chapter describes techniques for reverse engineering network-
   connected programs. Reverse engineering allows you to analyze a
   protocol without needing to capture example traffic. These methods
   also help to identify how custom encryption or obfuscation is imple-
   mented so you can better analyze traffic you’ve captured.

Chapter 7: Network Protocol Security
   This chapter provides background information on techniques and cryp-
   tographic algorithms used to secure network protocols. Protecting the
   contents of network traffic from disclosure or tampering as it travels
   over public networks is of the utmost importance for network protocol
   security.

Chapter 8: Implementing the Network Protocol
   This chapter explains techniques for implementing the application net-
   work protocol in your own code so you can test the protocol’s behavior
   to find security weaknesses.

Chapter 9: The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities
   This chapter describes common security vulnerabilities you’ll encounter
   in a network protocol. When you understand the root causes of vulner-
   abilities, you can more easily identify them during analysis.

Chapter 10: Finding and Exploiting Security Vulnerabilities
   This chapter describes processes for finding security vulnerabilities
   based on the root causes in Chapter 9 and demonstrates a number of
   ways of exploiting them, including developing your own shell code and
   bypassing exploit mitigations through return-oriented programming.

                                                              Introduction   xxiii
                      Appendix: Network Protocol Analysis Toolkit
                         In the appendix, you’ll find descriptions of some of the tools I com-
                         monly use when performing network protocol analysis. Many of the
                         tools are described briefly in the main body of the text as well.

     How to Use This Book
                      If you want to start with a refresher on the basics of networking,
                      read Chapter 1 first. When you’re familiar with the basics, proceed to
                      Chapters 2, 3, and 5 for practical experience in capturing network traffic
                      and learning the network protocol analysis process.
                           With the knowledge of the principles of network traffic capture and
                      analysis, you can then move on to Chapters 7 through 10 for practical infor-
                      mation on how to find and exploit security vulnerabilities in these protocols.
                      Chapters 4 and 6 contain more advanced information about additional cap-
                      ture techniques and application reverse engineering, so you can read them
                      after you’ve read the other chapters if you prefer.
                           For the practical examples, you’ll need to install .NET Core (https://
                      www.microsoft.com/net/core/), which is a cross-platform version of the .NET
                      runtime from Microsoft that works on Windows, Linux, and macOS. You
                      can then download releases for Canape Core from https://github.com/tyranid/
                      CANAPE.Core/releases/ and SuperFunkyChat from https://github.com/tyranid/
                      ExampleChatApplication/releases/; both use .NET Core as the runtime. Links to
                      each site are available with the book’s resources at https://www.nostarch.com/
                      networkprotocols/.
                           To execute the example Canape Core scripts, you’ll need to use the
                      CANAPE.Cli application, which will be in the release package downloaded
                      from the Canape Core Github repository. Execute the script with the follow-
                      ing command line, replacing script.csx with the name of the script you want
                      to execute.

                      dotnet exec CANAPE.Cli.dll script.csx

                           All example listings for the practical chapters as well as packet captures
                      are available on the book’s page at https://www.nostarch.com/networkprotocols/.
                      It’s best to download these example listings before you begin so you can fol-
                      low the practical chapters without having to enter a large amount of source
                      code manually.

     Contact Me
                      I’m always interested in receiving feedback, both positive and negative, on
                      my work, and this book is no exception. You can email me at attacking.network
                      .protocols@gmail.com. You can also follow me on Twitter @tiraniddo or subscribe
                      to my blog at https://tyranidslair.blogspot.com/ where I post some of my latest
                      advanced security research.

xxiv   Introduction
