                                       1
             T he B asics o f N etworking

        To attack network protocols, you need to understand
        the basics of computer networking. The more you
        understand how common networks are built and func-
        tion, the easier it will be to apply that knowledge to
        capturing, analyzing, and exploiting new protocols.
             Throughout this chapter, I’ll introduce basic network concepts you’ll
        encounter every day when you’re analyzing network protocols. I’ll also lay
        the groundwork for a way to think about network protocols, making it easier
        to find previously unknown security issues during your analysis.

Network Architecture and Protocols
        Let’s start by reviewing some basic networking terminology and asking the
        fundamental question: what is a network? A network is a set of two or more
        computers connected together to share information. It’s common to refer
        to each connected device as a node on the network to make the descrip-
        tion applicable to a wider range of devices. Figure 1-1 shows a very simple
        example.
                                       Network

                Workstation                              Mainframe
                  node                                     node

                                       Server
                                       node

Figure 1-1: A simple network of three nodes

                    The figure shows three nodes connected with a common network. Each
                node might have a different operating system or hardware. But as long as
                each node follows a set of rules, or network protocol, it can communicate with
                the other nodes on the network. To communicate correctly, all nodes on a
                network must understand the same network protocol.
                    A network protocol serves many functions, including one or more of
                the following:
                    Maintaining session state Protocols typically implement mechanisms
                    to create new connections and terminate existing connections.
                    Identifying nodes through addressing Data must be transmitted to
                    the correct node on a network. Some protocols implement an address-
                    ing mechanism to identify specific nodes or groups of nodes.
                    Controlling flow The amount of data transferred across a network
                    is limited. Protocols can implement ways of managing data flow to
                    increase throughput and reduce latency.
                    Guaranteeing the order of transmitted data Many networks do not
                    guarantee that the order in which the data is sent will match the order
                    in which it’s received. A protocol can reorder the data to ensure it’s
                    delivered in the correct order.
                    Detecting and correcting errors Many networks are not 100 percent
                    reliable; data can become corrupted. It’s important to detect corrup-
                    tion and, ideally, correct it.
                    Formatting and encoding data Data isn’t always in a format suitable
                    for transmitting on the network. A protocol can specify ways of encod-
                    ing data, such as encoding English text into binary values.

     The Internet Protocol Suite
                TCP/IP is the de facto protocol that modern networks use. Although you can
                think of TCP/IP as a single protocol, it’s actually a combination of two proto-
                cols: the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP). These

2   Chapter 1
two protocols form part of the Internet Protocol Suite (IPS), a conceptual model
of how network protocols send network traffic over the internet that breaks
down network communication into four layers, as shown in Figure 1-2.

Example protocols           Internet Protocol Suite     External connections

HTTP, SMTP, DNS               Application layer           User application

        TCP, UDP               Transport layer

        IPv4, IPv6              Internet layer

     Ethernet, PPP                Link layer              Physical network

Figure 1-2: Internet Protocol Suite layers

    These four layers form a protocol stack. The following list explains each
layer of the IPS:
     Link layer (layer 1) This layer is the lowest level and describes the
     physical mechanisms used to transfer information between nodes on a
     local network. Well-known examples include Ethernet (both wired and
     wireless) and Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP).
     Internet layer (layer 2) This layer provides the mechanisms for
     addressing network nodes. Unlike in layer 1, the nodes don’t have to
     be located on the local network. This level contains the IP; on modern
     networks, the actual protocol used could be either version 4 (IPv4) or
     version 6 (IPv6).
     Transport layer (layer 3) This layer is responsible for connections
     between clients and servers, sometimes ensuring the correct order of
     packets and providing service multiplexing. Service multiplexing allows
     a single node to support multiple different services by assigning a dif-
     ferent number for each service; this number is called a port. TCP and
     the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) operate on this layer.
     Application layer (layer 4) This layer contains network protocols, such
     as the HyperText Transport Protocol (HTTP), which transfers web page con-
     tents; the Simple Mail Transport Protocol (SMTP), which transfers email;
     and the Domain Name System (DNS) protocol, which converts a name to a
     node on the network. Throughout this book, we’ll focus primarily on
     this layer.

                                                            The Basics of Networking   3
                     Each layer interacts only with the layer above and below it, but there must
                be some external interactions with the stack. Figure 1-2 shows two external
                connections. The link layer interacts with a physical network connection,
                transmitting data in a physical medium, such as pulses of electricity or light.
                The application layer interacts with the user application: an application is a
                collection of related functionality that provides a service to a user. Figure 1-3
                shows an example of an application that processes email. The service pro-
                vided by the mail application is the sending and receiving of messages over
                a network.

                                                  Mail application

                                 User interface                       Content parsers
                                HTML rendering                       Text, HTML, JPEG

                                             Network communication              Network
                                               SMTP, POP3, IMAP
                                                                                          Mail server

Figure 1-3: Example mail application

                    Typically, applications contain the following components:
                    Network communication This component communicates over the
                    network and processes incoming and outgoing data. For a mail applica-
                    tion, the network communication is most likely a standard protocol,
                    such as SMTP or POP3.
                    Content parsers Data transferred over a network usually contains con-
                    tent that must be extracted and processed. Content might include tex-
                    tual data, such as the body of an email, or it might be pictures or video.
                    User interface (UI) The UI allows the user to view received emails
                    and to create new emails for transmission. In a mail application, the UI
                    might display emails using HTML in a web browser.
                    Note that the user interacting with the UI doesn’t have to be a human
                being. It could be another application that automates the sending and
                receiving of emails through a command line tool.

     Data Encapsulation
                Each layer in the IPS is built on the one below, and each layer is able to
                encapsulate the data from the layer above so it can move between the
                layers. Data transmitted by each layer is called a protocol data unit (PDU).

                Headers, Footers, and Addresses
                The PDU in each layer contains the payload data that is being transmit-
                ted. It’s common to prefix a header—which contains information required

4   Chapter 1
                      for the payload data to be transmitted, such as the addresses of the source
                      and destination nodes on the network—to the payload data. Sometimes a
                      PDU also has a footer that is suffixed to the payload data and contains values
                      needed to ensure correct transmission, such as error-checking information.
                      Figure 1-4 shows how the PDUs are laid out in the IPS.

                                                                                                      Layer 4:
                                                                            Application payload
                                                                                                      Application layer
                                                                                     PDU

                                                   Source     Destination
                                                    port         port
                                                                                                      Layer 3:
                                                                                  TCP payload
                                                                                                      Session layer
                                                      TCP header
                                                                            PDU

                          Source     Destination
                          address     address
                                                                                                      Layer 2:
                                                                   IP payload
                                                                                                      Internet layer
                               IP header
                                                            PDU

 Source     Destination
 address     address
                                                                                                               Layer 1:
                                                      Ethernet payload                               Footer
                                                                                                               Link layer
    Ethernet header                        Protocol data unit (PDU)

Figure 1-4: IPS data encapsulation

                          The TCP header contains a source and destination port number .
                      These port numbers allow a single node to have multiple unique network
                      connections. Port numbers for TCP (and UDP) range from 0 to 65535.
                      Most port numbers are assigned as needed to new connections, but some
                      numbers have been given special assignments, such as port 80 for HTTP.
                      (You can find a current list of assigned port numbers in the /etc/services file
                      on most Unix-like operating systems.) A TCP payload and header are com-
                      monly called a segment, whereas a UDP payload and header are commonly
                      called a datagram.
                          The IP protocol uses a source and a destination address . The desti-
                      nation address allows the data to be sent to a specific node on the network.
                      The source address allows the receiver of the data to know which node sent
                      the data and allows the receiver to reply to the sender.
                          IPv4 uses 32-bit addresses, which you’ll typically see written as
                      four numbers separated by dots, such as 192.168.10.1. IPv6 uses 128-bit
                      addresses, because 32-bit addresses aren’t sufficient for the number of
                      nodes on modern networks. IPv6 addresses are usually written as hexa-
                      decimal numbers separated by colons, such as fe80:0000:0000:0000
                      :897b:581e:44b0:2057. Long strings of 0000 numbers are collapsed into

                                                                                                The Basics of Networking   5
                two colons. For example, the preceding IPv6 address can also be written
                as fe80::897b:581e:44b0:2057. An IP payload and header are commonly
                called a packet.
                     Ethernet also contains source and destination addresses . Ethernet
                uses a 64-bit value called a Media Access Control (MAC) address, which is
                typically set during manufacture of the Ethernet adapter. You’ll usually
                see MAC addresses written as a series of hexadecimal numbers separated
                by dashes or colons, such as 0A-00-27-00-00-0E. The Ethernet payload,
                including the header and footer, is commonly referred to as a frame.

                Data Transmission
                Let’s briefly look at how data is transferred from one node to another using
                the IPS data encapsulation model. Figure 1-5 shows a simple Ethernet net-
                work with three nodes.

                                           192.1.1.100

                      
                                                             

                    192.1.1.101
                                                         
                MAC: 00-11-22-33-44-55

                                          192.1.1.50
                                     MAC: 66-77-88-99-AA-BB

Figure 1-5: A simple Ethernet network

                     In this example, the node at  with the IP address 192.1.1.101 wants
                to send data using the IP protocol to the node at  with the IP address
                192.1.1.50. (The switch device  forwards Ethernet frames between all
                nodes on the network. The switch doesn’t need an IP address because
                it operates only at the link layer.) Here is what takes place to send data
                between the two nodes:

                1.   The operating system network stack node  encapsulates the applica-
                     tion and transport layer data and builds an IP packet with a source
                     address of 192.1.1.101 and a destination address of 192.1.1.50.
                2.   The operating system can at this point encapsulate the IP data as an
                     Ethernet frame, but it might not know the MAC address of the target
                     node. It can request the MAC address for a particular IP address using
                     the Address Resolution Protocol (ARP), which sends a request to all
                     nodes on the network to find the MAC address for the destination IP
                     address.

6   Chapter 1
                      3. Once the node at  receives an ARP response, it can build the frame,
                         setting the source address to the local MAC address of 00-11-22-33-44​
                         -55 and the destination address to 66-77-88-99-AA-BB. The new frame
                         is transmitted on the network and is received by the switch .
                      4. The switch forwards the frame to the destination node, which
                         unpacks the IP packet and verifies that the destination IP address
                         matches. Then the IP payload data is extracted and passes up the
                         stack to be received by the waiting application.

    Network Routing
                      Ethernet requires that all nodes be directly connected to the same local
                      network. This requirement is a major limitation for a truly global network
                      because it’s not practical to physically connect every node to every other
                      node. Rather than require that all nodes be directly connected, the source
                      and destination addresses allow data to be routed over different networks
                      until the data reaches the desired destination node, as shown in Figure 1-6.

 Ethernet network 1                                                                        Ethernet network 2

                              192.1.1.100                               200.0.1.10
                                                         
                                           192.1.1.1            200.0.1.1                               ?
      

                                                       Router
                                                                                           200.0.1.50
     192.1.1.101
                                                                                      MAC: 66-77-88-99-AA-BB
 MAC: 00-11-22-33-44-55

                              192.1.1.50                                200.0.1.100

Figure 1-6: An example of a routed network connecting two Ethernet networks

                          Figure 1-6 shows two Ethernet networks, each with separate IP network
                      address ranges. The following description explains how the IP uses this
                      model to send data from the node at  on network 1 to the node at  on
                      network 2.

                      1.   The operating system network stack node  encapsulates the applica-
                           tion and transport layer data, and it builds an IP packet with a source
                           address of 192.1.1.101 and a destination address of 200.0.1.50.
                      2.   The network stack needs to send an Ethernet frame, but because the
                           destination IP address does not exist on any Ethernet network that the
                           node is connected to, the network stack consults its operating system

                                                                                          The Basics of Networking   7
                     routing table. In this example, the routing table contains an entry for the
                     IP address 200.0.1.50. The entry indicates that a router  on IP address
                     192.1.1.1 knows how to get to that destination address.
                3.   The operating system uses ARP to look up the router’s MAC address at
                     192.1.1.1, and the original IP packet is encapsulated within the Ethernet
                     frame with that MAC address.
                4.   The router receives the Ethernet frame and unpacks the IP packet.
                     When the router checks the destination IP address, it determines that
                     the IP packet is not destined for the router but for a different node on
                     another connected network. The router looks up the MAC address of
                     200.0.1.50, encapsulates the original IP packet into the new Ethernet
                     frame, and sends it on to network 2.
                5.   The destination node receives the Ethernet frame, unpacks the IP
                     packet, and processes its contents.

                    This routing process might be repeated multiple times. For example, if
                the router was not directly connected to the network containing the node
                200.0.1.50, it would consult its own routing table and determine the next
                router it could send the IP packet to.
                    Clearly, it would be impractical for every node on the network to know
                how to get to every other node on the internet. If there is no explicit rout-
                ing entry for a destination, the operating system provides a default routing
                table entry, called the default gateway, which contains the IP address of a
                router that can forward IP packets to their destinations.

     My Model for Network Protocol Analysis
                The IPS describes how network communication works; however, for analysis
                purposes, most of the IPS model is not relevant. It’s simpler to use my model
                to understand the behavior of an application network protocol. My model
                contains three layers, as shown in Figure 1-7, which illustrates how I would
                analyze an HTTP request.
                    Here are the three layers of my model:
                     Content layer Provides the meaning of what is being communicated.
                     In Figure 1-7, the meaning is making an HTTP request for the file
                     image.jpg.
                     Encoding layer Provides rules to govern how you represent your con-
                     tent. In this example, the HTTP request is encoded as an HTTP GET
                     request, which specifies the file to retrieve.
                     Transport layer Provides rules to govern how data is transferred
                     between the nodes. In the example, the HTTP GET request is sent
                     over a TCP/IP connection to port 80 on the remote node.

8   Chapter 1
         Protocol model

          Content layer
                                 I would like to get the file image.jpg
          (File request)

         Encoding layer
                                 GET /image.jpg HTTP/1.1
             (HTTP)

                                 4500 0043 50d1 4000 8006 0000 c0a8 0a6d
                                 d83a d544 40e0 0050 5dff a4e6 6ac2 4254
         Transport layer         5018 0102 78ca 0000 4745 5420 2f69 6d61
            (TCP/IP)             6765 2e6a 7067 2048 5454 502f 312e 310d
                                 0a0d 0a                ...

Figure 1-7: My conceptual protocol model

     Splitting the model this way reduces complexity with application-specific
protocols because it allows us to filter out details of the network protocol that
aren’t relevant. For example, because we don’t really care how TCP/IP is sent
to the remote node (we take for granted that it will get there somehow), we
simply treat the TCP/IP data as a binary transport that just works.
     To understand why the protocol model is useful, consider this protocol
example: imagine you’re inspecting the network traffic from some malware.
You find that the malware uses HTTP to receive commands from the opera-
tor via the server. For example, the operator might ask the malware to enu-
merate all files on the infected computer’s hard drive. The list of files can
be sent back to the server, at which point the operator can request a specific
file to be uploaded.
     If we analyze the protocol from the perspective of how the opera-
tor would interact with the malware, such as by requesting a file to
be uploaded, the new protocol breaks down into the layers shown in
Figure 1-8.

         Protocol model

          Content layer
                                 Sending file secret.doc with content 1122..
        (Send file request)

         Encoding layer
                                 SEND secret.doc 1122..
  (Simple text-based command)

         Transport layer
                                 GET /image.jpg?e=SEND%20secret.doc%11%22 HTTP/1.1
       (HTTP and TCP/IP)

Figure 1-8: The conceptual model for a malware protocol using HTTP

                                                                The Basics of Networking   9
                     The following list explains each layer of the new protocol model:
                     Content layer The malicious application is sending a stolen file called
                     secret.doc to the server.
                     Encoding layer The encoding of the command to send the stolen file
                     is a simple text string with a command SEND followed by the filename
                     and the file data.
                     Transport layer The protocol uses an HTTP request parameter to
                     transport the command. It uses the standard percent-encoding mecha-
                     nism, making it a legal HTTP request.
                     Notice in this example that we don’t consider the HTTP request being
                 sent over TCP/IP; we’ve combined the encoding and transport layer in
                 Figure 1-7 into just the transport layer in Figure 1-8. Although the mal-
                 ware still uses lower-level protocols, such as TCP/IP, these protocols are
                 not important to the analysis of the malware command to send a file. The
                 reason it’s not important is that we can consider HTTP over TCP/IP as a
                 single transport layer that just works and focus specifically on the unique
                 malware commands.
                     By narrowing our scope to the layers of the protocol that we need
                 to analyze, we avoid a lot of work and focus on the unique aspects of the
                 protocol. On the other hand, if we were to analyze this protocol using the
                 layers in Figure 1-7, we might assume that the malware was simply request-
                 ing the file image.jpg, because it would appear as though that was all the
                 HTTP request was doing.

     Final Words
                 This chapter provided a quick tour of the networking basics. I discussed
                 the IPS, including some of the protocols you’ll encounter in real networks,
                 and described how data is transmitted between nodes on a local network as
                 well as remote networks through routing. Additionally, I described a way to
                 think about application network protocols that should make it easier for you
                 to focus on the unique features of the protocol to speed up its analysis.
                      In Chapter 2, we’ll use these networking basics to guide us in captur-
                 ing network traffic for analysis. The goal of capturing network traffic is
                 to access the data you need to start the analysis process, identify what pro-
                 tocols are being used, and ultimately discover security issues that you can
                 exploit to compromise the applications using these protocols.

10   Chapter 1
