                   C apt u ring
                               2
             A pplication  T ra f f ic

Surprisingly, capturing useful traffic can be a challeng-
ing aspect of protocol analysis. This chapter describes
two different capture techniques: passive and active.
Passive capture doesn’t directly interact with the traf-
fic. Instead, it extracts the data as it travels on the wire,
which should be familiar from tools like Wireshark.
You’ll find that different applications provide different mechanisms (which
have their own advantages and disadvantages) to redirect traffic. Active
capture interferes with traffic between a client application and the server;
this has great power but can cause some complications. You can think of
active capture in terms of proxies or even a man-in-the-middle attack. Let’s
look at both active and passive techniques in more depth.
     Passive Network Traffic Capture
                 Passive capture is a relatively easy technique: it doesn’t typically require
                 any specialist hardware, nor do you usually need to write your own code.
                 Figure 2-1 shows a common scenario: a client and server communicating
                 via Ethernet over a network.

                 Client application                                          Server application

                                                 Passive capture device

Figure 2-1: An example of passive network capture

                     Passive network capture can take place either on the network by tap-
                 ping the traffic as it passes in some way or by sniffing directly on either the
                 client or server host.

     Quick Primer for Wireshark
                 Wireshark is perhaps the most popular packet-sniffing application available.
                 It’s cross platform and easy to use, and it comes with many built-in protocol
                 analysis features. In Chapter 5 you’ll learn how to write a dissector to aid
                 in protocol analysis, but for now, let’s set up Wireshark to capture IP traffic
                 from the network.
                       To capture traffic from an Ethernet interface (wired or wireless), the
                 capturing device must be in promiscuous mode. A device in promiscuous mode
                 receives and processes any Ethernet frame it sees, even if that frame wasn’t
                 destined for that interface. Capturing an application running on the same
                 computer is easy: just monitor the outbound network interface or the local
                 loopback interface (better known as localhost). Otherwise, you might need
                 to use networking hardware, such as a hub or a configured switch, to ensure
                 traffic is sent to your network interface.
                       Figure 2-2 shows the default view when capturing traffic from an
                 Ethernet interface.

12   Chapter 2
  

                                                                                                    

                                                                                                    

Figure 2-2: The default Wireshark view

                       There are three main view areas. Area u shows a timeline of raw packets
                   captured off the network. The timeline provides a list of the source and
                   destination IP addresses as well as decoded protocol summary information.
                   Area v provides a dissected view of the packet, separated into distinct pro-
                   tocol layers that correspond to the OSI network stack model. Area w shows
                   the captured packet in its raw form.
                       The TCP network protocol is stream based and designed to recover
                   from dropped packets or data corruption. Due to the nature of networks
                   and IP, there is no guarantee that packets will be received in a particular
                   order. Therefore, when you are capturing packets, the timeline view might
                   be difficult to interpret. Fortunately, Wireshark offers dissectors for known
                   protocols that will normally reassemble the entire stream and provide all
                   the information in one place. For example, highlight a packet in a TCP con-
                   nection in the timeline view and then select Analyze4Follow TCP Stream
                   from the main menu. A dialog similar to Figure 2-3 should appear. For pro-
                   tocols without a dissector, Wireshark can decode the stream and present it
                   in an easy-to-view dialog.

                                                                         Capturing Application Traffic   13
Figure 2-3: Following a TCP stream

                     Wireshark is a comprehensive tool, and covering all of its features is
                 beyond the scope of this book. If you’re not familiar with it, obtain a good
                 reference, such as Practical Packet Analysis, 3rd Edition (No Starch Press,
                 2017), and learn many of its useful features. Wireshark is indispensable for
                 analyzing application network traffic, and it’s free under the General Public
                 License (GPL).

     Alternative Passive Capture Techniques
                 Sometimes using a packet sniffer isn’t appropriate, for example, in situa-
                 tions when you don’t have permission to capture traffic. You might be doing
                 a penetration test on a system with no administrative access or a mobile
                 device with a limited privilege shell. You might also just want to ensure that
                 you look at traffic only for the application you’re testing. That’s not always
                 easy to do with packet sniffing unless you correlate the traffic based on
                 time. In this section, I’ll describe a few techniques for extracting network
                 traffic from a local application without using a packet-sniffing tool.

                 System Call Tracing
                 Many modern operating systems provide two modes of execution. Kernel
                 mode runs with a high level of privilege and contains code implementing
                 the OS’s core functionality. User mode is where everyday processes run. The
                 kernel provides services to user mode by exporting a collection of special
                 system calls (see Figure 2-4), allowing users to access files, create processes—
                 and most important for our purposes—connect to networks.

14   Chapter 2
                                    Network             Network
                    Kernel
                                   subsystem

                                                                  Server

                                          System call
           Kernel/User mode boundary

                System libraries

               Client application

Figure 2-4: An example of user-to-kernel network communication via
system calls

     When an application wants to connect to a remote server, it issues
special system calls to the OS’s kernel to open a connection. The app then
reads and writes the network data. Depending on the operating system run-
ning your network applications, you can monitor these calls directly to pas-
sively extract data from an application.
     Most Unix-like systems implement system calls resembling the
Berkeley Sockets model for network communication. This isn’t surpris-
ing, because the IP protocol was originally implemented in the Berkeley
Software Distribution (BSD) 4.2 Unix operating system. This socket imple-
mentation is also part of POSIX, making it the de facto standard. Table 2-1
shows some of the more important system calls in the Berkeley Sockets API.

Table 2-1: Common Unix System Calls for Networking

 Name                          Description
 socket                        Creates a new socket file descriptor.
 connect                       Connects a socket to a known IP address and port.
 bind                          Binds the socket to a local known IP address and port.
 recv, read, recvfrom          Receives data from the network via the socket. The generic
                               function read is for reading from a file descriptor, whereas
                               recv and recvfrom are specific to the socket’s API.
 send, write, sendfrom         Sends data over the network via the socket.

                                                                   Capturing Application Traffic   15
                       To learn more about how these system calls work, a great resource is
                   The TCP/IP Guide (No Starch Press, 2005). Plenty of online resources are
                   also available, and most Unix-like operating systems include manuals you
                   can view at a terminal using the command man 2 syscall_name. Now let’s look
                   at how to monitor system calls.

                   The strace Utility on Linux
                   In Linux, you can directly monitor system calls from a user program with-
                   out special permissions, unless the application you want to monitor runs as
                   a privileged user. Many Linux distributions include the handy utility strace,
                   which does most of the work for you. If it isn’t installed by default, down-
                   load it from your distribution’s package manager or compile it from source.
                       Run the following command, replacing /path/to/app with the applica-
                   tion you’re testing and args with the necessary parameters, to log the net-
                   work system calls used by that application:

                   $ strace –e trace=network,read,write /path/to/app args

                      Let’s monitor a networking application that reads and writes a few strings
                   and look at the output from strace. Listing 2-1 shows four log entries (extra-
                   neous logging has been removed from the listing for brevity).

                   $ strace -e trace=network,read,write customapp
                   --snip--
                 u socket(PF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, IPPROTO_TCP) = 3
                 v connect(3, {sa_family=AF_INET, sin_port=htons(5555),
                                        sin_addr=inet_addr("192.168.10.1")}, 16) = 0
                 w write(3, "Hello World!\n", 13)          = 13
                 x read(3, "Boo!\n", 2048)                 = 5

Listing 2-1: Example output of the strace utility

                        The first entry u creates a new TCP socket, which is assigned the
                   handle 3. The next entry v shows the connect system call used to make
                   a TCP connection to IP address 192.168.10.1 on port 5555. The application
                   then writes the string Hello World! w before reading out a string Boo! x. The
                   output shows it’s possible to get a good idea of what an application is doing
                   at the system call level using this utility, even if you don’t have high levels of
                   privilege.

                   Monitoring Network Connections with DTrace
                   DTrace is a very powerful tool available on many Unix-like systems, includ-
                   ing Solaris (where it was originally developed), macOS, and FreeBSD. It
                   allows you to set system-wide probes on special trace providers, including
                   system calls. You configure DTrace by writing scripts in a language with
                   a C-like syntax. For more details on this tool, refer to the DTrace Guide
                   online at http://www.dtracebook.com/index.php/DTrace_Guide.

16   Chapter 2
                       Listing 2-2 shows an example of a script that monitors outbound IP con-
                   nections using DTrace.

traceconnect.d     /* traceconnect.d - A simple DTrace script to monitor a connect system call */
                 u struct sockaddr_in {
                       short            sin_family;
                       unsigned short   sin_port;
                       in_addr_t        sin_addr;
                       char             sin_zero[8];
                   };

                 v syscall::connect:entry
                 w /arg2 == sizeof(struct sockaddr_in)/
                   {
                     x addr = (struct sockaddr_in*)copyin(arg1, arg2);
                     y printf("process:'%s' %s:%d", execname, inet_ntop(2, &addr->sin_addr),
                         ntohs(addr->sin_port));
                   }

Listing 2-2: A simple DTrace script to monitor a connect system call

                        This simple script monitors the connect system call and outputs IPv4 TCP
                   and UDP connections. The system call takes three parameters, represented
                   by arg0, arg1, and arg2 in the DTrace script language, that are initialized
                   for us in the kernel. The arg0 parameter is the socket file descriptor (that
                   we don’t need), arg1 is the address of the socket we’re connecting to, and
                   arg2 is the length of that address. Parameter 0 is the socket handle, which
                   is not needed in this case. The next parameter is the user process memory
                   address of a socket address structure, which is the address to connect to
                   and can be different sizes depending on the socket type. (For example,
                   IPv4 addresses are smaller than IPv6.) The final parameter is the length of
                   the socket address structure in bytes.
                        The script defines a sockaddr_in structure that is used for IPv4 connec-
                   tions at u; in many cases these structures can be directly copied from the
                   system’s C header files. The system call to monitor is specified at v. At w,
                   a DTrace-specific filter is used to ensure we trace only connect calls where
                   the socket address is the same size as sockaddr_in. At x, the sockaddr_in
                   structure is copied from your process into a local structure for DTrace to
                   inspect. At y, the process name, the destination IP address, and the port
                   are printed to the console.
                        To run this script, copy it to a file called traceconnect.d and then run the
                   command dtrace -s traceconnect.d as the root user. When you use a network-
                   connected application, the output should look like Listing 2-3.

                   process:'Google Chrome'        173.194.78.125:5222
                   process:'Google Chrome'        173.194.66.95:443
                   process:'Google Chrome'        217.32.28.199:80
                   process:'ntpd'                 17.72.148.53:123
                   process:'Mail'                 173.194.67.109:993

                                                                                    Capturing Application Traffic   17
                  process:'syncdefaultsd'        17.167.137.30:443
                  process:'AddressBookSour'      17.172.192.30:443

Listing 2-3: Example output from traceconnect.d script

                       The output shows individual connections to IP addresses, printing out
                  the process name, for example 'Google Chrome', the IP address, and the port
                  connected to. Unfortunately, the output isn’t always as useful as the output
                  from strace on Linux, but DTrace is certainly a valuable tool. This demon-
                  stration only scratches the surface of what DTrace can do.

                  Process Monitor on Windows
                  In contrast to Unix-like systems, Windows implements its user-mode net-
                  work functions without direct system calls. The networking stack is exposed
                  through a driver, and establishing a connection uses the file open, read, and
                  write system calls to configure a network socket for use. Even if Windows
                  supported a facility similar to strace, this implementation makes it more
                  difficult to monitor network traffic at the same level as other platforms.
                       Windows, starting with Vista and later, has supported an event genera-
                  tion framework that allows applications to monitor network activity. Writing
                  your own implementation of this would be quite complex, but fortunately,
                  someone has already written a tool to do it for you: Microsoft’s Process
                  Monitor tool. Figure 2-5 shows the main interface when filtering only on
                  network connection events.

Figure 2-5: An example Process Monitor capture

18   Chapter 2
                        Selecting the filter circled in Figure 2-5 displays only events related to
                   network connections from a monitored process. Details include the hosts
                   involved as well as the protocol and port being used. Although the capture
                   doesn’t provide any data associated with the connections, it does offer valu-
                   able insight into the network communications the application is establish-
                   ing. Process Monitor can also capture the state of the current calling stack,
                   which helps you determine where in an application network connections
                   are being made. This will become important in Chapter 6 when we start
                   reverse engineering binaries to work out the network protocol. Figure 2-6
                   shows a single HTTP connection to a remote server in detail.

                                               

Figure 2-6: A single captured connection

                       Column u shows the name of the process that established the connec-
                   tion. Column v shows the operation, which in this case is connecting to a
                   remote server, sending the initial HTTP request and receiving a response.
                   Column w indicates the source and destination addresses, and column x
                   provides more in-depth information about the captured event.
                       Although this solution isn’t as helpful as monitoring system calls on other
                   platforms, it’s still useful in Windows when you just want to determine the
                   network protocols a particular application is using. You can’t capture data
                   using this technique, but once you determine the protocols in use, you can
                   add that information to your analysis through more active network traffic
                   capture.

    Advantages and Disadvantages of Passive Capture
                   The greatest advantage of using passive capture is that it doesn’t disrupt the
                   client and server applications’ communication. It will not change the desti-
                   nation or source address of traffic, and it doesn’t require any modifications
                   or reconfiguration of the applications.
                       Passive capture might also be the only technique you can use when you
                   don’t have direct control over the client or the server. You can usually find
                   a way to listen to the network traffic and capture it with a limited amount
                   of effort. After you’ve collected your data, you can determine which active
                   capture techniques to use and the best way to attack the protocol you want
                   to analyze.

                                                                           Capturing Application Traffic   19
                     One major disadvantage of passive network traffic capture is that cap-
                 ture techniques like packet sniffing run at such a low level that it can dif-
                 ficult to interpret what an application received. Tools such as Wireshark
                 certainly help, but if you’re analyzing a custom protocol, it might not be
                 possible to easily take apart the protocol without interacting with it directly.
                     Passive capture also doesn’t always make it easy to modify the traffic an
                 application produces. Modifying traffic isn’t always necessary, but it’s useful
                 when you encounter encrypted protocols, want to disable compression, or
                 need to change the traffic for exploitation.
                     When analyzing traffic and injecting new packets doesn’t yield results,
                 switch tactics and try using active capture techniques.

     Active Network Traffic Capture
                 Active capture differs from passive in that you’ll try to influence the flow
                 of the traffic, usually by using a man-in-the-middle attack on the network
                 communication. As shown in Figure 2-7, the device capturing traffic usu-
                 ally sits between the client and server applications, acting as a bridge. This
                 approach has several advantages, including the ability to modify traffic and
                 disable features like encryption or compression, which can make it easier to
                 analyze and exploit a network protocol.

                 Client application              Man-in-the-middle proxy     Server application

Figure 2-7: A man-in-the-middle proxy

                     A disadvantage of this approach is that it’s usually more difficult
                 because you need to reroute the application’s traffic through your active
                 capture system. Active capture can also have unintended, undesirable
                 effects. For example, if you change the network address of the server or
                 client to the proxy, this can cause confusion, resulting in the application
                 sending traffic to the wrong place. Despite these issues, active capture is
                 probably the most valuable technique for analyzing and exploiting appli-
                 cation network protocols.

     Network Proxies
                 The most common way to perform a man-in-the-middle attack on network
                 traffic is to force the application to communicate through a proxy service.
                 In this section, I’ll explain the relative advantages and disadvantages of
                 some of the common proxy types you can use to capture traffic, analyze
                 that data, and exploit a network protocol. I’ll also show you how to get
                 traffic from typical client applications into a proxy.

20   Chapter 2
                     Port-Forwarding Proxy
                     Port forwarding is the easiest way to proxy a connection. Just set up a lis-
                     tening server (TCP or UDP) and wait for a new connection. When that
                     new connection is made to the proxy server, it will open a forwarding
                     connection to the real service and logically connect the two, as shown
                     in Figure 2-8.

                             Listening
                                                                      TCP
                     TCP        TCP                                            TCP
                                                                     client
                              service

Client application                       TCP port-forwarding proxy                   Server application

Figure 2-8: Overview of a TCP port-forwarding proxy

                     Simple Implementation
                     To create our proxy, we’ll use the built-in TCP port forwarder included with
                     the Canape Core libraries. Place the code in Listing 2-4 into a C# script file,
                     changing LOCALPORT v, REMOTEHOST w, and REMOTEPORT x to appropriate values
                     for your network.

PortFormat		 // PortFormatProxy.csx – Simple TCP port-forwarding proxy
Proxy.csx		// Expose methods like WriteLine and WritePackets
             using static System.Console;
             using static CANAPE.Cli.ConsoleUtils;

                     // Create proxy template
                     var template = new uFixedProxyTemplate();
                     template.LocalPort = vLOCALPORT;
                     template.Host = w"REMOTEHOST";
                     template.Port = xREMOTEPORT;

                   // Create proxy instance and start
                 y var service = template.Create();
                   service.Start();

                   WriteLine("Created {0}", service);
                   WriteLine("Press Enter to exit...");
                   ReadLine();
                 z service.Stop();

                   // Dump packets
                   var packets = service.Packets;
                   WriteLine("Captured {0} packets:",
                       packets.Count);
                 { WritePackets(packets);

Listing 2-4: A simple TCP port-forwarding proxy example

                                                                                      Capturing Application Traffic   21
                      This very simple script creates an instance of a FixedProxyTemplate u.
                 Canape Core works on a template model, although if required you can get
                 down and dirty with the low-level network configuration. The script con-
                 figures the template with the desired local and remote network informa-
                 tion. The template is used to create a service instance at y; you can think
                 of documents in the framework acting as templates for services. The newly
                 created service is then started; at this point, the network connections are
                 configured. After waiting for a key press, the service is stopped at z. Then
                 all the captured packets are written to the console using the WritePackets()
                 method {.
                      Running this script should bind an instance of our forwarding proxy
                 to the LOCALPORT number for the localhost interface only. When a new TCP
                 connection is made to that port, the proxy code should establish a new con-
                 nection to REMOTEHOST with TCP port REMOTEPORT and link the two connections
                 together.

   WARNING       Binding a proxy to all network addresses can be risky from a security perspective
                 because proxies written for testing protocols rarely implement robust security mecha-
                 nisms. Unless you have complete control over the network you are connected to or
                 have no choice, only bind your proxy to the local loopback interface. In Listing 2-4,
                 the default is LOCALHOST; to bind to all interfaces, set the AnyBind property to true.

                 Redirecting Traffic to Proxy
                 With our simple proxy application complete, we now need to direct our
                 application traffic through it.
                      For a web browser, it’s simple enough: to capture a specific request,
                 instead of using the URL form http://www.domain.com/resource, use http://
                 localhost:localport/resource, which pushes the request through your port-
                 forwarding proxy.
                      Other applications are trickier: you might have to dig into the applica-
                 tion’s configuration settings. Sometimes, the only setting an application
                 allows you to change is the destination IP address. But this can lead to a
                 chicken-and-egg scenario where you don’t know which TCP or UDP ports
                 the application might be using with that address, especially if the applica-
                 tion contains complex functions running over multiple different service
                 connections. This occurs with Remote Procedure Call (RPC) protocols, such
                 as the Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA). This pro-
                 tocol usually makes an initial network connection to a broker, which acts as
                 a directory of available services. A second connection is then made to the
                 requested service over an instance-specific TCP port.
                      In this case, a good approach is to use as many network-connected
                 features of the application as possible while monitoring it using passive
                 capture techniques. By doing so, you should uncover the connections that
                 application typically makes, which you can then easily replicate with for-
                 warding proxies.
                      If the application doesn’t support changing its destination, you need
                 to be a bit more creative. If the application resolves the destination server

22   Chapter 2
        address via a hostname, you have more options. You could set up a custom
        DNS server that responds to name requests with the IP address of your proxy.
        Or you could use the hosts file facility, which is available on most operating
        systems, including Windows, assuming you have control over system files on
        the device the application is running on.
             During hostname resolving, the OS (or the resolving library) first refers
        to the hosts file to see if any local entries exist for that name, making a DNS
        request only if one is not found. For example, the hosts file in Listing 2-5
        redirects the hostnames www.badgers.com and www.domain.com to localhost.

        # Standard Localhost addresses
        127.0.0.1       localhost
        ::1             localhost

        # Following are dummy entries to redirect traffic through the proxy
        127.0.0.1       www.badgers.com
        127.0.0.1       www.domain.com

Listing 2-5: An example hosts file

            The standard location of the hosts file on Unix-like OSes is /etc/hosts,
        whereas on Windows it is C:\Windows\System32\Drivers\etc\hosts. Obviously,
        you’ll need to replace the path to the Windows folder as necessary for your
        environment.

N ote   Some antivirus and security products track changes to the system’s hosts, because
        changes are a sign of malware. You might need to disable the product’s protection
        if you want to change the hosts file.

        Advantages of a Port-Forwarding Proxy
        The main advantage of a port-forwarding proxy is its simplicity: you wait for
        a connection, open a new connection to the original destination, and then
        pass traffic back and forth between the two. There is no protocol associated
        with the proxy to deal with, and no special support is required by the appli-
        cation from which you are trying to capture traffic.
             A port-forwarding proxy is also the primary way of proxying UDP traf-
        fic; because it isn’t connection oriented, the implementation of a forwarder
        for UDP is considerably simpler.

        Disadvantages of a Port-Forwarding Proxy
        Of course, the simplicity of a port-forwarding proxy also contributes to its
        disadvantages. Because you are only forwarding traffic from a listening
        connection to a single destination, multiple instances of a proxy would be
        required if the application uses multiple protocols on different ports.
            For example, consider an application that has a single hostname or IP
        address for its destination, which you can control either directly by chang-
        ing it in the application’s configuration or by spoofing the hostname. The
        application then attempts to connect to TCP ports 443 and 1234. Because

                                                                    Capturing Application Traffic   23
                     you can control the address it connects to, not the ports, you need to set up
                     forwarding proxies for both, even if you are only interested in the traffic
                     running over port 1234.
                          This proxy can also make it difficult to handle more than one con-
                     nection to a well-known port. For example, if the port-forwarding proxy is
                     listening on port 1234 and making a connection to www.domain.com port
                     1234, only redirected traffic for the original domain will work as expected.
                     If you wanted to also redirect www.badgers.com, things would be more dif-
                     ficult. You can mitigate this if the application supports specifying the desti-
                     nation address and port or by using other techniques, such as Destination
                     Network Address Translation (DNAT), to redirect specific connections to
                     unique forwarding proxies. (Chapter 5 contains more details on DNAT as
                     well as numerous other more advanced network capture techniques.)
                          Additionally, the protocol might use the destination address for its own
                     purposes. For example, the Host header in HyperText Transport Protocol
                     (HTTP) can be used for Virtual Host decisions, which might make a port-
                     forwarded protocol work differently, or not at all, from a redirected connec-
                     tion. Still, at least for HTTP, I will discuss a workaround for this limitation
                     in “Reverse HTTP Proxy” on page 32.

                     SOCKS Proxy
                     Think of a SOCKS proxy as a port-forwarding proxy on steroids. Not only
                     does it forward TCP connections to the desired network location, but all
                     new connections start with a simple handshake protocol that informs the
                     proxy of the ultimate destination rather than having it fixed. It can also
                     support listening connections, which is important for protocols like File
                     Transfer Protocol (FTP) that need to open new local ports for the server
                     to send data to. Figure 2-9 provides an overview of SOCKS proxy.

                                                              TCP client to   TCP
                                                            www.domain.com

                     SOCKS   Listening
                              SOCKS                                           Server www.domain.com
                              service

                                                             TCP listener     TCP
Client application                        SOCKS proxy           from
                                                           www.badgers.com

                                                                              Server www.badgers.com

Figure 2-9: Overview of SOCKS proxy

                          Three common variants of the protocol are currently in use—SOCKS 4,
                     4a, and 5—and each has its own use. Version 4 is the most commonly sup-
                     ported version of the protocol; however, it supports only IPv4 connections,
                     and the destination address must be specified as a 32-bit IP address. An

24   Chapter 2
                      update to version 4, version 4a allowed connections by hostname (which is
                      useful if you don’t have a DNS server that can resolve IP addresses). Version 5
                      introduced hostname support, IPv6, UDP forwarding, and improved authen-
                      tication mechanisms; it is also the only one specified in an RFC (1928).
                           As an example, a client will send the request shown in Figure 2-10 to
                      establish a SOCKS connection to IP address 10.0.0.1 on port 12345. The
                      USERNAME component is the only method of authentication in SOCKS version 4
                      (not especially secure, I know). VER represents the version number, which in
                      this case is 4. CMD indicates it wants to connect out (binding to an address is
                      CMD 2), and the TCP port and address are specified in binary form.

                  VER      CMD     TCP PORT           IP ADDRESS                   USERNAME              NULL
                 0x04     0x01       12345            0x10000001                   "james"               0x00

Size in octets    1        1           2                  4                        VARIABLE                1

Figure 2-10: A SOCKS version 4 request

                           If the connection is successful, it will send back the appropriate response,
                      as shown in Figure 2-11. The RESP field indicates the status of the response;
                      the TCP port and address fields are only significant for binding requests.
                      Then the connection becomes transparent and the client and server directly
                      negotiate with each other; the proxy server only acts to forward traffic in
                      either direction.

                                        VER    RESP   TCP PORT             IP ADDRESS
                                       0x04    0x5A       0                    0

                      Size in octets       1    1         2                    4

Figure 2-11: A SOCKS version 4 successful response

                      Simple Implementation
                      The Canape Core libraries have built-in support for SOCKS 4, 4a, and 5.
                      Place Listing 2-6 into a C# script file, changing LOCALPORT v to the local TCP
                      port you want to listen on for the SOCKS proxy.

SocksProxy.csx        // SocksProxy.csx – Simple SOCKS proxy
                      // Expose methods like WriteLine and WritePackets
                      using static System.Console;
                      using static CANAPE.Cli.ConsoleUtils;

                   // Create the SOCKS proxy template
                 u var template = new SocksProxyTemplate();
                   template.LocalPort = vLOCALPORT;

                      // Create proxy instance and start
                      var service = template.Create();
                      service.Start();

                                                                                       Capturing Application Traffic   25
                 WriteLine("Created {0}", service);
                 WriteLine("Press Enter to exit...");
                 ReadLine();
                 service.Stop();

                 // Dump packets
                 var packets = service.Packets;
                 WriteLine("Captured {0} packets:",
                     packets.Count);
                 WritePackets(packets);

Listing 2-6: A simple SOCKS proxy example

                     Listing 2-6 follows the same pattern established with the TCP port-
                 forwarding proxy in Listing 2-4. But in this case, the code at u creates a
                 SOCKS proxy template. The rest of the code is exactly the same.

                 Redirecting Traffic to Proxy
                 To determine a way of pushing an application’s network traffic through a
                 SOCKS proxy, look in the application first. For example, when you open the
                 proxy settings in Mozilla Firefox, the dialog in Figure 2-12 appears. From
                 there, you can configure Firefox to use a SOCKS proxy.

Figure 2-12: Firefox proxy configuration

26   Chapter 2
                      But sometimes SOCKS support is not immediately obvious. If you are
                 testing a Java application, the Java Runtime accepts command line param-
                 eters that enable SOCKS support for any outbound TCP connection. For
                 example, consider the very simple Java application in Listing 2-7, which con-
                 nects to IP address 192.168.10.1 on port 5555.

SocketClient.java // SocketClient.java – A simple Java TCP socket client
                  import java.io.PrintWriter;
                  import java.net.Socket;

                 public class SocketClient {
                     public static void main(String[] args) {
                         try {
                             Socket s = new Socket("192.168.10.1", 5555);
                             PrintWriter out = new PrintWriter(s.getOutputStream(), true);
                             out.println("Hello World!");
                             s.close();
                         } catch(Exception e) {
                         }
                     }
                 }

Listing 2-7: A simple Java TCP client

                     When you run this compiled program normally, it would do as you
                 expect. But if on the command line you pass two special system properties,
                 socksProxyHost and socksProxyPort, you can specify a SOCKS proxy for any
                 TCP connection:

                 java –DsocksProxyHost=localhost –DsocksProxyPort=1080 SocketClient

                      This will make the TCP connection through the SOCKS proxy on local-
                 host port 1080.
                      Another place to look to determine how to push an application’s network
                 traffic through a SOCKS proxy is the OS’s default proxy. On macOS, navi-
                 gate to System Preferences4Network4Advanced4Proxies. The dialog
                 shown in Figure 2-13 appears. From here, you can configure a system-wide
                 SOCKS proxy or general proxies for other protocols. This won’t always work,
                 but it’s an easy option worth trying out.
                      In addition, if the application just will not support a SOCKS proxy
                 natively, certain tools will add that function to arbitrary applications. These
                 tools range from free and open source tools, such as Dante (https://www​
                 .inet.no/dante/) on Linux, to commercial tools, such as Proxifier (https://
                 www.proxifier.com/), which runs on Windows and macOS. In one way or
                 another, they all inject into the application to add SOCKS support and
                 modify the operation of the socket functions.

                                                                           Capturing Application Traffic   27
Figure 2-13: A proxy configuration dialog on macOS

                 Advantages of a SOCKS Proxy
                 The clear advantage of using a SOCKS proxy, as opposed to using a simple
                 port forwarder, is that it should capture all TCP connections (and poten-
                 tially some UDP if you are using SOCKS version 5) that an application
                 makes. This is an advantage as long as the OS socket layer is wrapped to
                 effectively push all connections through the proxy.
                      A SOCKS proxy also generally preserves the destination of the connec-
                 tion from the point of view of the client application. Therefore, if a client
                 application sends in-band data that refers to its endpoint, then the end-
                 point will be what the server expects. However, this does not preserve the
                 source address. Some protocols, such as FTP, assume they can request ports
                 to be opened on the originating client. The SOCKS protocol provides a
                 facility for binding listening connections but adds to the complexity of the
                 implementation. This makes capture and analysis more difficult because
                 you must consider many different streams of data to and from a server.

                 Disadvantages of a SOCKS Proxy
                 The main disadvantage of SOCKS is that support can be inconsistent
                 between applications and platforms. The Windows system proxy sup-
                 ports only SOCKS version 4 proxies, which means it will resolve only local

28   Chapter 2
                     hostnames. It does not support IPv6 and does not have a robust authentica-
                     tion mechanism. Generally, you get better support by using a SOCKS tool
                     to add to an existing application, but this doesn’t always work well.

                     HTTP Proxies
                     HTTP powers the World Wide Web as well as a myriad of web services and
                     RESTful protocols. Figure 2-14 provides an overview of an HTTP proxy.
                     The protocol can also be co-opted as a transport mechanism for non-web
                     protocols, such as Java’s Remote Method Invocation (RMI) or Real Time
                     Messaging Protocol (RTMP), because it can tunnel though the most restric-
                     tive firewalls. It is important to understand how HTTP proxying works in
                     practice, because it will almost certainly be useful for protocol analysis,
                     even if a web service is not being tested. Existing web application–testing
                     tools rarely do an ideal job when HTTP is being used out of its original
                     environment. Sometimes rolling your own implementation of an HTTP
                     proxy is the only solution.

                                                            HTTP client to    HTTP
                                                           www.domain.com

                            Listening
                     HTTP
                              HTTP                                            Server www.domain.com
                             service

                                                              Tunneled       HTTPS
Client application                         HTTP proxy         HTTPS to
                                                           www.badgers.com

                                                                              Server www.badgers.com

Figure 2-14: Overview of an HTTP proxy

                         The two main types of HTTP proxy are the forwarding proxy and the
                     reverse proxy. Each has advantages and disadvantages for the prospective
                     network protocol analyzer.

                     Forwarding an HTTP Proxy
                     The HTTP protocol is specified in RFC 1945 for version 1.0 and RFC 2616
                     for version 1.1; both versions provide a simple mechanism for proxying
                     HTTP requests. For example, HTTP 1.1 specifies that the first full line of
                     a request, the request line, has the following format:

                     uGET v/image.jpg HTTP/1.1

                         The method u specifies what to do in that request using familiar
                     verbs, such as GET, POST, and HEAD. In a proxy request, this does not change
                     from a normal HTTP connection. The path v is where the proxy request
                     gets interesting. As is shown, an absolute path indicates the resource that

                                                                             Capturing Application Traffic   29
                 the method will act upon. Importantly, the path can also be an absolute
                 Uniform Request Identifier (URI). By specifying an absolute URI, a proxy
                 server can establish a new connection to the destination, forwarding all
                 traffic on and returning data back to the client. The proxy can even manip-
                 ulate the traffic, in a limited fashion, to add authentication, hide version 1.0
                 servers from 1.1 clients, and add transfer compression along with all man-
                 ner of other things. However, this flexibility comes with a cost: the proxy
                 server must be able to process the HTTP traffic, which adds massive com-
                 plexity. For example, the following request line accesses an image resource
                 on a remote server through a proxy:

                 GET http://www.domain.com/image.jpg HTTP/1.1

                     You, the attentive reader, might have identified an issue with this
                 approach to proxying HTTP communication. Because the proxy must be
                 able to access the underlying HTTP protocol, what about HTTPS, which
                 transports HTTP over an encrypted TLS connection? You could break out
                 the encrypted traffic; however, in a normal environment, it is unlikely the
                 HTTP client would trust whatever certificate you provided. Also, TLS is
                 intentionally designed to make it virtually impossible to use a man-in-the-
                 middle attack any other way. Fortunately, this was anticipated, and RFC 2817
                 provides two solutions: it includes the ability to upgrade an HTTP connec-
                 tion to encryption (there is no need for more details here), and more impor-
                 tantly for our purposes, it specifies the CONNECT HTTP method for creating
                 transparent, tunneled connections over HTTP proxies. As an example, a
                 web browser that wants to establish a proxy connection to an HTTPS site
                 can issue the following request to the proxy:

                 CONNECT www.domain.com:443 HTTP/1.1

                     If the proxy accepts this request, it will make a new TCP connection to
                 the server. On success, it should return the following response:

                 HTTP/1.1 200 Connection Established

                     The TCP connection to the proxy now becomes transparent, and the
                 browser is able to establish the negotiated TLS connection without the proxy
                 getting in the way. Of course, it’s worth noting that the proxy is unlikely to
                 verify that TLS is actually being used on this connection. It could be any
                 protocol you like, and this fact is abused by some applications to tunnel out
                 their own binary protocols through HTTP proxies. For this reason, it’s com-
                 mon to find deployments of HTTP proxies restricting the ports that can be
                 tunneled to a very limited subset.

                 Simple Implementation
                 Once again, the Canape Core libraries include a simple implementation of
                 an HTTP proxy. Unfortunately, they don’t support the CONNECT method to

30   Chapter 2
                    create a transparent tunnel, but it will suffice for demonstration purposes.
                    Place Listing 2-8 into a C# script file, changing LOCALPORT v to the local TCP
                    port you want to listen on.

HttpProxy.csx		     // HttpProxy.csx – Simple HTTP proxy
                    // Expose methods like WriteLine and WritePackets
                    using static System.Console;
                    using static CANAPE.Cli.ConsoleUtils;

                    // Create proxy template
                  u var template = new HttpProxyTemplate();
                    template.LocalPort = vLOCALPORT;

                    // Create proxy instance and start
                    var service = template.Create();
                    service.Start();

                    WriteLine("Created {0}", service);
                    WriteLine("Press Enter to exit...");
                    ReadLine();
                    service.Stop();

                    // Dump packets
                    var packets = service.Packets;
                    WriteLine("Captured {0} packets:", packets.Count);
                    WritePackets(packets);

Listing 2-8: A simple forward HTTP proxy example

                        Here we created a forward HTTP Proxy. The code at line u is again
                    only a slight variation from the previous examples, creating an HTTP proxy
                    template.

                    Redirecting Traffic to Proxy
                    As with SOCKS proxies, the first port of call will be the application. It’s
                    rare for an application that uses the HTTP protocol to not have some
                    sort of proxy configuration. If the application has no specific settings
                    for HTTP proxy support, try the OS configuration, which is in the same
                    place as the SOCKS proxy configuration. For example, on Windows you
                    can access the system proxy settings by selecting Control Panel4Internet
                    Options4Connections4LAN Settings.
                         Many command line utilities on Unix-like systems, such as curl, wget,
                    and apt, also support setting HTTP proxy configuration through environ-
                    ment variables. If you set the environment variable http_proxy to the URL
                    for the HTTP proxy to use—for example, http://localhost:3128—the applica-
                    tion will use it. For secure traffic, you can also use https_proxy. Some imple-
                    mentations allow special URL schemes, such as socks4://, to specify that you
                    want to use a SOCKS proxy.

                                                                            Capturing Application Traffic   31
                 Advantages of a Forwarding HTTP Proxy
                 The main advantage of a forwarding HTTP proxy is that if the application
                 uses the HTTP protocol exclusively, all it needs to do to add proxy support
                 is to change the absolute path in the Request Line to an absolute URI and
                 send the data to a listening proxy server. Also, only a few applications that
                 use the HTTP protocol for transport do not already support proxying.

                 Disadvantages of a Forwarding HTTP Proxy
                 The requirement of a forwarding HTTP proxy to implement a full HTTP
                 parser to handle the many idiosyncrasies of the protocol adds significant
                 complexity; this complexity might introduce processing issues or, in the
                 worst case, security vulnerabilities. Also, the addition of the proxy desti-
                 nation within the protocol means that it can be more difficult to retrofit
                 HTTP proxy support to an existing application through external tech-
                 niques, unless you convert connections to use the CONNECT method (which
                 even works for unencrypted HTTP).
                      Due to the complexities of handling a full HTTP 1.1 connection, it
                 is common for proxies to either disconnect clients after a single request
                 or downgrade communications to version 1.0 (which always closes the
                 response connection after all data has been received). This might break
                 a higher-level protocol that expects to use version 1.1 or request pipelining,
                 which is the ability to have multiple requests in flight to improve perfor-
                 mance or state locality.

                 Reverse HTTP Proxy
                 Forwarding proxies are fairly common in environments where an internal
                 client is connecting to an outside network. They act as a security bound-
                 ary, limiting outbound traffic to a small subset of protocol types. (Let’s
                 just ignore the potential security implications of the CONNECT proxy for a
                 moment.) But sometimes you might want to proxy inbound connections,
                 perhaps for load-balancing or security reasons (to prevent exposing your
                 servers directly to the outside world). However, a problem arises if you do
                 this. You have no control over the client. In fact, the client probably doesn’t
                 even realize it’s connecting to a proxy. This is where the reverse HTTP proxy
                 comes in.
                      Instead of requiring the destination host to be specified in the request
                 line, as with a forwarding proxy, you can abuse the fact that all HTTP 1.1–
                 compliant clients must send a Host HTTP header in the request that
                 specifies the original hostname used in the URI of the request. (Note that
                 HTTP 1.0 has no such requirement, but most clients using that version will
                 send the header anyway.) With the Host header information, you can infer
                 the original destination of the request, making a proxy connection to that
                 server, as shown in Listing 2-9.

32   Chapter 2
                GET /image.jpg HTTP/1.1
                User-Agent: Super Funky HTTP Client v1.0
                Host: uwww.domain.com
                Accept: */*

Listing 2-9: An example HTTP request

                     Listing 2-9 shows a typical Host header u where the HTTP request
                was to the URL http://www.domain.com/image.jpg. The reverse proxy can
                easily take this information and reuse it to construct the original destina-
                tion. Again, because there is a requirement for parsing the HTTP head-
                ers, it is more difficult to use for HTTPS traffic that is protected by TLS.
                Fortunately, most TLS implementations take wildcard certificates where
                the subject is in the form of *.domain.com or similar, which would match
                any subdomain of domain.com.

                Simple Implementation
                Unsurprisingly, the Canape Core libraries include a built-in HTTP reverse
                proxy implementation, which you can access by changing the template
                object to HttpReverseProxyTemplate from HttpProxyTemplate. But for complete-
                ness, Listing 2-10 shows a simple implementation. Place the following code
                in a C# script file, changing LOCALPORT u to the local TCP port you want to
                listen on. If LOCALPORT is less than 1024 and you’re running this on a Unix-
                style system, you’ll also need to run the script as root.

ReverseHttp		 // ReverseHttpProxy.csx – Simple reverse HTTP proxy
Proxy.csx		// Expose methods like WriteLine and WritePackets
              using static System.Console;
              using static CANAPE.Cli.ConsoleUtils;

                // Create proxy template
                var template = new HttpReverseProxyTemplate();
                template.LocalPort = uLOCALPORT;

                // Create proxy instance and start
                var service = template.Create();
                service.Start();

                WriteLine("Created {0}", service);
                WriteLine("Press Enter to exit...");
                ReadLine();
                service.Stop();

                // Dump packets
                var packets = service.Packets;
                WriteLine("Captured {0} packets:",
                    packets.Count);
                WritePackets(packets);

Listing 2-10: A simple reverse HTTP proxy example

                                                                       Capturing Application Traffic   33
                  Redirecting Traffic to Your Proxy
                  The approach to redirecting traffic to a reverse HTTP proxy is similar to
                  that employed for TCP port-forwarding, which is by redirecting the con-
                  nection to the proxy. But there is a big difference; you can’t just change
                  the destination hostname. This would change the Host header, shown in
Listing 2-10. If you’re not careful, you could cause a proxy loop.1 Instead, it’s
                  best to change the IP address associated with a hostname using the hosts file.
                       But perhaps the application you’re testing is running on a device that
                  doesn’t allow you to change the hosts file. Therefore, setting up a custom
                  DNS server might be the easiest approach, assuming you’re able to change
                  the DNS server configuration.
                       You could use another approach, which is to configure a full DNS server
                  with the appropriate settings. This can be time consuming and error prone;
                  just ask anyone who has ever set up a bind server. Fortunately, existing tools
                  are available to do what we want, which is to return our proxy’s IP address
                  in response to a DNS request. Such a tool is dnsspoof. To avoid install-
                  ing another tool, you can do it using Canape’s DNS server. The basic DNS
                  server spoofs only a single IP address to all DNS requests (see Listing 2-11).
                  Replace IPV4ADDRESS u, IPV6ADDRESS v, and REVERSEDNS w with appropriate
                  strings. As with the HTTP Reverse Proxy, you’ll need to run this as root
                  on a Unix-like system, as it will try to bind to port 53, which is not usually
                  allowed for normal users. On Windows, there’s no such restriction on bind-
                  ing to ports less than 1024.

DnsServer.csx		   // DnsServer.csx – Simple DNS Server
                  // Expose console methods like WriteLine at global level.
                  using static System.Console;

                  // Create the DNS server template
                  var template = new DnsServerTemplate();

                  // Setup the response addresses
                  template.ResponseAddress = u"IPV4ADDRESS";
                  template.ResponseAddress6 = v"IPV6ADDRESS";
                  template.ReverseDns = w"REVERSEDNS";

                  // Create DNS server instance and start
                  var service = template.Create();
                  service.Start();
                  WriteLine("Created {0}", service);
                  WriteLine("Press Enter to exit...");
                  ReadLine();
                  service.Stop();

Listing 2-11: A simple DNS server

                  1. A proxy loop occurs when a proxy repeatedly connects to itself, causing a recursive loop.
                  The outcome can only end in disaster, or at least running out of available resources.

34   Chapter 2
            Now if you configure the DNS server for your application to point to
        your spoofing DNS server, the application should send its traffic through.

        Advantage of a Reverse HTTP Proxy
        The advantage of a reverse HTTP proxy is that it doesn’t require a client
        application to support a typical forwarding proxy configuration. This is
        especially useful if the client application is not under your direct control or
        has a fixed configuration that cannot be easily changed. As long as you can
        force the original TCP connections to be redirected to the proxy, it’s pos-
        sible to handle requests to multiple different hosts with little difficulty.

        Disadvantages of a Reverse HTTP Proxy
        The disadvantages of a reverse HTTP proxy are basically the same as for a
        forwarding proxy. The proxy must be able to parse the HTTP request and
        handle the idiosyncrasies of the protocol.

Final Words
        You’ve read about passive and active capture techniques in this chapter,
        but is one better than the other? That depends on the application you’re
        trying to test. Unless you are just monitoring network traffic, it pays to take
        an active approach. As you continue through this book, you’ll realize that
        active capture has significant benefits for protocol analysis and exploitation.
        If you have a choice in your application, use SOCKS because it’s the easiest
        approach in many circumstances.

                                                                Capturing Application Traffic   35
