              N etwork P rotocol
                                3
                  S tr u ct u res

The old adage “There is nothing new under the sun”
holds true when it comes to the way protocols are
structured. Binary and text protocols follow common
patterns and structures and, once understood, can eas-
ily be applied to any new protocol. This chapter details
some of these structures and formalizes the way I’ll
represent them throughout the rest of this book.
     In this chapter, I discuss many of the common types of protocol struc-
tures. Each is described in detail along with how it is represented in binary-
or text-based protocols. By the end of the chapter, you should be able to
easily identify these common types in any unknown protocol you analyze.
     Once you understand how protocols are structured, you’ll also see pat-
terns of exploitable behavior—ways of attacking the network protocol itself.
Chapter 10 will provide more detail on finding network protocol issues,
but for now we’ll just concern ourselves with structure.
     Binary Protocol Structures
                 Binary protocols work at the binary level; the smallest unit of data is a single
                 binary digit. Dealing with single bits is difficult, so we’ll use 8-bit units called
                 octets, commonly called bytes. The octet is the de facto unit of network proto-
                 cols. Although octets can be broken down into individual bits (for example,
                 to represent a set of flags), we’ll treat all network data in 8-bit units, as shown
                 in Figure 3-1.
                            Bit 7/MSB     Bit 0/LSB

                      Bit format: 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 = 0x41/65
                 Octet format: 0x41

Figure 3-1: Binary data description formats

                      When showing individual bits, I’ll use the bit format, which shows bit 7,
                 the most significant bit (MSB), on the left. Bit 0, or the least significant bit (LSB),
                 is on the right. (Some architectures, such as PowerPC, define the bit num-
                 bering in the opposite direction.)

                 Numeric Data
                 Data values representing numbers are usually at the core of a binary proto-
                 col. These values can be integers or decimal values. Numbers can be used
                 to represent the length of data, to identify tag values, or simply to represent
                 a number.
                      In binary, numeric values can be represented in a few different ways,
                 and a protocol’s method of choice depends on the value it’s representing.
                 The following sections describe some of the more common formats.

                 Unsigned Integers
                 Unsigned integers are the most obvious representation of a binary num-
                 ber. Each bit has a specific value based on its position, and these values are
                 added together to represent the integer. Table 3-1 shows the decimal and
                 hexadecimal values for an 8-bit integer.

Table 3-1: Decimal Bit Values

                  Bit        Decimal value     Hex value
                  0          1                 0x01
                  1          2                 0x02
                  2          4                 0x04
                  3          8                 0x08
                  4          16                0x10
                  5          32                0x20
                  6          64                0x40
                  7          128               0x80

38   Chapter 3
Signed Integers
Not all integer values are positive. In some scenarios, negative integers are
required—for example, to represent the difference between two integers,
you need to take into account that the difference could be negative—and
only signed integers can hold negative values. While encoding an unsigned
integer seems obvious, the CPU can only work with the same set of bits.
Therefore, the CPU requires a way of interpreting the unsigned integer
value as signed; the most common signed interpretation is two’s comple-
ment. The term two’s complement refers to the way in which the signed inte-
ger is represented within a native integer value in the CPU.
     Conversion between unsigned and signed values in two’s comple-
ment is done by taking the bitwise NOT (where a 0 bit is converted to
a 1 and 1 is converted to a 0) of the integer and adding 1. For example,
Figure 3-2 shows the 8-bit integer 123 converted to its two’s complement
representation.
       MSB                 LSB
NOT      01111011                = 0x7B/123

 +1      10000100                = 0x84/-124

   =     10000101                = 0x85/-123

Figure 3-2: The two’s complement representation
of 123

    The two’s complement representation has one dangerous security con-
sequence. For example, an 8-bit signed integer has the range –128 to 127, so
the magnitude of the minimum is larger than the maximum. If the mini-
mum value is negated, the result is itself; in other words, –(–128) is –128.
This can cause calculations to be incorrect in parsed formats, leading to
security vulnerabilities. We’ll go into more detail in Chapter 10.

Variable-Length Integers
Efficient transfer of network data has historically been very important. Even
though today’s high-speed networks might make efficiency concerns unnec-
essary, there are still advantages to reducing a protocol’s bandwidth. It can
be beneficial to use variable-length integers when the most common integer
values being represented are within a very limited range.
    For example, consider length fields: when sending blocks of data between
0 and 127 bytes in size, you could use a 7-bit variable integer representation.
Figure 3-3 shows a few different encodings for 32-bit words. At most, five
octets are required to represent the entire range. But if your protocol tends
to assign values between 0 and 127, it will only use one octet, which saves a
considerable amount of space.

                                                        Network Protocol Structures   39
                                     Lowest address

                        0x3F as 7-bit
                                          0x3F
                      variable integer

                        0x80 as 7-bit
                                          0x80   0x01
                      variable integer

                    0x01020304 as
                                          0x84   0x86   0x88   0x08
                 7-bit variable integer

                        0xFFFFFFFF as
                                          0xFF   0xFF   0xFF   0xFF   0x0F
                 7-bit variable integer

Figure 3-3: Example 7-bit integer encoding

                     That said, if you parse more than five octets (or even 32 bits), the
                 resulting integer from the parsing operation will depend on the parsing
                 program. Some programs (including those developed in C) will simply
                 drop any bits beyond a given range, whereas other development environ-
                 ments will generate an overflow error. If not handled correctly, this inte-
                 ger overflow might lead to vulnerabilities, such as buffer overflows, which
                 could cause a smaller than expected memory buffer to be allocated, in
                 turn resulting in memory corruption.

                 Floating-Point Data
                 Sometimes, integers aren’t enough to represent the range of decimal values
                 needed for a protocol. For example, a protocol for a multiplayer computer
                 game might require sending the coordinates of players or objects in the
                 game’s virtual world. If this world is large, it would be easy to run up against
                 the limited range of a 32- or even 64-bit fixed-point value.
                      The format of floating-point integers used most often is the IEEE for-
                 mat specified in IEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic (IEEE 754).
                 Although the standard specifies a number of different binary and even
                 decimal formats for floating-point values, you’re likely to encounter only
                 two: a single-precision binary representation, which is a 32-bit value; and
                 a double-precision, 64-bit value. Each format specifies the position and bit
                 size of the significand and exponent. A sign bit is also specified, indicating
                 whether the value is positive or negative. Figure 3-4 shows the general lay-
                 out of an IEEE floating-point value, and Table 3-2 lists the common expo-
                 nent and significand sizes.

40   Chapter 3
Sign

                                            IEEE floating-point format

             Exponent                                               Significand

 MSB                                                                                                         LSB

Figure 3-4: Floating-point representation

Table 3-2: Common Float Point Sizes and Ranges

                     Bit size     Exponent bits       Significand bits     Value range
                     32           8                   23                   +/– 3.402823 × 1038
                     64           11                  52                   +/– 1.79769313486232 × 10308

                   Booleans
                   Because Booleans are very important to computers, it’s no surprise to see
                   them reflected in a protocol. Each protocol determines how to represent
                   whether a Boolean value is true or false, but there are some common
                   conventions.
                        The basic way to represent a Boolean is with a single-bit value. A 0 bit
                   means false and a 1 means true. This is certainly space efficient but not
                   necessarily the simplest way to interface with an underlying application.
                   It’s more common to use a single byte for a Boolean value because it’s far
                   easier to manipulate. It’s also common to use zero to represent false and
                   non-zero to represent true.

                   Bit Flags
                   Bit flags are one way to represent specific Boolean states in a protocol. For
                   example, in TCP a set of bit flags is used to determine the current state of a
                   connection. When making a connection, the client sends a packet with the
                   synchronize flag (SYN) set to indicate that the connections should synchro-
                   nize their timers. The server can then respond with an acknowledgment
                   (ACK) flag to indicate it has received the client request as well as the SYN
                   flag to establish the synchronization with the client. If this handshake used
                   single enumerated values, this dual state would be impossible without a dis-
                   tinct SYN/ACK state.

                   Binary Endian
                   The endianness of data is a very important part of interpreting binary pro-
                   tocols correctly. It comes into play whenever a multi-octet value, such as a
                   32-bit word, is transferred. The endian is an artifact of how computers store
                   data in memory.

                                                                                     Network Protocol Structures   41
                       Because octets are transmitted sequentially on the network, it’s possible
                 to send the most significant octet of a value as the first part of the transmis-
                 sion, as well as the reverse—send the least significant octet first. The order
                 in which octets are sent determines the endianness of the data. Failure to
                 correctly handle the endian format can lead to subtle bugs in the parsing of
                 protocols.
                       Modern platforms use two main endian formats: big and little. Big
                 endian stores the most significant byte at the lowest address, whereas
                 little endian stores the least significant byte in that location. Figure 3-5
                 shows how the 32-bit integer 0x01020304 is stored in both forms.
                                 Lowest address      Highest address

                  0x01020304
                     as 32-bit        0x01 0x02 0x03 0x04
                 big endian word

                   0x01020304
                       as 32-bit      0x04 0x03 0x02       0x01
                 little endian word

Figure 3-5: Big and little endian word representation

                      The endianness of a value is commonly referred to as either network
                 order or host order. Because the Internet RFCs invariably use big endian
                 as the preferred type for all network protocols they specify (unless there
                 are legacy reasons for doing otherwise), big endian is referred as network
                 order. But your computer could be either big or little endian. Processor
                 architectures such as x86 use little endian; others such as SPARC use big
                 endian.

        N ote    Some processor architectures, including SPARC, ARM, and MIPS, may have
                 onboard logic that specifies the endianness at runtime, usually by toggling a proces-
                 sor control flag. When developing network software, make no assumptions about the
                 endianness of the platform you might be running on. The networking API used to
                 build an application will typically contain convenience functions for converting to
                 and from these orders. Other platforms, such as PDP-11, use a middle endian format
                 where 16-bit words are swapped; however, you’re unlikely to ever encounter one in
                 everyday life, so don’t dwell on it.

                 Text and Human-Readable Data
                 Along with numeric data, strings are the value type you’ll most commonly
                 encounter, whether they’re being used for passing authentication creden-
                 tials or resource paths. When inspecting a protocol designed to send only

42   Chapter 3
                                English characters, the text will probably be encoded using ASCII. The
                                original ASCII standard defined a 7-bit character set from 0 to 0x7F, which
                                includes most of the characters needed to represent the English language
                                (shown in Figure 3-6).

                     Control          Printable
                    character         character
                                                              Lower 4 bits
                   0     1        2     3     4       5   6     7     8      9     A      B    C      D      E       F

               0   NUL SOH STX         ETX   EOT ENQ ACK       BEL   BS      TAB   LF    VT    FF    CR     SO       SI

               1   DLE   DC1 DC2 DC3 DC4 NAK SYN              ETB CAN EM           SUB   ESC   FS    GS      RS     US

               2   SP     !       "     #     $       %   &     '     (       )     *    +     ,      -       .      /
Upper 4 bits

               3   0     1        2     3     4       5   6     7     8      9      :     ;    <      =      >       ?

               4   @     A        B     C     D       E   F    G      H       I     J    K     L     M       N      O

               5    P    Q        R     S     T       U   V    W      X      Y      Z     [    \      ]      ^       _

               6    `     a       b     c     d       e   f     g     h       i     j     k    l     m       n       o

               7   p      q       r     s         t   u   v    w      x       y     z     {    |      }      ~     DEL

Figure 3-6: A 7-bit ASCII table

                                     The ASCII standard was originally developed for text terminals (physi-
                                cal devices with a moving printing head). Control characters were used to
                                send messages to the terminal to move the printing head or to synchronize
                                serial communications between the computer and the terminal. The ASCII
                                character set contains two types of characters: control and printable. Most of
                                the control characters are relics of those devices and are virtually unused.
                                But some still provide information on modern computers, such as CR and
                                LF, which are used to end lines of text.
                                     The printable characters are the ones you can see. This set of char-
                                acters consists of many familiar symbols and alphanumeric characters;
                                however, they won’t be of much use if you want to represent international
                                characters, of which there are thousands. It’s unachievable to represent
                                even a fraction of the possible characters in all the world’s languages in a
                                7-bit number.
                                     Three strategies are commonly employed to counter this limitation:
                                code pages, multibyte character sets, and Unicode. A protocol will either
                                require that you use one of these three ways to represent text, or it will offer
                                an option that an application can select.

                                                                                               Network Protocol Structures   43
                 Code Pages
                 The simplest way to extend the ASCII character set is by recognizing that if
                 all your data is stored in octets, 128 unused values (from 128 to 255) can be
                 repurposed for storing extra characters. Although 256 values are not enough
                 to store all the characters in every available language, you have many differ-
                 ent ways to use the unused range. Which characters are mapped to which
                 values is typically codified in specifications called code pages or character
                 encodings.

                 Multibyte Character Sets
                 In languages such as Chinese, Japanese, and Korean (collectively referred
                 to as CJK), you simply can’t come close to representing the entire written
                 language with 256 characters, even if you use all available space. The solu-
                 tion is to use multibyte character sets combined with ASCII to encode these
                 languages. Common encodings are Shift-JIS for Japanese and GB2312 for
                 simplified Chinese.
                      Multibyte character sets allow you to use two or more octets in sequence to
                 encode a desired character, although you’ll rarely see them in use. In fact,
                 if you’re not working with CJK, you probably won’t see them at all. (For the
                 sake of brevity, I won’t discuss multibyte character sets any further; plenty of
                 online resources will aid you in decoding them if required.)

                 Unicode
                 The Unicode standard, first standardized in 1991, aims to represent all
                 languages within a unified character set. You might think of Unicode as
                 another multibyte character set. But rather than focusing on a specific
                 language, such as Shift-JIS does with Japanese, it tries to encode all written
                 languages, including some archaic and constructed ones, into a single uni-
                 versal character set.
                     Unicode defines two related concepts: character mapping and character
                 encoding. Character mappings include mappings between a numeric value
                 and a character, as well as many other rules and regulations on how char-
                 acters are used or combined. Character encodings define the way these
                 numeric values are encoded in the underlying file or network protocol.
                 For analysis purposes, it’s far more important to know how these numeric
                 values are encoded.
                     Each character in Unicode is assigned a code point that represents
                 a unique character. Code points are commonly written in the format
                 U+ABCD, where ABCD is the code point’s hexadecimal value. For the
                 sake of compatibility, the first 128 code points match what is specified in
                 ASCII, and the second 128 code points are taken from ISO/IEC 8859-1.
                 The resulting value is encoded using a specific scheme, sometimes referred
                 to as Universal Character Set (UCS) or Unicode Transformation Format (UTF)
                 encodings. (Subtle differences exist between UCS and UTF formats,

44   Chapter 3
                   but for the sake of identification and manipulation, these differences
                   are unimportant.) Figure 3-7 shows a simple example of some different
                   Unicode formats.
Code points: Hello = U+0048 - U+0065 - U+006C - U+006C - U+006F

UCS-2/UTF-16 Little endian

 0x48    0x00    0x65     0x00   0x6C    0x00    0x6C     0x00    0x6F   0x00

UCS-2/UTF-16 Big endian

 0x00    0x48    0x00     0x65    0x00   0x6C     0x00    0x6C    0x00   0x6F

UCS-4/UTF-32 Little endian

 0x48    0x00    0x00     0x00    0x65    0x00    0x00    0x00    0x6C   0x00   0x00    0x00

 0x6C    0x00    0x00     0x00    0x6F    0x00    0x00    0x00

UTF-8

 0x48    0x65    0x6C     0x6C    0x6F

Figure 3-7: The string "Hello" in different Unicode encodings

                      Three common Unicode encodings in use are UTF-16, UTF-32,
                   and UTF-8.
                   UCS-2/UTF-16
                     UCS-2/UTF-16 is the native format on modern Microsoft Windows plat-
                     forms, as well as the Java and .NET virtual machines when they are run-
                     ning code. It encodes code points in sequences of 16-bit integers and
                     has little and big endian variants.

                   UCS-4/UTF-32
                     UCS-4/UTF-32 is a common format used in Unix applications because
                     it’s the default wide-character format in many C/C++ compilers. It
                     encodes code points in sequences of 32-bit integers and has different
                     endian variants.

                   UTF-8
                     UTF-8 is probably the most common format on Unix. It is also the
                     default input and output format for varying platforms and technolo-
                     gies, such as XML. Rather than having a fixed integer size for code
                     points, it encodes them using a simple variable length value. Table 3-3
                     shows how code points are encoded in UTF-8.

                                                                                 Network Protocol Structures   45
Table 3-3: Encoding Rules for Unicode Code Points in UTF-8

                  Bits of    First      Last       Byte 1            Byte 2          Byte 3   Byte 4
                  code       code       code
                  point      point (U+) point (U+)
                  0–7        0000          007F        0xxxxxxx
                  8–11       0080          07FF        110xxxxx      10xxxxxx
                  12–16      0800          FFFF        1110xxxx      10xxxxxx 10xxxxxx
                  17–21      10000         1FFFFF      11110xxx      10xxxxxx 10xxxxxx        10xxxxxx
                  22–26      200000        3FFFFFF     111110xx      10xxxxxx 10xxxxxx        10xxxxxx
                  26–31      4000000       7FFFFFFF    1111110x      10xxxxxx 10xxxxxx        10xxxxxx

                      UTF-8 has many advantages. For one, its encoding definition ensures
                 that the ASCII character set, code points U+0000 through U+007F, are
                 encoded using single bytes. This scheme makes this format not only ASCII
                 compatible but also space efficient. In addition, UTF-8 is compatible with
                 C/C++ programs that rely on NUL-terminated strings.
                      For all of its benefits, UTF-8 does come at a cost, because languages
                 like Chinese and Japanese consume more space than they do in UTF-16.
                 Figure 3-8 shows such a disadvantageous encoding of Chinese characters.
                 But notice that the UTF-8 in this example is still more space efficient than
                 the UTF-32 for the same characters.

                 Code points: ‫ބ‬ᆀ = U+5154 - U+5B50

                 UCS-2/UTF-16 Little endian              UCS-2/UTF-16 Big endian

                  0x54      0x51    0x50    0x5B             0x51    0x54     0x5B     0x50

                 UCS-4/UTF-32 Little endian

                  0x54      0x51    0x00    0x00      0x50    0x5B    0x00     0x00

                 UTF-8

                  0xE5      0x85    0x94    0xE5      0xAD    0x90

Figure 3-8: The string "兔子" in different Unicode encodings

        NOTE     Incorrect or naive character encoding can be a source of subtle security issues, rang-
                 ing from bypassing filtering mechanisms (say in a requested resource path) to causing
                 buffer overflows. We’ll investigate some of the vulnerabilities associated with character
                 encoding in Chapter 10.

46   Chapter 3
Variable Binary Length Data
If the protocol developer knows in advance exactly what data must be
transmitted, they can ensure that all values within the protocol are of a
fixed length. In reality this is quite rare, although even simple authentica-
tion credentials would benefit from the ability to specify variable username
and password string lengths. Protocols use several strategies to produce
variable-length data values: I discuss the most common—terminated data,
length-prefixed data, implicit-length data, and padded data—in the follow-
ing sections.

Terminated Data
You saw an example of variable-length data when variable-length integers
were discussed earlier in this chapter. The variable-length integer value was
terminated when the octet’s MSB was 0. We can extend the concept of ter-
minating values further to elements like strings or data arrays.
     A terminated data value has a terminal symbol defined that tells the
data parser that the end of the data value has been reached. The terminal
symbol is used because it’s unlikely to be present in typical data, ensuring
that the value isn’t terminated prematurely. With string data, the terminat-
ing value can be a NUL value (represented by 0) or one of the other control
characters in the ASCII set.
     If the terminal symbol chosen occurs during normal data transfer, you
need to use a mechanism to escape these symbols. With strings, it’s com-
mon to see the terminating character either prefixed with a backslash (\)
or repeated twice to prevent it from being identified as the terminal sym-
bol. This approach is especially useful when a protocol doesn’t know ahead
of time how long a value is—for example, if it’s generated dynamically.
Figure 3-9 shows an example of a string terminated by a NUL value.
            Valid string data

  'H'     'e'      'l'     'l'    'o'    NUL
 0x48    0x65     0x6C    0x6C   0x6F    0x00

                                      Terminating
                                       character

Figure 3-9: "Hello" as a NUL-terminated string

     Bounded data is often terminated by a symbol that matches the first
character in the variable-length sequence. For example, when using string
data, you might find a quoted string sandwiched between quotation marks. The
initial double quote tells the parser to look for the matching character to end
the data. Figure 3-10 shows a string bounded by a pair of double quotes.

                                                        Network Protocol Structures   47
                                        Valid string data

                   '"'       'H'      'e'      'l'     'l'     'o'    '"'
                  0x22      0x48     0x65     0x6C    0x6C    0x6F   0x22

                 Starting                                            Ending
                  quote                                               quote

                 Figure 3-10: "Hello" as a double-quoted bounded string

                 Length-Prefixed Data
                 If a data value is known in advance, it’s possible to insert its length into the
                 protocol directly. The protocol’s parser can read this value and then read
                 the appropriate number of units (say characters or octets) to extract the
                 original value. This is a very common way to specify variable-length data.
                      The actual size of the length prefix is usually not that important, although
                 it should be reasonably representative of the types of data being transmitted.
                 Most protocols won’t need to specify the full range of a 32-bit integer; how-
                 ever, you’ll often see that size used as a length field, if only because it fits well
                 with most processor architectures and platforms. For example, Figure 3-11
                 shows a string with an 8-bit length prefix.
                 Number of
                 characters                 5 Characters

                               'H'    'e'       'l'     'l'    'o'
                   0x05
                              0x48   0x65      0x6C    0x6C   0x6F

                 Figure 3-11: "Hello" as a length-prefixed string

                 Implicit-Length Data
                 Sometimes the length of the data value is implicit in the values around it.
                 For example, think of a protocol that is sending data back to a client using
                 a connection-oriented protocol such as TCP. Rather than specifying the
                 size of the data up front, the server could close the TCP connection, thus
                 implicitly signifying the end of the data. This is how data is returned in an
                 HTTP version 1.0 response.
                      Another example would be a higher-level protocol or structure that
                 has already specified the length of a set of values. The parser might extract
                 that higher-level structure first and then read the values contained within
                 it. The protocol could use the fact that this structure has a finite length
                 associated with it to implicitly calculate the length of a value in a similar

48   Chapter 3
       fashion to close the connection (without closing it, of course). For example,
       Figure 3-12 shows a trivial example where a 7-bit variable integer and string
       are contained within a single block. (Of course, in practice, this can be con-
       siderably more complex.)
                 0x80 as 7-bit
                variable integer                   String data

                                    'H'      'e'         'l'      'l'    'o'
        0x07     0x80    0x00
                                   0x48     0x65        0x6C     0x6C   0x6F

        Total                             7 Octets of
        size                                 data

       Figure 3-12: "Hello" as an implicit-length string

       Padded Data
       Padded data is used when there is a maximum upper bound on the length
       of a value, such as a 32-octet limit. For the sake of simplicity, rather than
       prefixing the value with a length or having an explicit terminating value,
       the protocol could instead send the entire fixed-length string but termi-
       nate the value by padding the unused data with a known value. Figure 3-13
       shows an example.
                    Valid string data                                   Padding data

         'H'      'e'     'l'       'l'      'o'         '$'      '$'    '$'      '$'       '$'       '$'
        0x48     0x65    0x6C      0x6C     0x6F        0x24     0x24   0x24     0x24      0x24      0x24

       Figure 3-13: "Hello" as a '$' padded string

Dates and Times
       It can be very important for a protocol to get the correct date and time.
       Both can be used as metadata, such as file modification timestamps in a
       network file protocol, as well as to determine the expiration of authenti-
       cation credentials. Failure to correctly implement the timestamp might
       cause serious security issues. The method of date and time representation
       depends on usage requirements, the platform the applications are running
       on, and the protocol’s space requirements. I discuss two common repre-
       sentations, POSIX/Unix Time and Windows FILETIME, in the following
       sections.

                                                                               Network Protocol Structures   49
                 POSIX/Unix Time
                 Currently, POSIX/Unix time is stored as a 32-bit signed integer value rep-
                 resenting the number of seconds that have elapsed since the Unix epoch,
                 which is usually specified as 00:00:00 (UTC), 1 January 1970. Although this
                 isn’t a high-definition timer, it’s sufficient for most scenarios. As a 32-bit inte-
                 ger, this value is limited to 03:14:07 (UTC) 19 January 2038, at which point
                 the representation will overflow. Some modern operating systems now use
                 a 64-bit representation to address this problem.

                 Windows FILETIME
                 The Windows FILETIME is the date and time format used by Microsoft
                 Windows for its filesystem timestamps. As the only format on Windows with
                 simple binary representation, it also appears in a few different protocols.
                     The FILETIME format is a 64-bit unsigned integer. One unit of the
                 integer represents a 100 ns interval. The epoch of the format is 00:00:00
                 (UTC), 1 January 1601. This gives the FILETIME format a larger range
                 than the POSIX/Unix time format.

     Tag, Length, Value Pattern
                 It’s easy to imagine how one might send unimportant data using simple pro-
                 tocols, but sending more complex and important data takes some explain-
                 ing. For example, a protocol that can send different types of structures must
                 have a way to represent the bounds of a structure and its type.
                       One way to represent data is with a Tag, Length, Value (TLV) pattern. The
                 Tag value represents the type of data being sent by the protocol, which is
                 commonly a numeric value (usually an enumerated list of possible values).
                 But the Tag can be anything that provides the data structures with a unique
                 pattern. The Length and Value are variable-length values. The order in
                 which the values appear isn’t important; in fact, the Tag might be part
                 of the Value. Figure 3-14 show a couple of ways these values could be
                 arranged.
                       The Tag value sent can be used to determine how to further process the
                 data. For example, given two types of Tags, one that indicates the authenti-
                 cation credentials to the application and another that represents a message
                 being transmitted to the parser, we must be able to distinguish between
                 the two types of data. One big advantage to this pattern is that it allows
                 us to extend a protocol without breaking applications that have not been
                 updated to support the updated protocol. Because each structure is sent
                 with an associated Tag and Length, a protocol parser could ignore the
                 structures that it doesn’t understand.

50   Chapter 3
Tag outside
   value                       3-octet value                                  4-octet value

   0x08 0x00 0x03 0x12 0x34 0x56                      0x00 0x04 0x08 0x12 0x34 0x56

              16-bit                                      16-bit   Tag inside
              length                                      length     value

Figure 3-14: Possible TLV arrangements

    Multiplexing and Fragmentation
                       Often in computer communication, multiple tasks must happen at once.
                       For example, consider the Microsoft Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP): a user
                       could be moving the mouse cursor, typing on the keyboard, and transfer-
                       ring files to a remote computer while changes in the display and audio are
                       being transmitted back to the user (see Figure 3-15).

                                                              User interface updates

                                                          Keyboard and mouse updates

                                                                      Sound
                                                                                                    Remote desktop
                                                                   Shared files                         client

                           Remote desktop server

Figure 3-15: Data needs for Remote Desktop Protocol

                            This complex data transfer would not result in a very rich experience
                       if display updates had to wait for a 10-minute audio file to finish before
                       updating the display. Of course, a workaround would be opening multiple
                       connections to the remote computer, but those would use more resources.
                       Instead, many protocols use multiplexing, which allows multiple connections
                       to share the same underlying network connection.
                            Multiplexing (shown in Figure 3-16) defines an internal channel mecha-
                       nism that allows a single connection to host multiple types of traffic by
                       fragmenting large transmissions into smaller chunks. Multiplexing then
                       combines these chunks into a single connection. When analyzing a proto-
                       col, you may need to demultiplex these channels to get the original data
                       back out.

                                                                                        Network Protocol Structures   51
                                  User               Shared
                                                                          Sound
                                interface              file
                                                                          update
                                 update              update

                                    1         2        3         4          5

                                                                                   Remote desktop client

    Remote desktop server
                                                                User
                                            Sound
                                                              interface
                                            update
                                                               update

Figure 3-16: Multiplexed RDP data

                       Unfortunately, some network protocols restrict the type of data that
                   can be transmitted and how large each packet of data can be—a problem
                   commonly encountered when layering protocols. For example, Ethernet
                   defines the maximum size of traffic frames as 1500 octets, and running IP
                   on top of that causes problems because the maximum size of IP packets
                   can be 65536 bytes. Fragmentation is designed to solve this problem: it
                   uses a mechanism that allows the network stack to convert large packets
                   into smaller fragments when the application or OS knows that the entire
                   packet cannot be handled by the next layer.

     Network Address Information
                   The representation of network address information in a protocol usually
                   follows a fairly standard format. Because we’re almost certainly dealing
                   with TCP or UDP protocols, the most common binary representation is the
                   IP address as either a 4- or 16-octet value (for IPv4 or IPv6) along with a
                   2-octet port. By convention, these values are typically stored as big endian
                   integer values.
                        You might also see hostnames sent instead of raw addresses. Because
                   hostnames are just strings, they follow the patterns used for sending
                   variable-length strings, which was discussed earlier in “Variable Binary
                   Length Data” on page 47. Figure 3-17 shows how some of these formats
                   might appear.

52   Chapter 3
                                              IPv4 address
                                               127.0.0.1           TCP port 80

                                      0x7F    0x00 0x00 0x01 0x00 0x50

                                     Hostname
                                      a.com                        TCP port 80

                        'a'    '.'      'c'     'o'   'm'    0x00 0x00 0x50

                                                         Terminating
                                                          character
                              IPv6 address
                                (128 bits)
                                   ::1                             TCP port 80

         0x00 0x00 0x00           ...         0x00 0x00 0x01 0x00 0x50

Figure 3-17: Network information in binary

Structured Binary Formats
        Although custom network protocols have a habit of reinventing the wheel,
        sometimes it makes more sense to repurpose existing designs when describ-
        ing a new protocol. For example, one common format encountered in binary
        protocols is Abstract Syntax Notation 1 (ASN.1). ASN.1 is the basis for protocols
        such as the Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), and it is the
        encoding mechanism for all manner of cryptographic values, such as X.509
        certificates.
             ASN.1 is standardized by the ISO, IEC, and ITU in the X.680 series. It
        defines an abstract syntax to represent structured data. Data is represented
        in the protocol depending on the encoding rules, and numerous encodings
        exist. But you’re most likely to encounter the Distinguished Encoding Rules
        (DER), which is designed to represent ASN.1 structures in a way that can-
        not be misinterpreted—a useful property for cryptographic protocols. The
        DER representation is a good example of a TLV protocol.

                                                                        Network Protocol Structures   53
                      Rather than going into great detail about ASN.1 (which would take up
                 a fair amount of this book), I give you Listing 3-1, which shows the ASN.1
                 for X.509 certificates.

                 Certificate ::= SEQUENCE {
                      version         [0] EXPLICIT Version DEFAULT v1,
                      serialNumber         CertificateSerialNumber,
                      signature            AlgorithmIdentifier,
                      issuer               Name,
                      validity             Validity,
                      subject              Name,
                      subjectPublicKeyInfo SubjectPublicKeyInfo,
                      issuerUniqueID [1] IMPLICIT UniqueIdentifier OPTIONAL,
                      subjectUniqueID [2] IMPLICIT UniqueIdentifier OPTIONAL,
                      extensions      [3] EXPLICIT Extensions OPTIONAL
                 }

Listing 3-1: ASN.1 representation for X.509 certificates

                     This abstract definition of an X.509 certificate can be represented in
                 any of ASN.1’s encoding formats. Listing 3-2 shows a snippet of the DER
                 encoded form dumped as text using the OpenSSL utility.

                 $ openssl asn1parse -in example.cer
                     0:d=0 hl=4 l= 539 cons: SEQUENCE
                     4:d=1 hl=4 l= 388 cons: SEQUENCE
                     8:d=2 hl=2 l=    3 cons: cont [ 0 ]
                    10:d=3 hl=2 l=    1 prim: INTEGER         :02
                    13:d=2 hl=2 l= 16 prim: INTEGER           :19BB8E9E2F7D60BE48BFE6840B50F7C3
                    31:d=2 hl=2 l= 13 cons: SEQUENCE
                    33:d=3 hl=2 l=    9 prim: OBJECT          :sha1WithRSAEncryption
                    44:d=3 hl=2 l=    0 prim: NULL
                    46:d=2 hl=2 l= 17 cons: SEQUENCE
                    48:d=3 hl=2 l= 15 cons: SET
                    50:d=4 hl=2 l= 13 cons: SEQUENCE
                    52:d=5 hl=2 l=    3 prim: OBJECT          :commonName
                    57:d=5 hl=2 l=    6 prim: PRINTABLESTRING :democa

Listing 3-2: A small sample of X.509 certificate

     Text Protocol Structures
                 Text protocols are a good choice when the main purpose is to transfer text,
                 which is why mail transfer protocols, instant messaging, and news aggrega-
                 tion protocols are usually text based. Text protocols must have structures
                 similar to binary protocols. The reason is that, although their main content
                 differs, both share the goal of transferring data from one place to another.
                     The following section details some common text protocol structures
                 that you’ll likely encounter in the real world.

54   Chapter 3
Numeric Data
Over the millennia, science and written languages have invented ways to
represent numeric values in textual format. Of course, computer protocols
don’t need to be human readable, but why go out of your way just to prevent
a protocol from being readable (unless your goal is deliberate obfuscation).

Integers
It’s easy to represent integer values using the current character set’s repre-
sentation of the characters 0 through 9 (or A through F if hexadecimal). In
this simple representation, size limitations are no concern, and if a number
needs to be larger than a binary word size, you can add digits. Of course,
you’d better hope that the protocol parser can handle the extra digits or
security issues will inevitably occur.
      To make a signed number, you add the minus (–) character to the front
of the number; the plus (+) symbol for positive numbers is implied.

Decimal Numbers
Decimal numbers are usually defined using human-readable forms. For
example, you might write a number as 1.234, using the dot character to sep-
arate the integer and fractional components of the number; however, you’ll
still need to consider the requirement of parsing a value afterward.
      Binary representations, such as floating point, can’t represent all deci-
mal values precisely with finite precision (just as decimals can’t represent
numbers like 1/3). This fact can make some values difficult to represent in
text format and can cause security issues, especially when values are com-
pared to one another.

Text Booleans
Booleans are easy to represent in text protocols. Usually, they’re repre-
sented using the words true or false. But just to be difficult, some protocols
might require that words be capitalized exactly to be valid. And sometimes
integer values will be used instead of words, such as 0 for false and 1 for
true, but not very often.

Dates and Times
At a simple level, it’s easy to encode dates and times: just represent them as
they would be written in a human-readable language. As long as all applica-
tions agree on the representation, that should suffice.
     Unfortunately, not everyone can agree on a standard format, so typi-
cally many competing date representations are in use. This can be a partic-
ularly acute issue in applications such as mail clients, which need to process
all manner of international date formats.

                                                        Network Protocol Structures   55
                 Variable-Length Data
                 All but the most trivial protocols must have a way to separate important text
                 fields so they can be easily interpreted. When a text field is separated out of
                 the original protocol, it’s commonly referred to as a token. Some protocols
                 specify a fixed length for tokens, but it’s far more common to require some
                 type of variable-length data.

                 Delimited Text
                 Separating tokens with delimiting characters is a very common way to sepa-
                 rate tokens and fields that’s simple to understand and easy to construct and
                 parse. Any character can be used as the delimiter (depending on the type
                 of data being transferred), but whitespace is encountered most in human-
                 readable formats. That said, the delimiter doesn’t have to be whitespace.
                 For example, the Financial Information Exchange (FIX) protocol delimits
                 tokens using the ASCII Start of Header (SOH) character with a value of 1.

                 Terminated Text
                 Protocols that specify a way to separate individual tokens must also have a
                 way to define an End of Command condition. If a protocol is broken into
                 separate lines, the lines must be terminated in some way. Most well-known,
                 text-based Internet protocols are line oriented, such as HTTP and IRC; lines
                 typically delimit entire structures, such as the end of a command.
                     What constitutes the end-of-line character? That depends on whom
                 you ask. OS developers usually define the end-of-line character as either
                 the ASCII Line Feed (LF), which has the value 10; the Carriage Return (CR)
                 with the value 13; or the combination CR LF. Protocols such as HTTP and
                 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) specify CR LF as the official end-of-
                 line combination. However, so many incorrect implementations occur that
                 most parsers will also accept a bare LF as the end-of-line indication.

                 Structured Text Formats
                 As with structured binary formats such ASN.1, there is normally no reason
                 to reinvent the wheel when you want to represent structured data in a text
                 protocol. You might think of structured text formats as delimited text on
                 steroids, and as such, rules must be in place for how values are represented
                 and hierarchies constructed. With this in mind, I’ll describe three formats
                 in common use within real-world text protocols.

                 Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions
                 Originally developed for sending multipart email messages, Multipurpose
                 Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) found its way into a number of protocols,
                 such as HTTP. The specification in RFCs 2045, 2046 and 2047, along with
                 numerous other related RFCs, defines a way of encoding multiple discrete
                 attachments in a single MIME-encoded message.

56   Chapter 3
     MIME messages separate the body parts by defining a common separa-
tor line prefixed with two dashes (--). The message is terminated by follow-
ing this separator with the same two dashes. Listing 3-3 shows an example
of a text message combined with a binary version of the same message.

MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary=MSG_2934894829

This is a message with multiple parts in MIME format.
--MSG_2934894829
Content-Type: text/plain

Hello World!
--MSG_2934894829
Content-Type: application/octet-stream
Content-Transfer-Encoding: base64

PGh0bWw+Cjxib2R5PgpIZWxsbyBXb3JsZCEKPC9ib2R5Pgo8L2h0bWw+Cg==
--MSG_2934894829--

Listing 3-3: A simple MIME message

     One of the most common uses of MIME is for Content-Type values,
which are usually referred to as MIME types. A MIME type is widely used
when serving HTTP content and in operating systems to map an applica-
tion to a particular content type. Each type consists of the form of the data
it represents, such as text or application, in the format of the data. In this
case, plain is unencoded text and octet-stream is a series of bytes.

JavaScript Object Notation
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) was designed as a simple representation for
a structure based on the object format provided by the JavaScript program-
ming language. It was originally used to transfer data between a web page
in a browser and a backend service, such as in Asynchronous JavaScript and
XML (AJAX). Currently, it’s commonly used for web service data transfer
and all manner of other protocols.
     The JSON format is simple: a JSON object is enclosed using the braces
({}) ASCII characters. Within these braces are zero or more member entries,
each consisting of a key and a value. For example, Listing 3-4 shows a simple
JSON object consisting of an integer index value, "Hello world!" as a string,
and an array of strings.

{
    "index" : 0,
    "str" : "Hello World!",
    "arr" : [ "A", "B" ]
}

Listing 3-4: A simple JSON object

                                                         Network Protocol Structures   57
                       The JSON format was designed for JavaScript processing, and it can be
                 parsed using the "eval" function. Unfortunately, using this function comes
                 with a significant security risk; namely, it’s possible to insert arbitrary script
                 code during object creation. Although most modern applications use a pars-
                 ing library that doesn’t need a connection to JavaScript, it’s worth ensuring
                 that arbitrary JavaScript code is not executed in the context of the applica-
                 tion. The reason is that it could lead to potential security issues, such as cross-
                 site scripting (XSS), a vulnerability where attacker-controlled JavaScript can be
                 executed in the context of another web page, allowing the attacker to access
                 the page’s secure resources.

                 Extensible Markup Language
                 Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language for describing
                 a structured document format. Developed by the W3C, it’s derived from
                 Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML). It has many similarities
                 to HTML, but it aims to be stricter in its definition in order to simplify
                 parsers and create fewer security issues.1
                      At a basic level, XML consists of elements, attributes, and text. Elements
                 are the main structural values. They have a name and can contain child
                 elements or text content. Only one root element is allowed in a single docu-
                 ment. Attributes are additional name-value pairs that can be assigned to an
                 element. They take the form of name="Value". Text content is just that, text.
                 Text is a child of an element or the value component of an attribute.
                      Listing 3-5 shows a very simple XML document with elements, attri-
                 butes, and text values.

                 <value index="0">    <str>Hello World!</str>
                     <arr><value>A</value><value>B</value></arr>
                 </value>

Listing 3-5: A simple XML document

                     All XML data is text; no type information is provided for in the XML
                 specification, so the parser must know what the values represent. Certain
                 specifications, such as XML Schema, aim to remedy this type information
                 deficiency but they are not required in order to process XML content. The
                 XML specification defines a list of well-formed criteria that can be used to
                 determine whether an XML document meets a minimal level of structure.
                     XML is used in many different places to define the way informa-
                 tion is transmitted in a protocol, such as in Rich Site Summary (RSS). It
                 can also be part of a protocol, as in Extensible Messaging and Presence
                 Protocol (XMPP).

                 1. Just ask those who have tried to parse HTML for errant script code how difficult that task
                 can be without a strict format.

58   Chapter 3
Encoding Binary Data
        In the early history of computer communication, 8-bit bytes were not
        the norm. Because most communication was text based and focused on
        English-speaking countries, it made economic sense to send only 7 bits per
        byte as required by the ASCII standard. This allowed other bits to provide
        control for serial link protocols or to improve performance. This history
        is reflected heavily in some early network protocols, such as the SMTP or
        Network News Transfer Protocol (NNTP), which assume 7-bit communica-
        tion channels.
             But a 7-bit limitation presents a problem if you want to send that amus-
        ing picture to your friend via email or you want to write your mail in a non-
        English character set. To overcome this limitation, developers devised a
        number of ways to encode binary data as text, each with varying degrees of
        efficiency or complexity.
             As it turns out, the ability to convert binary content into text still has its
        advantages. For example, if you wanted to send binary data in a structured
        text format, such as JSON or XML, you might need to ensure that delimit-
        ers were appropriately escaped. Instead, you can choose an existing encod-
        ing format, such as Base64, to send the binary data and it will be easily
        understood on both sides.
             Let’s look at some of the more common binary-to-text encoding schemes
        you’re likely to encounter when inspecting a text protocol.

        Hex Encoding
        One of the most naive encoding techniques for binary data is hex encoding.
        In hex encoding, each octet is split into two 4-bit values that are converted to
        two text characters denoting the hexadecimal representation. The result is a
        simple representation of the binary in text form, as shown in Figure 3-18.

                   0x06                     0xE3                      0x58

             00000110                  11100011                 01011000

             '0'          '6'         'E'          '3'          '5'           '8'

Figure 3-18: Example hex encoding of binary data

             Although simple, hex encoding is not space efficient because all
        binary data automatically becomes 100 percent larger than it was origi-
        nally. But one advantage is that encoding and decoding operations are
        fast and simple and little can go wrong, which is definitely beneficial from
        a security perspective.

                                                                   Network Protocol Structures   59
                               HTTP specifies a similar encoding for URLs and some text protocols
                           called percent encoding. Rather than all data being encoded, only nonprint-
                           able data is converted to hex, and values are signified by prefixing the value
                           with a % character. If percent encoding was used to encode the value in
                           Figure 3-18, you would get %06%E3%58.

                           Base64
                           To counter the obvious inefficiencies in hex encoding, we can use Base64,
                           an encoding scheme originally developed as part of the MIME specifica-
                           tions. The 64 in the name refers to the number of characters used to
                           encode the data.
                               The input binary is separated into individual 6-bit values, enough to
                           represent 0 through 63. This value is then used to look up a corresponding
                           character in an encoding table, as shown in Figure 3-19.
                                                       Lower 4 bits
                   0   1     2      3   4    5     6     7     8      9   A   B    C    D    E     F

               0   A   B     C      D   E    F    G     H      I      J   K   L   M     N    O     P
Upper 2 bits

               1   Q   R     S      T   U    V    W      X     Y      Z   a   b    c    d    e     f

               2   g   h      i     j   k    l     m     n     o      p   q   r    s    t    u     v

               3   w   x     y      z   0    1     2     3     4      5   6   7    8    9    +     /

Figure 3-19: Base64 encoding table

                                But there’s a problem with this approach: when 8 bits are divided by 6,
                           2 bits remain. To counter this problem, the input is taken in units of three
                           octets, because dividing 24 bits by 6 bits produces 4 values. Thus, Base64
                           encodes 3 bytes into 4, representing an increase of only 33 percent, which is
                           significantly better than the increase produced by hex encoding. Figure 3-20
                           shows an example of encoding a three-octet sequence into Base64.
                                But yet another issue is apparent with this strategy. What if you have
                           only one or two octets to encode? Would that not cause the encoding to
                           fail? Base64 gets around this issue by defining a placeholder character,
                           the equal sign (=). If in the encoding process, no valid bits are available
                           to use, the encoder will encode that value as the placeholder. Figure 3-21
                           shows an example of only one octet being encoded. Note that it generates
                           two placeholder characters. If two octets were encoded, Base64 would
                           generate only one.

 60   Chapter 3
         0x06                       0xE3                   0x58

       00000110                11100011                01011000

         0x01              0x2E              0x0D          0x18

                            Base64 mapping table

          'B'               'u'               'N'           'Y'

Figure 3-20: Base64 encoding 3 bytes as 4 characters

         0x06

       00000110                0000XXXX                XXXXXXXX

         0x01              0x20                ?              ?

                            Base64 mapping table

          'B'               'g'               '='          '='
                                                           '='

Figure 3-21: Base64 encoding 1 byte as 3 characters

    To convert Base64 data back into binary, you simply follow the steps
in reverse. But what happens when a non-Base64 character is encountered
during the decoding? Well that’s up to the application to decide. We can
only hope that it makes a secure decision.

                                                          Network Protocol Structures   61
     Final Words
                 In this chapter, I defined many ways to represent data values in binary
                 and text protocols and discussed how to represent numeric data, such as
                 integers, in binary. Understanding how octets are transmitted in a pro-
                 tocol is crucial to successfully decoding values. At the same time, it’s also
                 important to identify the many ways that variable-length data values can
                 be represented because they are perhaps the most important structure you
                 will encounter within a network protocol. As you analyze more network pro-
                 tocols, you’ll see the same structures used repeatedly. Being able to quickly
                 identify the structures is key to easily processing unknown protocols.
                      In Chapter 4, we’ll look at a few real-world protocols and dissect them
                 to see how they match up with the descriptions presented in this chapter.

62   Chapter 3
