                               5
         A naly sis f ro m the W ire

In Chapter 2, I discussed how to capture network traf-
fic for analysis. Now it’s time to put that knowledge to
the test. In this chapter, we’ll examine how to analyze
captured network protocol traffic from a chat appli-
cation to understand the protocol in use. If you can
determine which features a protocol supports, you
can assess its security.
    Analysis of an unknown protocol is typically incremental. You begin
by capturing network traffic, and then analyze it to try to understand what
each part of the traffic represents. Throughout this chapter, I’ll show you
how to use Wireshark and some custom code to inspect an unknown net-
work protocol. Our approach will include extracting structures and state
information.
     The Traffic-Producing Application: SuperFunkyChat
                 The test subject for this chapter is a chat application I’ve written in C# called
                 SuperFunkyChat, which will run on Windows, Linux, and macOS. Download
                 the latest prebuild applications and source code from the GitHub page at
                 https://github.com/tyranid/ExampleChatApplication/releases/; be sure to choose
                 the release binaries appropriate for your platform. (If you’re using Mono,
                 choose the .NET version, and so on.) The example client and server console
                 applications for SuperFunkyChat are called ChatClient and ChatServer.
                      After you’ve downloaded the application, unpack the release files to a
                 directory on your machine so you can run each application. For the sake
                 of simplicity, all example command lines will use the Windows executable
                 binaries. If you’re running under Mono, prefix the command with the path
                 to the main mono binary. When running files for .NET Core, prefix the
                 command with the dotnet binary. The files for .NET will have a .dll extension
                 instead of .exe.

                 Starting the Server
                 Start the server by running ChatServer.exe with no parameters. If successful,
                 it should print some basic information, as shown in Listing 5-1.

                 C:\SuperFunkyChat> ChatServer.exe
                 ChatServer (c) 2017 James Forshaw
                 WARNING: Don't use this for a real chat system!!!
                 Running server on port 12345 Global Bind False

Listing 5-1: Example output from running ChatServer

        N ote    Pay attention to the warning! This application has not been designed to be a secure
                 chat system.

                      Notice in Listing 5-1 that the final line prints the port the server is run-
                 ning on (12345 in this case) and whether the server has bound to all inter-
                 faces (global). You probably won’t need to change the port (--port NUM), but
                 you might need to change whether the application is bound to all interfaces
                 if you want clients and the server to exist on different computers. This is
                 especially important on Windows. It’s not easy to capture traffic to the local
                 loopback interface on Windows; if you encounter any difficulties, you may
                 need to run the server on a separate computer or a virtual machine (VM).
                 To bind to all interfaces, specify the --global parameter.

                 Starting Clients
                 With the server running, we can start one or more clients. To start a client,
                 run ChatClient.exe (see Listing 5-2), specify the username you want to use on
                 the server (the username can be anything you like), and specify the server
                 hostname (for example, localhost). When you run the client, you should see
                 output similar to that shown in Listing 5-2. If you see any errors, make sure

80   Chapter 5
        you’ve set up the server correctly, including requiring binding to all inter-
        faces or disabling the firewall on the server.

        C:\SuperFunkyChat> ChatClient.exe USERNAME HOSTNAME
        ChatClient (c) 2017 James Forshaw
        WARNING: Don't use this for a real chat system!!!
        Connecting to localhost:12345

Listing 5-2: Example output from running ChatClient

             As you start the client, look at the running server: you should see output
        on the console similar to Listing 5-3, indicating that the client has success-
        fully sent a “Hello” packet.

        Connection from 127.0.0.1:49825
        Received packet ChatProtocol.HelloProtocolPacket
        Hello Packet for User: alice HostName: borax

Listing 5-3: The server output when a client connects

        Communicating Between Clients
        After you’ve completed the preceding steps successfully, you should be able
        to connect multiple clients so you can communicate between them. To send
        a message to all users with the ChatClient, enter the message on the com-
        mand line and press ENTER.
            The ChatClient also supports a few other commands, which all begin
        with a forward slash (/), as detailed in Table 5-1.

Table 5-1: Commands for the ChatClient Application

         Command                 Description
         /quit [message]         Quit client with optional message
         /msg user message       Send a message to a specific user
         /list                   List other users on the system
         /help                   Print help information

            You’re ready to generate traffic between the SuperFunkyChat clients
        and server. Let’s start our analysis by capturing and inspecting some traffic
        using Wireshark.

A Crash Course in Analysis with Wireshark
        In Chapter 2, I introduced Wireshark but didn’t go into any detail on how
        to use Wireshark to analyze rather than simply capture traffic. Because
        Wireshark is a very powerful and comprehensive tool, I’ll only scratch
        the surface of its functionality here. When you first start Wireshark on
        Windows, you should see a window similar to the one shown in Figure 5-1.

                                                                     Analysis from the Wire   81
Figure 5-1: The main Wireshark window on Windows

                     The main window allows you to choose the interface to capture traffic
                 from. To ensure we capture only the traffic we want to analyze, we need to
                 configure some options on the interface. Select Capture4 Options from
                 the menu. Figure 5-2 shows the options dialog that opens.

                                       

                                                              

Figure 5-2: The Wireshark Capture Interfaces dialog

                      Select the network interface you want to capture traffic from, as shown
                 at . Because we’re using Windows, choose Local Area Connection, which is
                 our main Ethernet connection; we can’t easily capture from Localhost. Then
                 set a capture filter . In this case, we specify the filter ip host 192.168.10.102
                 to limit capture to traffic to or from the IP address 192.168.10.102. (The IP

82   Chapter 5
address we’re using is the chat server’s address. Change the IP address as
appropriate for your configuration.) Click the Start button to begin captur-
ing traffic.

Generating Network Traffic and Capturing Packets
The main approach to packet analysis is to generate as much traffic from
the target application as possible to improve your chances of finding its
various protocol structures. For example, Listing 5-4 shows a single session
with ChatClient for alice.

# alice - Session
> Hello There!
< bob: I've just joined from borax
< bob: How are you?
< bob: This is nice isn't it?
< bob: Woo
< Server: 'bob' has quit, they said 'I'm going away now!'
< bob: I've just joined from borax
< bob: Back again for another round.
< Server: 'bob' has quit, they said 'Nope!'
> /quit
< Server: Don't let the door hit you on the way out!

Listing 5-4: Single ChatClient session for alice.

     And Listing 5-5 and Listing 5-6 show two sessions for bob.

# bob - Session 1
> How are you?
> This is nice isn't it?
> /list
< User List
< alice - borax
> /msg alice Woo
> /quit
< Server: Don't let the door hit you on the way out!

Listing 5-5: First ChatClient session for bob

# bob - Session 2
> Back again for another round.
> /quit Nope!
< Server: Don't let the door hit you on the way out!

Listing 5-6: Second ChatClient session for bob

     We run two sessions for bob so we can capture any connection or discon-
nection events that might only occur between sessions. In each session, a right
angle bracket (>) indicates a command to enter into the ChatClient, and a
left angle bracket (<) indicates responses from the server being written to the

                                                            Analysis from the Wire   83
                 console. You can execute the commands to the client for each of these session
                 captures to reproduce the rest of the results in this chapter for analysis.
                     Now turn to Wireshark. If you’ve configured Wireshark correctly and
                 bound it to the correct interface, you should start seeing packets being cap-
                 tured, as shown in Figure 5-3.

Figure 5-3: Captured traffic in Wireshark

                     After running the example sessions, stop the capture by clicking the
                 Stop button (highlighted) and save the packets for later use if you want.

                 Basic Analysis
                 Let’s look at the traffic we’ve captured. To get an overview of the communica-
                 tion that occurred during the capture period, choose among the options on
                 the Statistics menu. For example, choose Statistics Conversations, and you
                 should see a new window displaying high-level conversations such as TCP ses-
                 sions, as shown in the Conversations window in Figure 5-4.

Figure 5-4: The Wireshark Conversations window

84   Chapter 5
    The Conversations window shows three separate TCP conversations in
the captured traffic. We know that the SuperFunkyChat client application
uses port 12345, because we see three separate TCP sessions coming from
port 12345. These sessions should correspond to the three client sessions
shown in Listing 5-4, Listing 5-5, and Listing 5-6.

Reading the Contents of a TCP Session
To view the captured traffic for a single conversation, select one of the con-
versations in the Conversations window and click the Follow Stream button.
A new window displaying the contents of the stream as ASCII text should
appear, as shown in Figure 5-5.

                                                                               

Figure 5-5: Displaying the contents of a TCP session in Wireshark’s Follow TCP Stream view

     Wireshark replaces data that can’t be represented as ASCII characters
with a single dot character, but even with that character replacement, it’s
clear that much of the data is being sent in plaintext. That said, the net-
work protocol is clearly not exclusively a text-based protocol because the
control information for the data is nonprintable characters. The only rea-
son we’re seeing text is that SuperFunkyChat’s primary purpose is to send
text messages.
     Wireshark shows the inbound and outbound traffic in a session using
different colors: pink for outbound traffic and blue for inbound. In a TCP
session, outbound traffic is from the client that initiated the TCP session, and
inbound traffic is from the TCP server. Because we’ve captured all traffic to
the server, let’s look at another conversation. To change the conversation,
change the Stream number  in Figure 5-5 to 1. You should now see a dif-
ferent conversation, for example, like the one in Figure 5-6.

                                                                    Analysis from the Wire   85
Figure 5-6: A second TCP session from a different client

                      Compare Figure 5-6 to Figure 5-5; you’ll see the details of the two ses-
                 sions are different. Some text sent by the client (in Figure 5-6), such as
                 “How are you?”, is shown as received by the server in Figure 5-5. Next, we’ll
                 try to determine what those binary parts of the protocol represent.

     Identifying Packet Structure with Hex Dump
                 At this point, we know that our subject protocol seems to be part binary
                 and part text, which indicates that looking at just the printable text won’t
                 be enough to determine all the various structures in the protocol.
                     To dig in, we first return to Wireshark’s Follow TCP Stream view, as
                 shown in Figure 5-5, and change the Show and save data as drop-down
                 menu to the Hex Dump option. The stream should now look similar to
                 Figure 5-7.

                                                                          

Figure 5-7: The Hex Dump view of the stream

86   Chapter 5
                       The Hex Dump view shows three columns of information. The column
                  at the very left  is the byte offset into the stream for a particular direction.
                  For example, the byte at 0 is the first byte sent in that direction, the byte 4
                  is the fifth, and so on. The column in the center  shows the bytes as a hex
                  dump. The column at the right  is the ASCII representation, which we saw
                  previously in Figure 5-5.

                  Viewing Individual Packets
                  Notice how the blocks of bytes shown in the center column in Figure 5-7
                  vary in length. Compare this again to Figure 5-6; you’ll see that other than
                  being separated by direction, all data in Figure 5-6 appears as one contigu-
                  ous block. In contrast, the data in Figure 5-7 might appear as just a few
                  blocks of 4 bytes, then a block of 1 byte, and finally a much longer block
                  containing the main group of text data.
                       What we’re seeing in Wireshark are individual packets: each block is a
                  single TCP packet, or segment, containing perhaps only 4 bytes of data. TCP
                  is a stream-based protocol, which means that there are no real boundaries
                  between consecutive blocks of data when you’re reading and writing data to
                  a TCP socket. However, from a physical perspective, there’s no such thing
                  as a real stream-based network transport protocol. Instead, TCP sends indi-
                  vidual packets consisting of a TCP header containing information, such as
                  the source and destination port numbers as well as the data.
                       In fact, if we return to the main Wireshark window, we can find a
                  packet to prove that Wireshark is displaying single TCP packets. Select
                  EditFind Packet, and an additional drop-down menu appears in the
                  main window, as shown Figure 5-8.

                                                                    

       

                

                              

Figure 5-8: Finding a packet in Wireshark’s main window

                                                                               Analysis from the Wire   87
                       We’ll find the first value shown in Figure 5-7, the string BINX. To do this,
                 fill in the Find options as shown in Figure 5-8. The first selection box indi-
                 cates where in the packet capture to search. Specify that you want to search
                 in the Packet bytes . Leave the second selection box as Narrow & Wide,
                 which indicates that you want to search for both ASCII and Unicode strings.
                 Also leave the Case sensitive box unchecked and specify that you want to
                 look for a String value  in the third drop-down menu. Then enter the
                 string value we want to find, in this case the string BINX . Finally, click
                 the Find button, and the main window should automatically scroll and
                 highlight the first packet Wireshark finds that contains the BINX string .
                 In the middle window at , you should see that the packet contains 4 bytes,
                 and you can see the raw data in the bottom window, which shows that we’ve
                 found the BINX string . We now know that the Hex Dump view Wireshark
                 displays in Figure 5-8 represents packet boundaries because the BINX string
                 is in a packet of its own.

                 Determining the Protocol Structure
                 To simplify determining the protocol structure, it makes sense to look
                 only at one direction of the network communication. For example, let’s
                 just look at the outbound direction (from client to server) in Wireshark.
                 Returning to the Follow TCP Stream view, select the Hex Dump option in
                 the Show and save data as drop-down menu. Then select the traffic direc-
                 tion from the client to the server on port 12345 from the drop-down menu
                 at , as shown in Figure 5-9.

                                                            

Figure 5-9: A hex dump showing only the outbound direction

                      Click the Save as . . . button to copy the outbound traffic hex dump to a
                 text file to make it easier to inspect. Listing 5-7 shows a small sample of that
                 traffic saved as text.

                 00000000   42 49 4e 58                                         BINXu
                 00000004   00 00 00 0d                                         ....v
                 00000008   00 00 03 55                                         ...Uw

88   Chapter 5
0000000C    00                                                           .x
0000000D    05 61 6c 69 63 65 04 4f          4e 59 58 00                 .alice.O NYX.y
00000019    00 00 00 14                                                  ....
0000001D    00 00 06 3f                                                  ...?
00000021    03                                                           .
00000022    05 61 6c 69 63 65 0c 48          65 6c 6c 6f 20 54 68 65     .alice.H ello The
00000032    72 65 21                                                     re!
--snip--

Listing 5-7: A snippet of outbound traffic

     The outbound stream begins with the four characters BINX . These
characters are never repeated in the rest of the data stream, and if you
compare different sessions, you’ll always find the same four characters at
the start of the stream. If I were unfamiliar with this protocol, my intuition
at this point would be that this is a magic value sent from the client to the
server to tell the server that it’s talking to a valid client rather than some
other application that happens to have connected to the server’s TCP port.
     Following the stream, we see that a sequence of four blocks is sent. The
blocks at  and  are 4 bytes, the block at  is 1 byte, and the block at 
is larger and contains mostly readable text. Let’s consider the first block of
4 bytes at . Might these represent a small number, say the integer value
0xD or 13 in decimal?
     Recall the discussion of the Tag, Length, Value (TLV) pattern in
Chapter 3. TLV is a very simple pattern in which each block of data is
delimited by a value representing the length of the data that follows. This
pattern is especially important for stream-based protocols, such as those
running over TCP, because otherwise the application doesn’t know how
much data it needs to read from a connection to process the protocol. If
we assume that this first value is the length of the data, does this length
match the length of the rest of the packet? Let’s find out.
     Count the total bytes of the blocks at , w, x, and , which seem to
be a single packet, and the result is 21 bytes, which is eight more than the
value of 13 we were expecting (the integer value 0xD). The value of the
length block might not be counting its own length. If we remove the length
block (which is 4 bytes), the result is 17, which is 4 bytes more than the tar-
get length but getting closer. We also have the other unknown 4-byte block
at  following the potential length, but perhaps that’s not counted either. Of
course, it’s easy to speculate, but facts are more important, so let’s do some
testing.

Testing Our Assumptions
At this point in such an analysis, I stop staring at a hex dump because it’s not
the most efficient approach. One way to quickly test whether our assumptions
are right is to export the data for the stream and write some simple code to
parse the structure. Later in this chapter, we’ll write some code for Wireshark
to do all of our testing within the GUI, but for now we’ll implement the code
using Python on the command line.

                                                                       Analysis from the Wire   89
                     To get our data into Python, we could add support for reading Wireshark
                 capture files, but for now we’ll just export the packet bytes to a file. To export
                 the packets from the dialog shown in Figure 5-9, follow these steps:

                 1.   In the Show and save data as drop-down menu, choose the Raw option.
                 2.   Click Save As to export the outbound packets to a binary file called
                      bytes_outbound.bin.

                     We also want to export the inbound packets, so change to and select
                 the inbound conversation. Then save the raw inbound bytes using the pre-
                 ceding steps, but name the file bytes_inbound.bin.
                     Now use the XXD tool (or a similar tool) on the command line to be
                 sure that we’ve successfully dumped the data, as shown in Listing 5-8.

                 $ xxd bytes_outbound.bin
                 00000000: 4249 4e58 0000 000f 0000 0473 0003 626f    BINX.......s..bo
                 00000010: 6208 7573 6572 2d62 6f78 0000 0000 1200    b.user-box......
                 00000020: 0005 8703 0362 6f62 0c48 6f77 2061 7265    .....bob.How are
                 00000030: 2079 6f75 3f00 0000 1c00 0008 e303 0362     you?..........b
                 00000040: 6f62 1654 6869 7320 6973 206e 6963 6520    ob.This is nice
                 00000050: 6973 6e27 7420 6974 3f00 0000 0100 0000    isn't it?.......
                 00000060: 0606 0000 0013 0000 0479 0505 616c 6963    .........y..alic
                 00000070: 6500 0000 0303 626f 6203 576f 6f00 0000    e.....bob.Woo...
                 00000080: 1500 0006 8d02 1349 276d 2067 6f69 6e67    .......I'm going
                 00000090: 2061 7761 7920 6e6f 7721                    away now!

Listing 5-8: The exported packet bytes

                 Dissecting the Protocol with Python
                 Now we’ll write a simple Python script to dissect the protocol. Because
                 we’re just extracting data from a file, we don’t need to write any network
                 code; we just need to open the file and read the data. We’ll also need to
                 read binary data from the file—specifically, a network byte order integer
                 for the length and unknown 4-byte block.

                 Performing the Binary Conversion
                 We can use the built-in Python struct library to do the binary conversions.
                 The script should fail immediately if something doesn’t seem right, such as
                 not being able to read all the data we expect from the file. For example, if
                 the length is 100 bytes and we can read only 20 bytes, the read should fail.
                 If no errors occur while parsing the file, we can be more confident that our
                 analysis is correct. Listing 5-9 shows the first implementation, written to
                 work in both Python 2 and 3.

                 from struct import unpack
                 import sys
                 import os

90   Chapter 5
  # Read fixed number of bytes
u def read_bytes(f, l):
      bytes = f.read(l)
   v if len(bytes) != l:
          raise Exception("Not enough bytes in stream")
      return bytes

  # Unpack a 4-byte network byte order integer
w def read_int(f):
      return unpack("!i", read_bytes(f, 4))[0]

  # Read a single byte
x def read_byte(f):
      return ord(read_bytes(f, 1))

  filename = sys.argv[1]
  file_size = os.path.getsize(filename)

  f = open(filename, "rb")
y print("Magic: %s" % read_bytes(f, 4))

  # Keep reading until we run out of file
z while f.tell() < file_size:
      length = read_int(f)
      unk1 = read_int(f)
      unk2 = read_byte(f)
      data = read_bytes(f, length - 1)
      print("Len: %d, Unk1: %d, Unk2: %d, Data: %s"
          % (length, unk1, unk2, data))

Listing 5-9: An example Python script for parsing protocol data

        Let’s break down the important parts of the script. First, we define some
  helper functions to read data from the file. The function read_bytes()  reads
  a fixed number of bytes from the file specified as a parameter. If not enough
  bytes are in the file to satisfy the read, an exception is thrown to indicate an
  error . We also define a function read_int()  to read a 4-byte integer from
  the file in network byte order where the most significant byte of the integer
  is first in the file, as well as define a function to read a single byte . In the
  main body of the script, we open a file passed on the command line and first
  read a 4-byte value , which we expect is the magic value BINX. Then the code
  enters a loop  while there’s still data to read, reading out the length, the
  two unknown values, and finally the data and then printing the values to the
  console.
        When you run the script in Listing 5-9 and pass it the name of a binary
  file to open, all data from the file should be parsed and no errors gener-
  ated if our analysis that the first 4-byte block was the length of the data sent
  on the network is correct. Listing 5-10 shows example output in Python 3,
  which does a better job of displaying binary strings than Python 2.

                                                                    Analysis from the Wire   91
                 $ python3 read_protocol.py bytes_outbound.bin
                 Magic: b'BINX'
                 Len: 15, Unk1: 1139, Unk2: 0, Data: b'\x03bob\x08user-box\x00'
                 Len: 18, Unk1: 1415, Unk2: 3, Data: b'\x03bob\x0cHow are you?'
                 Len: 28, Unk1: 2275, Unk2: 3, Data: b"\x03bob\x16This is nice isn't it?"
                 Len: 1, Unk1: 6, Unk2: 6, Data: b''
                 Len: 19, Unk1: 1145, Unk2: 5, Data: b'\x05alice\x00\x00\x00\x03\x03bob\x03Woo'
                 Len: 21, Unk1: 1677, Unk2: 2, Data: b"\x13I'm going away now!"

Listing 5-10: Example output from running Listing 5-9 against a binary file

                 Handling Inbound Data
                 If you ran Listing 5-9 against an exported inbound data set, you would
                 immediately get an error because there’s no magic string BINX in the
                 inbound protocol, as shown in Listing 5-11. Of course, this is what we
                 would expect if there were a mistake in our analysis and the length field
                 wasn’t quite as simple as we thought.

                 $ python3 read_protocol.py bytes_inbound.bin
                 Magic: b'\x00\x00\x00\x02'
                 Length: 1, Unknown1: 16777216, Unknown2: 0, Data: b''
                 Traceback (most recent call last):
                   File "read_protocol.py", line 31, in <module>
                     data = read_bytes(f, length - 1)
                   File "read_protocol.py", line 9, in read_bytes
                     raise Exception("Not enough bytes in stream")
                 Exception: Not enough bytes in stream

Listing 5-11: Error generated by Listing 5-9 on inbound data

                      We can clear up this error by modifying the script slightly to include a
                 check for the magic value and reset the file pointer if it’s not equal to the
                 string BINX. Add the following line just after the file is opened in the original
                 script to reset the file pointer to the start if the magic value is incorrect.

                 if read_bytes(f, 4) != b'BINX': f.seek(0)

                     Now, with this small modification, the script will execute successfully
                 on the inbound data and result in the output shown in Listing 5-12.

                 $ python3 read_protocol.py bytes_inbound.bin
                 Len: 2, Unk1: 1, Unk2: 1, Data: b'\x00'
                 Len: 36, Unk1: 3146, Unk2: 3, Data: b"\x03bob\x1eI've just joined from user-box"
                 Len: 18, Unk1: 1415, Unk2: 3, Data: b'\x03bob\x0cHow are you?'

Listing 5-12: Output of modified script on inbound data

92   Chapter 5
Digging into the Unknown Parts of the Protocol
We can use the output in Listing 5-10 and Listing 5-12 to start delving into
the unknown parts of the protocol. First, consider the field labeled Unk1.
The values it takes seem to be different for every packet, but the values are
low, ranging from 1 to 3146.
    But the most informative parts of the output are the following two
entries, one from the outbound data and one from the inbound.

OUTBOUND: Len: 1, Unk1: 6, Unk2: 6, Data: b''
INBOUND: Len: 2, Unk1: 1, Unk2: 1, Data: b'\x00'

    Notice that in both entries the value of Unk1 is the same as Unk2. That
could be a coincidence, but the fact that both entries have the same value
might indicate something important. Also notice that in the second entry
the length is 2, which includes the Unk2 value and a 0 data value, whereas the
length of the first entry is only 1 with no trailing data after the Unk2 value.
Perhaps Unk1 is directly related to the data in the packet? Let’s find out.

Calculating the Checksum
It’s common to add a checksum to a network protocol. The canonical
example of a checksum is just the sum of all the bytes in the data you
want to check for errors. If we assume that the unknown value is a simple
checksum, we can sum all the bytes in the example outbound and inbound
packets I highlighted in the preceding section, resulting in the calculated
sum shown in Table 5-2.

Table 5-2: Testing Checksum for Example Packets

 Unknown value      Data bytes    Sum of data bytes
 6                  6             6
 1                  1, 0          1

     Although Table 5-2 seems to confirm that the unknown value matches
our expectation of a simple checksum for very simple packets, we still need
to verify that the checksum works for larger and more complex packets.
There are two easy ways to determine whether we’ve guessed correctly that
the unknown value is a checksum over the data. One way is to send simple,
incrementing messages from a client (like A, then B, then C, and so on),
capture the data, and analyze it. If the checksum is a simple addition, the
value should increment by 1 for each incrementing message. The alterna-
tive would be to add a function to calculate the checksum to see whether
the checksum matches between what was captured on the network and our
calculated value.

                                                           Analysis from the Wire   93
                      To test our assumptions, add the code in Listing 5-13 to the script in
                 Listing 5-7 and add a call to it after reading the data to calculate the check-
                 sum. Then just compare the value extracted from the network capture as Unk1
                 and the calculated value to see whether our calculated checksum matches.

                 def calc_chksum(unk2, data):
                     chksum = unk2
                     for i in range(len(data)):
                         chksum += ord(data[i:i+1])
                     return chksum

Listing 5-13: Calculating the checksum of a packet

                     And it does! The numbers calculated match the value of Unk1. So, we’ve
                 discovered the next part of the protocol structure.

                 Discovering a Tag Value
                 Now we need to determine what Unk2 might represent. Because the value of
                 Unk2 is considered part of the packet’s data, it’s presumably related to the
                 meaning of what is being sent. However, as we saw at  in Listing 5-7, the
                 value of Unk2 is being written to the network as a single byte value, which
                 indicates that it’s actually separate from the data. Perhaps the value rep-
                 resents the Tag part of a TLV pattern, just as we suspect that Length is the
                 Value part of that construction.
                     To determine whether Unk2 is in fact the Tag value and a representation
                 of how to interpret the rest of the data, we’ll exercise the ChatClient as much
                 as possible, try all possible commands, and capture the results. We can then
                 perform basic analysis comparing the value of Unk2 when sending the same
                 type of command to see whether the value of Unk2 is always the same.
                     For example, consider the client sessions in Listing 5-4, Listing 5-5,
                 and Listing 5-6. In the session in Listing 5-5, we sent two messages, one
                 after another. We’ve already analyzed this session using our Python script
                 in Listing 5-10. For simplicity, Listing 5-14 shows only the first three cap-
                 ture packets (with the latest version of the script).

                 Unk2: 0, Data: b'\x03bob\x08user-box\x00'
                 Unk2: 3, Data: b'\x03bob\x0cHow are you?'
                 Unk2: 3, Data: b"\x03bob\x16This is nice isn't it?"
                 *SNIP*

Listing 5-14: The first three packets from the session represented by Listing 5-5

                      The first packet  doesn’t correspond to anything we typed into the
                 client session in Listing 5-5. The unknown value is 0. The two messages
                 we then sent in Listing 5-5 are clearly visible as text in the Data part of the
                 packets at  and . The Unk2 values for both of those messages is 3, which
                 is different from the first packet’s value of 0. Based on this observation, we
                 can assume that the value of 3 might represent a packet that is sending a
                 message, and if that’s the case, we’d expect to find a value of 3 used in every

94   Chapter 5
         connection when sending a single value. In fact, if you now analyze a differ-
         ent session containing messages being sent, you’ll find the same value of 3
         used whenever a message is sent.

 N ote   At this stage in my analysis, I’d return to the various client sessions and try to cor-
         relate the action I performed in the client with the messages sent. Also, I’d correlate
         the messages I received from the server with the client’s output. Of course, this is easy
         when there’s likely to be a one-to-one match between the command we use in the client
         and the result on the network. However, more complex protocols and applications
         might not be that obvious, so you’ll have to do a lot of correlation and testing to try
         to discover all the possible values for particular parts of the protocol.

             We can assume that Unk2 represents the Tag part of the TLV structure.
         Through further analysis, we can infer the possible Tag values, as shown in
         Table 5-3.

Table 5-3: Inferred Commands from Analysis of Captured Sessions

          Command number        Direction     Description
          0                     Outbound      Sent when client connects to server.
          1                     Inbound       Sent from server after client sends command '0'
                                              to the server.
          2                     Both          Sent from client when /quit command is used.
                                              Sent by server in response.
          3                     Both          Sent from client with a message for all users. Sent
                                              from server with the message from all users.
          5                     Outbound      Sent from client when /msg command is used.
          6                     Outbound      Sent from client when /list command is used.
          7                     Inbound       Sent from server in response to /list command.

 N ote   We’ve built a table of commands but we still don’t know how the data for each of these
         commands is represented. To further analyze that data, we’ll return to Wireshark and
         develop some code to dissect the protocol and display it in the GUI. It can be difficult
         to deal with simple binary files, and although we could use a tool to parse a capture
         file exported from Wireshark, it’s best to have Wireshark handle a lot of that work.

Developing Wireshark Dissectors in Lua
         It’s easy to analyze a known protocol like HTTP with Wireshark because the
         software can extract all the necessary information. But custom protocols are
         a bit more challenging: to analyze them, we’ll have to manually extract all the
         relevant information from a byte representation of the network traffic.
               Fortunately, you can use the Wireshark plug-in Protocol Dissectors to
         add additional protocol analysis to Wireshark. Doing so used to require

                                                                            Analysis from the Wire   95
                 building a dissector in C to work with your particular version of Wireshark,
                 but modern versions of Wireshark support the Lua scripting language. The
                 scripts you write in Lua will also work with the tshark command line tool.
                     This section describes how to develop a simple Lua script dissector for
                 the SuperFunkyChat protocol that we’ve been analyzing.

        N ote    Details about developing in Lua and the Wireshark APIs are beyond the scope of
                 this book. For more information on how to develop in Lua, visit its official website
                 at https://www.lua.org/docs.html. The Wireshark website, and especially the
                 Wiki, are the best places to visit for various tutorials and example code (https://
                 wiki.wireshark.org/Lua/).

                     Before developing the dissector, make sure your copy of Wireshark
                 supports Lua by checking the About Wireshark dialog at HelpAbout
                 Wireshark. If you see the word Lua in the dialog, as shown in Figure 5-10,
                 you should be good to go.

Figure 5-10: The Wireshark About dialog showing Lua support

        N ote    If you run Wireshark as root on a Unix-like system, Wireshark will typically disable
                 Lua support for security reasons, and you’ll need to configure Wireshark to run as a
                 nonprivileged user to capture and run Lua scripts. See the Wireshark documentation
                 for your operating system to find out how to do so securely.

96   Chapter 5
                       You can develop dissectors for almost any protocol that Wireshark will
                  capture, including TCP and UDP. It’s much easier to develop dissectors for
                  UDP protocols than it is for TCP, because each captured UDP packet typi-
                  cally has everything needed by the dissector. With TCP, you’ll need to deal
                  with such problems as data that spans multiple packets (which is exactly
                  why we needed to account for length block in our work on SuperFunkyChat
                  using the Python script in Listing 5-9). Because UDP is easier to work with,
                  we’ll focus on developing UDP dissectors.
                       Conveniently enough, SuperFunkyChat supports a UDP mode by passing
                  the --udp command line parameter to the client when starting. Send this
                  flag while capturing, and you should see packets similar to those shown in
Figure 5-11. (Notice that Wireshark mistakenly tries to dissect the traffic
                  as an unrelated GVSP protocol, as displayed in the Protocol column .
                  Implementing our own dissector will fix the mistaken protocol choice.)

                                               

Figure 5-11: Wireshark showing captured UDP traffic

                       One way to load Lua files is to put your scripts in the %APPDATA%\
                  Wireshark\plugins directory on Windows and in the ~/.config/wireshark/plugins
                  directory on Linux and macOS. You can also load a Lua script by specifying
                  it on the command line as follows, replacing the path information with the
                  location of your script:

                  wireshark -X lua_script:</path/to/script.lua>

                      If there’s an error in your script’s syntax, you should see a message dialog
                  similar to Figure 5-12. (Granted, this isn’t exactly the most efficient way to
                  develop, but it’s fine as long as you’re just prototyping.)

                                                                              Analysis from the Wire   97
Figure 5-12: The Wireshark Lua error dialog

                   Creating the Dissector
                   To create a protocol dissector for the SuperFunkyChat protocol, first create
                   the basic shell of the dissector and register it in Wireshark’s list of dissectors
                   for UDP port 12345. Copy Listing 5-15 into a file called dissector.lua and load it
                   into Wireshark along with an appropriate packet capture of the UDP traffic.
                   It should run without errors.

dissector.lua		 -- Declare our chat protocol for dissection
                chat_proto = Proto("chat","SuperFunkyChat Protocol")
                 -- Specify protocol fields
                chat_proto.fields.chksum = ProtoField.uint32("chat.chksum", "Checksum",
                                                              base.HEX)
                 chat_proto.fields.command = ProtoField.uint8("chat.command", "Command")
                 chat_proto.fields.data = ProtoField.bytes("chat.data", "Data")

                   -- Dissector function
                   -- buffer: The UDP packet data as a "Testy Virtual Buffer"
                   -- pinfo: Packet information
                   -- tree: Root of the UI tree
                  function chat_proto.dissector(buffer, pinfo, tree)
                       -- Set the name in the protocol column in the UI
                     pinfo.cols.protocol = "CHAT"

                       -- Create sub tree which represents the entire buffer.
                     local subtree = tree:add(chat_proto, buffer(),
                                                "SuperFunkyChat Protocol Data")
                       subtree:add(chat_proto.fields.chksum, buffer(0, 4))
                       subtree:add(chat_proto.fields.command, buffer(4, 1))
                       subtree:add(chat_proto.fields.data, buffer(5))
                   end

                   -- Get UDP dissector table and add for port 12345
                  udp_table = DissectorTable.get("udp.port")
                   udp_table:add(12345, chat_proto)

Listing 5-15: A basic Lua Wireshark dissector

98   Chapter 5
     When the script initially loads, it creates a new instance of the Proto
class , which represents an instance of a Wireshark protocol and assigns
it the name chat_proto. Although you can build the dissected tree manually,
I’ve chosen to define specific fields for the protocol at  so the fields will
be added to the display filter engine, and you’ll be able to set a display filter
of chat.command == 0 so Wireshark will only show packets with command 0.
(This technique is very useful for analysis because you can filter down to
specific packets easily and analyze them separately.)
     At , the script creates a dissector() function on the instance of the
Proto class. This dissector() will be called to dissect a packet. The function
takes three parameters:

•   A buffer containing the packet data that is an instance of something
    Wireshark calls a Testy Virtual Buffer (TVB).
•   A packet information instance that represents the display information
    for the dissection.
•   The root tree object for the UI. You can attach subnodes to this tree to
    generate your display of the packet data.

     At , we set the name of the protocol in the UI column (as shown in
Figure 5-11) to CHAT. Next, we build a tree of the protocol elements  we’re
dissecting. Because UDP doesn’t have an explicit length field, we don’t need
to take that into account; we only need to extract the checksum field. We
add to the subtree using the protocol fields and use the buffer parameter
to create a range, which takes a start index into the buffer and an optional
length. If no length is specified, the rest of the buffer is used.
     Then we register the protocol dissector with Wireshark’s UDP dissector
table. (Notice that the function we defined at  hasn’t actually executed
yet; we’ve simply defined it.) Finally, we get the UDP table and add our
chat_proto object to the table with port 12345 . Now we’re ready to start
the dissection.

The Lua Dissection
Start Wireshark using the script in Listing 5-15 (for example, using the –X
parameter) and then load a packet capture of the UDP traffic. You should
see that the dissector has loaded and dissected the packets, as shown in
Figure 5-13.
    At , the Protocol column has changed to CHAT. This matches the first
line of our dissector function in Listing 5-15 and makes it easier to see that
we’re dealing with the correct protocol. At , the resulting tree shows the
different fields of the protocol with the checksum printed in hex, as we
specified. If you click the Data field in the tree, the corresponding range
of bytes should be highlighted in the raw packet display at the bottom of
the window .

                                                             Analysis from the Wire   99
                                               

                            

                  

Figure 5-13: Dissected SuperFunkyChat protocol traffic

                      Parsing a Message Packet
                      Let’s augment the dissector to parse a particular packet. We’ll use com-
                      mand 3 as our example because we’ve determined that it marks the send-
                      ing or receiving of a message. Because a received message should show the
                      ID of the sender as well as the message text, this packet data should con-
                      tain both components; this makes it a perfect example for our purposes.
                           Listing 5-16 shows a snippet from Listing 5-10 when we dumped the
                      traffic using our Python script.

                      b'\x03bob\x0cHow are you?'
                      b"\x03bob\x16This is nice isn't it?"

Listing 5-16: Example message data

                           Listing 5-16 shows two examples of message packet data in a binary
                      Python string format. The \xXX characters are actually nonprintable bytes,
                      so \x05 is really the byte 0x05 and \x16 is 0x16 (or 22 in decimal). Two print-
                      able strings are in each packet shown in the listing: the first is a username
                      (in this case bob), and the second is the message. Each string is prefixed by
                      a nonprintable character. Very simple analysis (counting characters, in this
                      case) indicates that the nonprintable character is the length of the string
                      that follows the character. For example, with the username string, the non-
                      printable character represents 0x03, and the string bob is three characters
                      in length.

100   Chapter 5
                         Let’s write a function to parse a single string from its binary representa-
                     tion. We’ll update Listing 5-15 to add support for parsing the message com-
                     mand in Listing 5-17.

dissector_with		     -- Declare our chat protocol for dissection
_commands.lua        chat_proto = Proto("chat","SuperFunkyChat Protocol")
                     -- Specify protocol fields
                     chat_proto.fields.chksum = ProtoField.uint32("chat.chksum", "Checksum",
                                                                  base.HEX)
                     chat_proto.fields.command = ProtoField.uint8("chat.command", "Command")
                     chat_proto.fields.data = ProtoField.bytes("chat.data", "Data")

                     -- buffer: A TVB containing packet data
                     -- start: The offset in the TVB to read the string from
                     -- returns The string and the total length used
                   u function read_string(buffer, start)
                         local len = buffer(start, 1):uint()
                         local str = buffer(start + 1, len):string()
                         return str, (1 + len)
                     end

                     -- Dissector function
                     -- buffer: The UDP packet data as a "Testy Virtual Buffer"
                     -- pinfo: Packet information
                     -- tree: Root of the UI tree
                     function chat_proto.dissector(buffer, pinfo, tree)
                         -- Set the name in the protocol column in the UI
                         pinfo.cols.protocol = "CHAT"

                         -- Create sub tree which represents the entire buffer.
                         local subtree = tree:add(chat_proto,
                                                  buffer(),
                                                  "SuperFunkyChat Protocol Data")
                         subtree:add(chat_proto.fields.chksum, buffer(0, 4))
                         subtree:add(chat_proto.fields.command, buffer(4, 1))

                        -- Get a TVB for the data component of the packet.
                      v local data = buffer(5):tvb()
                        local datatree = subtree:add(chat_proto.fields.data, data())

                         local MESSAGE_CMD = 3
                      w local command = buffer(4, 1):uint()
                         if command == MESSAGE_CMD then
                             local curr_ofs = 0
                             local str, len = read_string(data, curr_ofs)
                          x datatree:add(chat_proto, data(curr_ofs, len), "Username: " .. str)
                             curr_ofs = curr_ofs + len
                             str, len = read_string(data, curr_ofs)
                             datatree:add(chat_proto, data(curr_ofs, len), "Message: " .. str)
                         end
                     end

                                                                                  Analysis from the Wire   101
                  -- Get UDP dissector table and add for port 12345
                  udp_table = DissectorTable.get("udp.port")
                  udp_table:add(12345, chat_proto)

Listing 5-17: The updated dissector script used to parse the Message command

                      In Listing 5-17, the added read_string() function  takes a TVB object
                  (buffer) and a starting offset (start), and it returns the length of the buffer
                  and then the string.

        N ote     What if the string is longer than the range of a byte value? Ah, that’s one of the chal-
                  lenges of protocol analysis. Just because something looks simple doesn’t mean it actu-
                  ally is simple. We’ll ignore issues such as the length because this is only meant as an
                  example, and ignoring length works for any examples we’ve captured.

                        With a function to parse the binary strings, we can now add the Message
                  command to the dissection tree. The code begins by adding the original
                  data tree and creates a new TVB object  that only contains the packet’s
                  data. It then extracts the command field as an integer and checks whether
                  it’s our Message command . If it’s not, we leave the existing data tree, but if
                  the field matches, we proceed to parse the two strings and add them to the
                  data subtree . However, instead of defining specific fields, we can add text
                  nodes by specifying only the proto object rather than a field object. If you
                  now reload this file into Wireshark, you should see that the username and
                  message strings are parsed, as shown in Figure 5-14.

              

    

Figure 5-14: A parsed Message command

102   Chapter 5
             Because the parsed data ends up as filterable values, we can select a
         Message command by specifying chat.command == 3 as a display filter, as shown
         at  in Figure 5-14. We can see that the username and message strings have
         been parsed correctly in the tree, as shown at .
             That concludes our quick introduction to writing a Lua dissector
         for Wireshark. Obviously, there is still plenty you can do with this script,
         including adding support for more commands, but you have enough for
         prototyping.

 N ote   Be sure to visit the Wireshark website for more on how to write parsers, including how
         to implement a TCP stream parser.

Using a Proxy to Actively Analyze Traffic
         Using a tool such as Wireshark to passively capture network traffic for later
         analysis of network protocols has a number of advantages over active cap-
         ture (as discussed in Chapter 2). Passive capture doesn’t affect the network
         operation of the applications you’re trying to analyze and requires no modi-
         fications of the applications. On the other hand, passive capture doesn’t
         allow you to interact easily with live traffic, which means you can’t modify
         traffic easily on the fly to see how applications will respond.
              In contrast, active capture allows you to manipulate live traffic but
         requires more setup than passive capture. It may require you to modify
         applications, or at the very least to redirect application traffic through a
         proxy. Your choice of approach will depend on your specific scenario, and
         you can certainly combine passive and active capture.
              In Chapter 2, I included some example scripts to demonstrate captur-
         ing traffic. You can combine these scripts with the Canape Core libraries to
         generate a number of proxies, which you might want to use instead of pas-
         sive capture.
              Now that you have a better understanding of passive capture, I’ll
         spend the rest of this chapter describing techniques for implementing
         a proxy for the SuperFunkyChat protocol and focus on how best to use
         active network capture.

         Setting Up the Proxy
         To set up the proxy, we’ll begin by modifying one of the capture examples
         in Chapter 2, specifically Listing 2-4, so we can use it for active network pro-
         tocol analysis. To simplify the development process and configuration of the
         SuperFunkyChat application, we’ll use a port-forwarding proxy rather than
         something like SOCKS.
             Copy Listing 5-18 into the file chapter5_proxy.csx and run it using
         Canape Core by passing the script’s filename to the CANAPE.Cli
         executable.

                                                                         Analysis from the Wire   103
chapter5		using static System.Console;
_proxy.csx		 using static CANAPE.Cli.ConsoleUtils;

                    var template = new FixedProxyTemplate();
                    // Local port of 4444, destination 127.0.0.1:12345
                   template.LocalPort = 4444;
                    template.Host = "127.0.0.1";
                    template.Port = 12345;

                    var service = template.Create();
                    // Add an event handler to log a packet. Just print to console.
                   service.LogPacketEvent += (s,e) => WritePacket(e.Packet);
                    // Print to console when a connection is created or closed.
                   service.NewConnectionEvent += (s,e) =>
                             WriteLine("New Connection: {0}", e.Description);
                    service.CloseConnectionEvent += (s,e) =>
                             WriteLine("Closed Connection: {0}", e.Description);
                    service.Start();

                    WriteLine("Created {0}", service);
                    WriteLine("Press Enter to exit...");
                    ReadLine();
                    service.Stop();

Listing 5-18: The active analysis proxy

                        At , we tell the proxy to listen locally on port 4444 and make a proxy
                    connection to 127.0.0.1 port 12345. This should be fine for testing the chat
                    application, but if you want to reuse the script for another application pro-
                    tocol, you’ll need to change the port and IP address as appropriate.
                        At , we make one of the major changes to the script in Chapter 2: we
                    add an event handler that is called whenever a packet needs to be logged,
                    which allows us to print the packet as soon it arrives. At , we add some
                    event handlers to print when a new connection is created and then closed.
                        Next, we reconfigure the ChatClient application to communicate with
                    local port 4444 instead of the original port 12345. In the case of ChatClient,
                    we simply add the --port NUM parameter to the command line as shown here:

                    ChatClient.exe --port 4444 user1 127.0.0.1

        N ote       Changing the destination in real-world applications may not be so simple. Review
                    Chapters 2 and 4 for ideas on how to redirect an arbitrary application into your proxy.

                        The client should successfully connect to the server via the proxy, and the
                    proxy’s console should begin displaying packets, as shown in Listing 5-19.

                    CANAPE.Cli (c) 2017 James Forshaw, 2014 Context Information Security.
                    Created Listener (TCP 127.0.0.1:4444), Server (Fixed Proxy Server)
                    Press Enter to exit...

104   Chapter 5
 New Connection: 127.0.0.1:50844 <=> 127.0.0.1:12345
  Tag 'Out' – Network '127.0.0.1:50844 <=> 127.0.0.1:12345'
          : 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0A 0B 0C 0D 0E 0F - 0123456789ABCDEF
  --------:-------------------------------------------------------------------
  00000000: 42 49 4E 58 00 00 00 0E 00 00 04 16 00 05 75 73 - BINX..........us
  00000010: 65 72 31 05 62 6F 72 61 78 00                   - er1.borax.

  Tag 'In' - Network '127.0.0.1:50844 <=> 127.0.0.1:12345'
          : 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0A 0B 0C 0D 0E 0F - 0123456789ABCDEF
  --------:-------------------------------------------------------------------
  00000000: 00 00 00 02 00 00 00 01 01 00                   - ..........

  PM - Tag 'Out' - Network '127.0.0.1:50844 <=> 127.0.0.1:12345'
          : 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0A 0B 0C 0D 0E 0F - 0123456789ABCDEF
  --------:-------------------------------------------------------------------
 00000000: 00 00 00 0D                                    - ....

  Tag 'Out' - Network '127.0.0.1:50844 <=> 127.0.0.1:12345'
          : 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0A 0B 0C 0D 0E 0F - 0123456789ABCDEF
  --------:-------------------------------------------------------------------
  00000000: 00 00 04 11 03 05 75 73 65 72 31 05 68 65 6C 6C - ......user1.hell
  00000010: 6F                                              - o

  --snip--
 Closed Connection: 127.0.0.1:50844 <=> 127.0.0.1:12345

Listing 5-19: Example output from proxy when a client connects

       Output indicating that a new proxy connection has been made is shown
  at . Each packet is displayed with a header containing information about its
  direction (outbound or inbound), using the descriptive tags Out  and In .
       If your terminal supports 24-bit color, as do most Linux, macOS, and
  even Windows 10 terminals, you can enable color support in Canape Core
  using the --color parameter when starting a proxy script. The colors assigned
  to inbound packets are similar to those in Wireshark: pink for outbound and
  blue for inbound. The packet display also shows which proxy connection it
  came from , matching up with the output at . Multiple connections could
  occur at the same time, especially if you’re proxying a complex application.
       Each packet is dumped in hex and ASCII format. As with capture in
  Wireshark, the traffic might be split between packets as in . However,
  unlike with Wireshark, when using a proxy, we don’t need to deal with
  network effects such as retransmitted packets or fragmentation: we simply
  access the raw TCP stream data after the operating system has dealt with
  all the network effects for us.
       At , the proxy prints that the connection is closed.

  Protocol Analysis Using a Proxy
  With our proxy set up, we can begin the basic analysis of the protocol. The
  packets shown in Listing 5-19 are simply the raw data, but we should ideally
  write code to parse the traffic as we did with the Python script we wrote for

                                                                   Analysis from the Wire   105
                  Wireshark. To that end, we’ll write a Data Parser class containing functions
                  to read and write data to and from the network. Copy Listing 5-20 into a
                  new file in the same directory as you copied chapter5_proxy.csx in Listing 5-18
                  and call it parser.csx.

parser.csx		 using CANAPE.Net.Layers;
             using System.IO;

                  class Parser : DataParserNetworkLayer
                  {
                       protected override bool NegotiateProtocol(
                             Stream serverStream, Stream clientStream)
                      {
                         var client = new DataReader(clientStream);
                          var server = new DataWriter(serverStream);

                         // Read magic from client and write it to server.
                        uint magic = client.ReadUInt32();
                         Console.WriteLine("Magic: {0:X}", magic);
                         server.WriteUInt32(magic);

                           // Return true to signal negotiation was successful.
                           return true;
                      }
                  }

Listing 5-20: A basic parser code for proxy

                       The negotiation method  is called before any other communication
                  takes place and is passed to two C# stream objects: one connected to the
                  Chat Server and the other to the Chat Client. We can use this negotiation
                  method to handle the magic value the protocol uses, but we could also
                  use it for more complex tasks, such as enabling encryption if the protocol
                  supports it.
                       The first task for the negotiation method is to read the magic value
                  from the client and pass it to the server. To simply read and write the 4-byte
                  magic value, we first wrap the streams in DataReader and DataWriter classes .
                  We then read the magic value from the client, print it to the console, and
                  write it to the server .
                       Add the line #load "parser.csx" to the very top of chapter5_proxy.csx.
                  Now when the main chapter5_proxy.csx script is parsed, the parser.csx file is
                  automatically included and parsed with the main script. Using this loading
                  feature allows you to write each component of your parser in a separate file
                  to make the task of writing a complex proxy manageable. Then add the line
                  template.AddLayer<Parser>(); just after template.Port = 12345; to add the parsing
                  layer to every new connection. This addition will instantiate a new instance
                  of the Parser class in Listing 5-20 with every connection so you can store any
                  state you need as members of the class. If you start the proxy script and con-
                  nect a client through the proxy, only important protocol data is logged; you’ll
                  no longer see the magic value (other than in the console output).

106   Chapter 5
  Adding Basic Protocol Parsing
  Now we’ll reframe the network protocol to ensure that each packet contains
  only the data for a single packet. We’ll do this by adding functions to read
  the length and checksum fields from the network and leave only the data.
  At the same time, we’ll rewrite the length and checksum when sending the
  data to the original recipient to keep the connection open.
       By implementing this basic parsing and proxying of a client connection,
  all nonessential information, such as lengths and checksums, should be
  removed from the data. As an added bonus, if you modify data inside the
  proxy, the sent packet will have the correct checksum and length to match
  your modifications. Add Listing 5-21 to the Parser class to implement these
  changes and restart the proxy.

 int CalcChecksum(byte[] data) {
      int chksum = 0;
      foreach(byte b in data) {
          chksum += b;
      }
      return chksum;
  }

 DataFrame ReadData(DataReader reader) {
      int length = reader.ReadInt32();
      int chksum = reader.ReadInt32();
      return reader.ReadBytes(length).ToDataFrame();
  }

 void WriteData(DataFrame frame, DataWriter writer) {
      byte[] data = frame.ToArray();
      writer.WriteInt32(data.Length);
      writer.WriteInt32(CalcChecksum(data));
      writer.WriteBytes(data);
  }

 protected override DataFrame ReadInbound(DataReader reader) {
      return ReadData(reader);
  }

  protected override void WriteOutbound(DataFrame frame, DataWriter writer) {
      WriteData(frame, writer);
  }

  protected override DataFrame ReadOutbound(DataReader reader) {
      return ReadData(reader);
  }

  protected override void WriteInbound(DataFrame frame, DataWriter writer) {
      WriteData(frame, writer);
  }

Listing 5-21: Parser code for SuperFunkyChat protocol

                                                            Analysis from the Wire   107
                       Although the code is a bit verbose (blame C# for that), it should be
                  fairly simple to understand. At , we implement the checksum calculator.
                  We could check packets we read to verify their checksums, but we’ll only
                  use this calculator to recalculate the checksum when sending the packet
                  onward.
                       The ReadData() function at  reads a packet from the network connec-
                  tion. It first reads a big endian 32-bit integer, which is the length, then the
                  32-bit checksum, and finally the data as bytes before calling a function to
                  convert that byte array to a DataFrame. (A DataFrame is an object to contain
                  network packets; you can convert a byte array or a string to a frame depend-
                  ing on what you need.)
                       The WriteData() function at  does the reverse of ReadData(). It uses the
                  ToArray() method on the incoming DataFrame to convert the packet to bytes
                  for writing. Once we have the byte array, we can recalculate the checksum
                  and the length, and then write it all back to the DataWriter class. At , we
                  implement the various functions to read and write data from the inbound
                  and outbound streams.
                       Put together all the different scripts for network proxy and parsing and
                  start a client connection through the proxy, and all nonessential informa-
                  tion, such as lengths and checksums, should be removed from the data. As
                  an added bonus, if you modify data inside the proxy, the sent packet will
                  have the correct checksum and length to match your modifications.

                  Changing Protocol Behavior
                  Protocols often include a number of optional components, such as encryp-
                  tion or compression. Unfortunately, it’s not easy to determine how that
                  encryption or compression is implemented without doing a lot of reverse
                  engineering. For basic analysis, it would be nice to be able to simply remove
                  the component. Also, if the encryption or compression is optional, the pro-
                  tocol will almost certainly indicate support for it while negotiating the ini-
                  tial connection. So, if we can modify the traffic, we might be able to change
                  that support setting and disable that additional feature. Although this is a
                  trivial example, it demonstrates the power of using a proxy instead of pas-
                  sive analysis with a tool like Wireshark. We can modify the connection to
                  make analysis easier.
                       For example, consider the chat application. One of its optional features
                  is XOR encryption (although see Chapter 7 on why it’s not really encryp-
                  tion). To enable this feature, you would pass the --xor parameter to the
                  client. Listing 5-22 compares the first couple of packets for the connection
                  without the XOR parameter and then with the XOR parameter.

                  OUTBOUND XOR   :     00 05 75 73 65 72 32 04 4F 4E 59 58 01             - ..user2.ONYX.
                  OUTBOUND NO XOR:     00 05 75 73 65 72 32 04 4F 4E 59 58 00             - ..user2.ONYX.

                  INBOUND XOR   :      01 E7                                              - ..
                  INBOUND NO XOR:      01 00                                              - ..

Listing 5-22: Example packets with and without XOR encryption enabled

108   Chapter 5
     I’ve highlighted in bold two differences in Listing 5-22. Let’s draw
some conclusions from this example. In the outbound packet (which is
command 0 based on the first byte), the final byte is a 1 when XOR is
enabled but 0x00 when it’s not enabled. My guess would be that this flag
indicates that the client supports XOR encryption. For inbound traffic,
the final byte of the first packet (command 1 in this case) is 0xE7 when
XOR is enabled and 0x00 when it’s not. My guess would be that this is a
key for the XOR encryption.
     In fact, if you look at the client console when you’re enabling XOR
encryption, you’ll see the line ReKeying connection to key 0xE7, which indi-
cates it is indeed the key. Although the negotiation is valid traffic, if you
now try to send a message with the client through the proxy, the connection
will no longer work and may even be disconnected. The connection stops
working because the proxy will try to parse fields, such as the length of the
packet, from the connection but will get invalid values. For example, when
reading a length, such as 0x10, the proxy will instead read 0x10 XOR 0xE7,
which is 0xF7. Because there are no 0xF7 bytes on the network connection,
it will hang. The short explanation is that to continue the analysis in this
situation, we need to do something about the XOR.
     While implementing the code to de-XOR the traffic when we read it
and re-XOR it again when we write it wouldn’t be especially difficult, it
might not be so simple to do if this feature were implemented to support
some proprietary compression scheme. Therefore, we’ll simply disable XOR
encryption in our proxy irrespective of the client’s setting. To do so, we read
the first packet in the connection and ensure that the final byte is set to 0.
When we forward that packet onward, the server will not enable XOR and
will return the value of 0 as the key. Because 0 is a NO-OP in XOR encryp-
tion (as in A XOR 0 = A), this technique will effectively disable the XOR.
     Change the ReadOutbound() method in the parser to the code in
Listing 5-23 to disable the XOR encryption.

protected override DataFrame ReadOutbound(DataReader reader) {
  DataFrame frame = ReadData(reader);
  // Convert frame back to bytes.
  byte[] data = frame.ToArray();
  if (data[0] == 0) {
    Console.WriteLine("Disabling XOR Encryption");
    data[data.Length - 1] = 0;
    frame = data.ToDataFrame();
  }
  return frame;
}

Listing 5-23: Disable XOR encryption

    If you now create a connection through the proxy, you’ll find that
regardless of whether the XOR setting is enabled or not, the client will
not be able to enable XOR.

                                                          Analysis from the Wire   109
     Final Words
                  In this chapter, you learned how to perform basic protocol analysis on an
                  unknown protocol using passive and active capture techniques. We started
                  by doing basic protocol analysis using Wireshark to capture example traffic.
                  Then, through manual inspection and a simple Python script, we were able
                  to understand some parts of an example chat protocol.
                       We discovered in the initial analysis that we were able to implement a
                  basic Lua dissector for Wireshark to extract protocol information and dis-
                  play it directly in the Wireshark GUI. Using Lua is ideal for prototyping pro-
                  tocol analysis tools in Wireshark.
                       Finally, we implemented a man-in-the-middle proxy to analyze the pro-
                  tocol. Proxying the traffic allows demonstration of a few new analysis tech-
                  niques, such as modifying protocol traffic to disable protocol features (such
                  as encryption) that might hinder the analysis of the protocol using purely
                  passive techniques.
                       The technique you choose will depend on many factors, such as the dif-
                  ficulty of capturing the network traffic and the complexity of the protocol.
                  You’ll want to apply the most appropriate combination of techniques to
                  fully analyze an unknown protocol.

110   Chapter 5
