                               6
            A pplication R e v erse
                 E ngineering

If you can analyze an entire network protocol just by
looking at the transmitted data, then your analysis is
quite simple. But that’s not always possible with some
protocols, especially those that use custom encryption
or compression schemes. However, if you can get the
executables for the client or server, you can use binary
reverse engineering (RE) to determine how the protocol
operates and search for vulnerabilities as well.
    The two main kinds of reverse engineering are static and dynamic. Static
reverse engineering is the process of disassembling a compiled executable
into native machine code and using that code to understand how the execut-
able works. Dynamic reverse engineering involves executing an application
and then using tools, such as debuggers and function monitors, to inspect
the application’s runtime operation.
                      In this chapter, I’ll walk you through the basics of taking apart execut-
                  ables to identify and understand the code areas responsible for network
                  communication.
                      I’ll focus on the Windows platform first, because you’re more likely to
                  find applications without source code on Windows than you are on Linux
                  or macOS. Then, I’ll cover the differences between platforms in more detail
                  and give you some tips and tricks for working on alternative platforms; how-
                  ever, most of the skills you’ll learn will be applicable on all platforms. As
                  you read, keep in mind that it takes time to become good reverse engineer,
                  and I can’t possibly cover the broad topic of reverse engineering in one
                  chapter.
                      Before we delve into reverse engineering, I’ll discuss how developers
                  create executable files and then provide some details about the omnipres-
                  ent x86 computer architecture. Once you understand the basics of x86
                  architecture and how it represents instructions, you’ll know what to look
                  for when you’re reverse engineering code.
                      Finally, I’ll explain some general operating system principles, includ-
                  ing how the operating system implements networking functionality. Armed
                  with this knowledge, you should be able to track down and analyze network
                  applications.
                      Let’s start with background information on how programs execute on
                  a modern operating system and examine the principles of compilers and
                  interpreters.

     Compilers, Interpreters, and Assemblers
                  Most applications are written in a higher-level programming language,
                  such as C/C++, C#, Java, or one of the many scripting languages. When an
                  application is developed, the raw language is its source code. Unfortunately,
                  computers don’t understand source code, so the high-level language must
                  be converted into machine code (the native instructions the computer’s pro-
                  cessor executes) by interpreting or compiling the source code.
                       The two common ways of developing and executing programs is by
                  interpreting the original source code or by compiling a program to native
                  code. The way a program executes determines how we reverse engineer it,
                  so let’s look at these two distinct methods of execution to get a better idea
                  of how they work.

                  Interpreted Languages
                  Interpreted languages, such as Python and Ruby, are sometimes called
                  scripting languages, because their applications are commonly run from
                  short scripts written as text files. Interpreted languages are dynamic and
                  speed up development time. But interpreters execute programs more
                  slowly than code that has been converted to machine code, which the com-
                  puter understands directly. To convert source code to a more native repre-
                  sentation, the programming language can instead be compiled.

112   Chapter 6
Compiled Languages
Compiled programming languages use a compiler to parse the source code
and generate machine code, typically by generating an intermediate lan-
guage first. For native code generation, usually an assembly language specific
to the CPU on which the application will run (such as 32- or 64-bit assem-
bly) is used. The language is a human-readable and understandable form
of the underlying processor’s instruction set. The assembly language is then
converted to machine code using an assembler. For example, Figure 6-1 shows
how a C compiler works.
                                                            Native
      C source code                                      machine code

                                                 55
 #include <stdio.h>
                                                 89 e5
                                                 83 ec 10
 void main() {
                                  C compiler     c7 04 24 64 50 40 00
     puts("Hello\n");
                                                 e8 8e 1f 00 00
 }
                                                 c9
                                                 c3

                          push    ebp
                          mov     ebp,esp
                          sub     esp,0x10
             Assembly
                          mov     [esp],str               Assembler
            source code
                          call    _puts
                          leave
                          ret

Figure 6-1: The C language compilation process

    To reverse a native binary to the original source code, you need to
reverse the compilation using a process called decompilation. Unfortunately,
decompiling machine code is quite difficult, so reverse engineers typically
reverse just the assembly process using a process called disassembly.

Static vs. Dynamic Linking
With extremely simple programs, the compilation process might be all
that is needed to produce a working executable. But in most applications,
a lot of code is imported into the final executable from external libraries
by linking —a process that uses a linker program after compilation. The
linker takes the application-specific machine code generated by the com-
piler, along with any necessary external libraries used by the application,

                                                         Application Reverse Engineering   113
                  and embeds everything in a final executable by statically linking any exter-
                  nal libraries. This static linking process produces a single, self-contained
                  executable that doesn’t depend on the original libraries.
                       Because certain processes might be handled in very different ways on
                  different operating systems, static linking all code into one big binary might
                  not be a good idea because the OS-specific implementation could change.
                  For example, writing to a file on disk might have widely different operating
                  system calls on Windows than it does on Linux. Therefore, compilers com-
                  monly link an executable to operating system–specific libraries by dynamic
                  linking: instead of embedding the machine code in the final executable, the
                  compiler stores only a reference to the dynamic library and the required
                  function. The operating system must resolve the linked references when the
                  application runs.

     The x86 Architecture
                  Before getting into the methods of reverse engineering, you’ll need some
                  understanding of the basics of the x86 computer architecture. For a com-
                  puter architecture that is over 30 years old, x86 is surprisingly persistent.
                  It’s used in the majority of desktop and laptop computers available today.
                  Although the PC has been the traditional home of the x86 architec-
                  ture, it has found its way into Mac1 computers, game consoles, and even
                  smartphones.
                       The original x86 architecture was released by Intel in 1978 with the
                  8086 CPU. Over the years, Intel and other manufacturers (such as AMD)
                  have improved its performance massively, moving from supporting 16-bit
                  operations to 32-bit and now 64-bit operations. The modern architecture
                  has barely anything in common with the original 8086, other than proces-
                  sor instructions and programming idioms. Because of its lengthy history,
                  the x86 architecture is very complex. We’ll first look at how the x86 exe-
                  cutes machine code, and then examine its CPU registers and the methods
                  used to determine the order of execution.

                  The Instruction Set Architecture
                  When discussing how a CPU executes machine code, it’s common to talk
                  about the instruction set architecture (ISA). The ISA defines how the machine
                  code works and how it interacts with the CPU and the rest of the computer.
                  A working knowledge of the ISA is crucial for effective reverse engineering.
                      The ISA defines the set of machine language instructions available to a
                  program; each individual machine language instruction is represented by a
                  mnemonic instruction. The mnemonics name each instruction and determine
                  how its parameters, or operands, are represented. Table 6-1 lists the mne-
                  monics of some of the most common x86 instructions. (I’ll cover many of
                  these instructions in greater detail in the following sections.)

                  1. Apple moved to the x86 architecture in 2006. Prior to that, Apple used the PowerPC archi-
                  tecture. PCs, on the other hand, have always been based on x86 architecture.

114   Chapter 6
Table 6-1: Common x86 Instruction Mnemonics

Instruction                   Description
MOV destination, source       Moves a value from source to destination
ADD destination, value        Adds an integer value to the destination
SUB destination, value        Subtracts an integer value from a destination
CALL address                  Calls the subroutine at the specified address
JMP address                   Jumps unconditionally to the specified address
RET                           Returns from a previous subroutine
RETN size                     Returns from a previous subroutine and then increments
                              the stack by size
Jcc address                   Jumps to the specified address if the condition indicated
                              by cc is true
PUSH value                    Pushes a value onto the current stack and decrements
                              the stack pointer
POP destination               Pops the top of the stack into the destination and incre-
                              ments the stack pointer
CMP valuea, valueb            Compares valuea and valueb and sets the appropriate
                              flags
TEST valuea, valueb           Performs a bitwise AND on valuea and valueb and sets
                              the appropriate flags
AND destination, value        Performs a bitwise AND on the destination with the
                              value
OR destination, value         Performs a bitwise OR on the destination with the
                              value
XOR destination, value        Performs a bitwise Exclusive OR on the destination
                              with the value
SHL destination, N            Shifts the destination to the left by N bits (with left
                              being higher bits)
SHR destination, N            Shifts the destination to the right by N bits (with right
                              being lower bits)
INC destination               Increments destination by 1
DEC destination               Decrements destination by 1

    These mnemonic instructions take one of three forms depending on
how many operands the instruction takes. Table 6-2 shows the three differ-
ent forms of operands.

Table 6-2: Intel Mnemonic Forms

Number of operands        Form                     Examples
0                         NAME                     POP, RET
1                         NAME input               PUSH 1; CALL func
2                         NAME output, input       MOV EAX, EBX; ADD EDI, 1

                                                           Application Reverse Engineering   115
                       The two common ways to represent x86 instructions in assembly are
                  Intel and AT&T syntax. Intel syntax, originally developed by the Intel
                  Corporation, is the syntax I use throughout this chapter. AT&T syntax is
                  used in many development tools on Unix-like systems. The syntaxes differ
                  in a few ways, such as the order in which operands are given. For example,
                  the instruction to add 1 to the value stored in the EAX register would
                  look like this in Intel syntax: ADD EAX, 1 and like this in AT&T Syntax:
                  addl $1, %eax.

                  CPU Registers
                  The CPU has a number of registers for very fast, temporary storage of the
                  current state of execution. In x86, each register is referred to by a two- or
                  three-character label. Figure 6-2 shows the main registers for a 32-bit x86
                  processor. It’s essential to understand the many types of registers the pro-
                  cessor supports because each serves different purposes and is necessary for
                  understanding how the instructions operate.

                   General purpose registers   Memory index registers

                             EAX                        ESI
                             EBX                        EDI
                             ECX                        ESP
                             EDX                        EBP
                                                        EIP
                       Selector registers

                     CS       DS        ES        Control registers

                     FS       GS        SS            EFLAGS

Figure 6-2: The main 32-bit x86 registers

                     The x86’s registers are split into four main categories: general purpose,
                  memory index, control, and selector.

                  General Purpose Registers
                  The general purpose registers (EAX, EBX, ECX, and EDX in Figure 6-2) are
                  temporary stores for nonspecific values of computation, such as the results
                  of addition or subtraction. The general purpose registers are 32 bits in size,
                  although instructions can access them in 16- and 8-bit versions using a sim-
                  ple naming convention: for example, a 16-bit version of the EAX register is
                  accessed as AX, and the 8-bit versions are AH and AL. Figure 6-3 shows the
                  organization of the EAX register.

116   Chapter 6
                EAX (32 bits)

                        AH (8 bits) AL (8 bits)

                             AX (16 bits)

Figure 6-3: EAX general purpose register with
small register components

Memory Index Registers
The memory index registers (ESI, EDI, ESP, EBP, EIP) are mostly general pur-
pose except for the ESP and EIP registers. The ESP register is used by the
PUSH and POP instructions, as well as during subroutine calls to indicate
the current memory location of the base of a stack.
     Although you can utilize the ESP register for purposes other than index-
ing into the stack, it’s usually unwise to do so because it might cause memory
corruption or unexpected behavior. The reason is that some instructions
implicitly rely on the value of the register. On the other hand, the EIP regis-
ter cannot be directly accessed as a general purpose register because it indi-
cates the next address in memory where an instruction will be read from.
     The only way to change the value of the EIP register is by using a con-
trol instruction, such as CALL, JMP, or RET. For this discussion, the important
control register is EFLAGS. EFLAGS contains a variety of Boolean flags that
indicate the results of instruction execution, such as whether the last opera-
tion resulted in the value 0. These Boolean flags implement conditional
branches on the x86 processor. For example, if you subtract two values and
the result is 0, the Zero flag in the EFLAGS register will be set to 1, and
flags that do not apply will be set to 0.
     The EFLAGS register also contains important system flags, such as
whether interrupts are enabled. Not all instructions affect the value of
EFLAGS. Table 6-3 lists the most important flag values, including the
flag’s bit position, its common name, and a brief description.

Table 6-3: Important EFLAGS Status Flags

 Bit      Name                  Description
 0        Carry flag            Indicates whether a carry bit was generated from the last
                                operation
 2        Parity flag           The parity of the least-significant byte of the last operation
 6        Zero flag             Indicates whether the last operation has zero as its result;
                                used in comparison operations
 7        Sign flag             Indicates the sign of the last operation; effectively, the
                                most-significant bit of the result
 11       Overflow flag         Indicates whether the last operation overflowed

                                                               Application Reverse Engineering   117
                  Selector Registers
                  The selector registers (CS, DS, ES, FS, GS, SS) address memory locations by
                  indicating a specific block of memory into which you can read or write. The
                  real memory address used in reading or writing the value is looked up in an
                  internal CPU table.

        N ote     Selector registers are usually only used in operating system–specific operations. For
                  example, on Windows, the FS register is used to access memory allocated to store the
                  current thread’s control information.

                       Memory is accessed using little endian byte order. Recall from Chapter 3
                  that little endian order means the least-significant byte is stored at the lowest
                  memory address.
                       Another important feature of the x86 architecture is that it doesn’t
                  require its memory operations to be aligned. All reads and writes to main
                  memory on an aligned processor architecture must be aligned to the size
                  of the operation. For example, if you want to read a 32-bit value, you would
                  have to read from a memory address that is a multiple of 4. On aligned
                  architectures, such as SPARC, reading an unaligned address would gener-
                  ate an error. Conversely, the x86 architecture permits you to read from or
                  write to any memory address regardless of alignment.
                       Unlike architectures such as ARM, which use specialized instructions
                  to load and store values between the CPU registers and main memory,
                  many of the x86 instructions can take memory addresses as operands. In
                  fact, the x86 supports a complex memory-addressing format for its instruc-
                  tions: each memory address reference can contain a base register, an index
                  register, a multiplier for the index (between 1 and 8), or a 32-bit offset. For
                  example, the following MOV instruction combines all four of these refer-
                  encing options to determine which memory address contains the value to
                  be copied into the EAX register:

                  MOV EAX, [ESI + EDI * 8 + 0x50]       ; Read 32-bit value from memory address

                        When a complex address reference like this is used in an instruction,
                  it’s common to see it enclosed in square brackets.

                  Program Flow
                  Program flow, or control flow, is how a program determines which instructions
                  to execute. The x86 has three main types of program flow instructions: sub-
                  routine calling, conditional branches, and unconditional branches. Subroutine call-
                  ing redirects the flow of the program to a subroutine—a specified sequence
                  of instructions. This is achieved with the CALL instruction, which changes
                  the EIP register to the location of the subroutine. CALL places the memory
                  address of the next instruction onto the current stack, which tells the pro-
                  gram flow where to return after it has performed its subroutine task. The
                  return is performed using the RET instruction, which changes the EIP regis-
                  ter to the top address in the stack (the one CALL put there).

118   Chapter 6
             Conditional branches allow the code to make decisions based on prior
        operations. For example, the CMP instruction compares the values of two
        operands (perhaps two registers) and calculates the appropriate values
        for the EFLAGS register. Under the hood, the CMP instruction does this by
        subtracting one value from the other, setting the EFLAGS register as appro-
        priate, and then discarding the result. The TEST instruction does the same
        except it performs an AND operation instead of a subtraction.
             After the EFLAGS value has been calculated, a conditional branch
        can be executed; the address it jumps to depends on the state of EFLAGS.
        For example, the JZ instruction will conditionally jump if the Zero flag is
        set (which would happen if, for instance, the CMP instruction compared two
        values that were equal); otherwise, the instruction is a no-operation. Keep
        in mind that the EFLAGS register can also be set by arithmetic and other
        instructions. For example, the SHL instruction shifts the value of a destina-
        tion by a certain number of bits from low to high.
             Unconditional branching program flow is implemented through the
        JMP instruction, which just jumps unconditionally to a destination address.
        There’s not much more to be said about unconditional branching.

Operating System Basics
        Understanding a computer’s architecture is important for both static and
        dynamic reverse engineering. Without this knowledge, it’s difficult to ever
        understand what a sequence of instructions does. But architecture is only
        part of the story: without the operating system handling the computer’s
        hardware and processes, the instructions wouldn’t be very useful. Here I’ll
        explain some of the basics of how an operating system works, which will
        help you understand the processes of reverse engineering.

        Executable File Formats
        Executable file formats define how executable files are stored on disk.
        Operating systems need to specify the executables they support so they can
        load and run programs. Unlike earlier operating systems, such as MS-DOS,
        which had no restrictions on what file formats would execute (when run,
        files containing instructions would load directly into memory), modern
        operating systems have many more requirements that necessitate more
        complex formats.
             Some requirements of a modern executable format include:

        •   Memory allocation for executable instructions and data
        •   Support for dynamic linking of external libraries
        •   Support for cryptographic signatures to validate the source of the
            executable
        •   Maintenance of debug information to link executable code to the origi-
            nal source code for debugging purposes

                                                           Application Reverse Engineering   119
                  •   A reference to the address in the executable file where code begins
                      executing, commonly called the start address (necessary because the
                      program’s start address might not be the first instruction in the execut-
                      able file)

                      Windows uses the Portable Executable (PE) format for all executables
                  and dynamic libraries. Executables typically use the .exe extension, and
                  dynamic libraries use the .dll extension. Windows doesn’t actually need
                  these extensions for a new process to work correctly; they are used just for
                  convenience.
                      Most Unix-like systems, including Linux and Solaris, use the Executable
                  Linking Format (ELF) as their primary executable format. The major excep-
                  tion is macOS, which uses the Mach-O format.

                  Sections
                  Memory sections are probably the most important information stored in an
                  executable. All nontrivial executables will have at least three sections: the
                  code section, which contains the native machine code for the executable;
                  the data section, which contains initialized data that can be read and writ-
                  ten during execution; and a special section to contain uninitialized data.
                  Each section has a name that identifies the data it contains. The code sec-
                  tion is usually called text, the data section is called data, and the uninitial-
                  ized data is called bss.
                      Every section contains four basic pieces of information:

                  •   A text name
                  •   A size and location of the data for the section contained in the execut-
                      able file
                  •   The size and address in memory where the data should be loaded
                  •   Memory protection flags, which indicate whether the section can be
                      written or executed when loaded into memory

                  Processes and Threads
                  An operating system must be able to run multiple instances of an execut-
                  able concurrently without them conflicting. To do so, operating systems
                  define a process, which acts as a container for an instance of a running exe-
                  cutable. A process stores all the private memory the instance needs to oper-
                  ate, isolating it from other instances of the same executable. The process
                  is also a security boundary, because it runs under a particular user of the
                  operating system and security decisions can be made based on this identity.
                       Operating systems also define a thread of execution, which allows the
                  operating system to rapidly switch between multiple processes, making it
                  seem to the user that they’re all running at the same time. This is called
                  multitasking. To switch between processes, the operating system must

120   Chapter 6
  interrupt what the CPU is doing, store the current process’s state, and
  restore an alternate process’s state. When the CPU resumes, it is running
  another process.
       A thread defines the current state of execution. It has its own block of
  memory for a stack and somewhere to store its state when the operating
  system stops the thread. A process will usually have at least one thread,
  and the limit on the number of threads in the process is typically con-
  trolled by the computer’s resources.
       To create a new process from an executable file, the operating system
  first creates an empty process with its own allocated memory space. Then
  the operating system loads the main executable into the process’s memory
  space, allocating memory based on the executable’s section table. Next, a
  new thread is created, which is called the main thread.
       The dynamic linking program is responsible for linking in the main exe-
  cutable’s system libraries before jumping back to the original start address.
  When the operating system launches the main thread, the process creation
  is complete.

  Operating System Networking Interface
  The operating system must manage a computer’s networking hardware so it
  can be shared between all running applications. The hardware knows very
  little about higher-level protocols, such as TCP/IP,2 so the operating system
  must provide implementations of these higher-level protocols.
        The operating system also needs to provide a way for applications to
  interface with the network. The most common network API is the Berkeley
  sockets model, originally developed at the University of California, Berkeley in
  the 1970s for BSD. All Unix-like systems have built-in support for Berkeley
  sockets. On Windows, the Winsock library provides a very similar program-
  ming interface. The Berkeley sockets model is so prevalent that you’ll almost
  certainly encounter it on a wide range of platforms.

  Creating a Simple TCP Client Connection to a Server
  To get a better sense of how the sockets API works, Listing 6-1 shows how to
  create a simple TCP client connection to a remote server.

  int port = 12345;
  const char* ip = "1.2.3.4";
  sockaddr_in addr = {0};

u int s = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

  addr.sin_family = PF_INET;
v addr.sin_port = htons(port);
w inet_pton(AF_INET, ip, &addr.sin_addr);

  2. This isn’t completely accurate: many network cards can perform some processing in
  hardware.

                                                              Application Reverse Engineering   121
                  x if(connect(s, (sockaddr*) &addr, sizeof(addr)) == 0)
                    {
                        char buf[1024];
                      y int len = recv(s, buf, sizeof(buf), 0);

                        z send(s, buf, len, 0);
                    }

                    close(s);

Listing 6-1: A simple TCP network client

                         The first API call u creates a new socket. The AF_INET parameter indi-
                    cates we want to use the IPv4 protocol. (To use IPv6 instead, we would write
                    AF_INET6). The second parameter SOCK_STREAM indicates that we want to use a
                    streaming connection, which for the internet means TCP. To create a UDP
                    socket, we would write SOCK_DGRAM (for datagram socket).
                         Next, we construct a destination address with addr, an instance of the
                    system-defined sockaddr_in structure. We set up the address structure with the
                    protocol type, the TCP port, and the TCP IP address. The call to inet_pton w
                    converts the string representation of the IP address in ip to a 32-bit integer.
                         Note that when setting the port, the htons function is used v to convert
                    the value from host-byte-order (which for x86 is little endian) to network-
                    byte-order (always big endian). This applies to the IP address as well. In this
                    case, the IP address 1.2.3.4 will become the integer 0x01020304 when stored
                    in big endian format.
                         The final step is to issue the call to connect to the destination address x.
                    This is the main point of failure, because at this point the operating system
                    has to make an outbound call to the destination address to see whether any-
                    thing is listening. When the new socket connection is established, the pro-
                    gram can read and write data to the socket as if it were a file via the recv y
                    and send z system calls. (On Unix-like systems, you can also use the general
                    read and write calls, but not on Windows.)

                    Creating a Client Connection to a TCP Server
                    Listing 6-2 shows a snippet of the other side of the network connection, a
                    very simple TCP socket server.

                    sockaddr_in bind_addr = {0};

                    int s = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

                    bind_addr.sin_family = AF_INET;
                    bind_addr.sin_port = htons(12345);
                  u inet_pton("0.0.0.0", &bind_addr.sin_addr);

                  v bind(s, (sockaddr*)&bind_addr, sizeof(bind_addr));
                  w listen(s, 10);

122   Chapter 6
  sockaddr_in client_addr;
  int socksize = sizeof(client_addr);
x int newsock = accept(s, (sockaddr*)&client_addr, &socksize);

  // Do something with the new socket

Listing 6-2: A simple TCP socket server

      The first important step when connecting to a TCP socket server is to
  bind the socket to an address on the local network interface, as shown at
  u and v. This is effectively the opposite of the client case in Listing 6-1
  because inet_pton() u just converts a string IP address to its binary form.
  The socket is bound to all network addresses, as signified by "0.0.0.0",
  although this could instead be a specific address on port 12345.
      Then, the socket is bound to that local address v. By binding to all
  interfaces, we ensure the server socket will be accessible from outside the
  current system, such as over the internet, assuming no firewall is in the way.
      Finally, the listing asks the network interface to listen for new incoming
  connections w and calls accept x, which returns the next new connection.
  As with the client, this new socket can be read and written to using the recv
  and send calls.
      When you encounter native applications that use the operating system
  network interface, you’ll have to track down all these function calls in the
  executable code. Your knowledge of how programs are written at the C pro-
  gramming language level will prove valuable when you’re looking at your
  reversed code in a disassembler.

  Application Binary Interface
  The application binary interface (ABI) is an interface defined by the operating
  system to describe the conventions of how an application calls an API func-
  tion. Most programming languages and operating systems pass parameters
  left to right, meaning that the leftmost parameter in the original source
  code is placed at the lowest stack address. If the parameters are built by
  pushing them to a stack, the last parameter is pushed first.
       Another important consideration is how the return value is provided to
  the function’s caller when the API call is complete. In the x86 architecture,
  as long as the value is less than or equal to 32 bits, it’s passed back in the
  EAX register. If the value is between 32 and 64 bits, it’s passed back in a
  combination of EAX and EDX.
       Both EAX and EDX are considered scratch registers in the ABI, mean-
  ing that their register values are not preserved across function calls: in
  other words, when calling a function, the caller can’t rely on any value
  stored in these registers to still exist when the call returns. This model of
  designating registers as scratch is done for pragmatic reasons: it allows
  functions to spend less time and memory saving registers, which might not
  be modified anyway. In fact, the ABI specifies an exact list of which regis-
  ters must be saved into a location on the stack by the called function.

                                                      Application Reverse Engineering   123
                      Table 6-4 contains a quick description of the typical register assign-
                  ment’s purpose. The table also indicates whether the register must be saved
                  when calling a function in order for the register to be restored to its origi-
                  nal value before the function returns.

Table 6-4: Saved Register List

                   Register    ABI usage                                     Saved?
                   EAX         Used to pass the return value of the          No
                               function
                   EBX         General purpose register                      Yes
                   ECX         Used for local loops and counters, and    No
                               sometimes used to pass object pointers in
                               languages such as C++
                   EDX         Used for extended return values               No
                   EDI         General purpose register                      Yes
                   ESI         General purpose register                      Yes
                   EBP         Pointer to the base of the current valid      Yes
                               stack frame
                   ESP         Pointer to the base of the stack              Yes

                       Figure 6-4 shows an add() function being called in the assembly code
                  for the print_add() function: it places the parameters on the stack (PUSH 10),
                  calls the add() function (CALL add), and then cleans up afterward (ADD ESP, 8).
                  The result of the addition is passed back from add() through the EAX regis-
                  ter, which is then printed to the console.

                  void print_add() {                              int add(int a, int b) {
                       printf("%d\n", add(1, 10));                     return a + b;
                  }                                               }

                  PUSH   EBP                                      MOV     EAX, [ESP+4] ; EAX = a
                  MOV    EBP, ESP                                 ADD     EAX, [ESP+8] ; EAX = a + b
                                                                  RET
                  PUSH   10     ; Push parameters
                  PUSH   1
                  CALL   add
                  ADD    ESP, 8 ; Remove parameters

                  PUSH   EAX
                  PUSH   OFFSET "%d\n"
                  CALL   printf
                  ADD    ESP, 8

                  POP    EBP
                  RET

Figure 6-4: Function calling in assembly code

124   Chapter 6
Static Reverse Engineering
        Now that you have a basic understanding of how programs execute, we’ll
        look at some methods of reverse engineering. Static reverse engineering is the
        process of dissecting an application executable to determine what it does.
        Ideally, we could reverse the compilation process to the original source
        code, but that’s usually too difficult to do. Instead, it’s more common to
        disassemble the executable.
            Rather than attacking a binary with only a hex editor and a machine
        code reference, you can use one of many tools to disassemble binaries.
        One such tool is the Linux-based objdump, which simply prints the disas-
        sembled output to the console or to a file. Then it’s up to you to navigate
        through the disassembly using a text editor. However, objdump isn’t very
        user friendly.
            Fortunately, there are interactive disassemblers that present disas-
        sembled code in a form that you can easily inspect and navigate. By far,
        the most fully featured of these is IDA Pro, which was developed by the
        Hex Rays company. IDA Pro is the go-to tool for static reversing, and it
        supports many common executable formats as well as almost any CPU
        architecture. The full version is pricey, but a free edition is also available.
        Although the free version only disassembles x86 code and can’t be used
        in a commercial environment, it’s perfect for getting you up to speed with
        a disassembler. You can download the free version of IDA Pro from the
        Hex Rays website at https://www.hex-rays.com/. The free version is only for
        Windows, but it should run well under Wine on Linux or macOS. Let’s
        take a quick tour of how to use IDA Pro to dissect a simple network binary.

        A Quick Guide to Using IDA Pro Free Edition
        Once it’s installed, start IDA Pro and then choose the target executable
        by clicking File4 Open. The Load a new file window should appear (see
        Figure 6-5).
            This window displays several options, but most are for advanced users;
        you only need to consider certain important options. The first option
        allows you to choose the executable format you want to inspect u. The
        default in the figure, Portable executable, is usually the correct choice,
        but it’s always best to check. The Processor type v specifies the processor
        architecture as the default, which is x86. This option is especially important
        when you’re disassembling binary data for unusual processor architectures.
        When you’re sure the options you chose are correct, click OK to begin
        disassembly.
            Your choices for the first and second options will depend on the execut-
        able you’re trying to disassemble. In this example, we’re disassembling a
        Windows executable that uses the PE format with an x86 processor. For
        other platforms, such as macOS or Linux, you’ll need to select the appro-
        priate options. IDA will make its best efforts to detect the format necessary
        to disassemble your target, so normally you won’t need to choose. During

                                                            Application Reverse Engineering   125
                  disassembly, it will do its best to find all executable code, annotate the
                  decompiled functions and data, and determine cross-references between
                  areas of the disassembly.

                                                

                                        

Figure 6-5: Options for loading a new file

                       By default, IDA attempts to provide annotations for variable names and
                  function parameters if it knows about them, such as when calling common
                  API functions. For cross-references, IDA will find the locations in the disas-
                  sembly where data and code are referenced: you can look these up when
                  you’re reverse engineering, as you’ll soon see. Disassembly can take a long
                  time. When the process is complete, you should have access to the main
                  IDA interface, as shown in Figure 6-6.
                       There are three important windows to pay attention to in IDA’s main
                  interface. The window at v is the default disassembly view. In this example,
                  it shows the IDA Pro graph view, which is often a very useful way to view an
                  individual function’s flow of execution. To display a native view showing the
                  disassembly in a linear format based on the loading address of instructions,
                  press the spacebar. The window at w shows the status of the disassembly pro-
                  cess as well as any errors that might occur if you try to perform an operation
                  in IDA that it doesn’t understand. The tabs of the open windows are at u.
                       You can open additional windows in IDA by selecting View4 Open sub-
                  views. Here are some windows you’ll almost certainly need and what they
                  display:
                      IDA View Shows the disassembly of the executable
                      Exports Shows any functions exported by the executable
                      Imports Shows any functions dynamically linked into this executable
                      at runtime

126   Chapter 6
                        Functions Shows a list of all functions that IDA Pro has identified
                        Strings Shows a list of printable strings that IDA Pro has identified
                        during analysis

  

   

                                                                                                       

Figure 6-6: The main IDA Pro interface

                        Of the five window types listed, the last four are basically just lists of
                   information. The IDA View is where you’ll spend most of your time when
                   you’re reverse engineering, because it shows you the disassembled code. You
                   can easily navigate around the disassembly
                   in IDA View. For example, double-click
                   anything that looks like a function name
                   or data reference to navigate automatically
                   to the location of the reference. This tech-
                   nique is especially useful when you’re ana-
                   lyzing calls to other functions: for instance,
                   if you see CALL sub_400100, just double-click
                   the sub_400100 portion to be taken directly
                   to the function. You can go to the original         Figure 6-7: The back button for
                                                                       the IDA Pro disassembly window
                   caller by pressing the esc key or the back
                   button, highlighted in Figure 6-7.
                        In fact, you can navigate back and forth in the disassembly window as
                   you would in a web browser. When you find a reference string in the text,

                                                                          Application Reverse Engineering   127
                  move the text cursor to the reference and press X or right-click and choose
                  Jump to xref to operand to bring up a cross-reference dialog that shows
                  a list of all locations in the executable referencing that function or data
                  value. Double-click an entry to navigate directly to the reference in the dis-
                  assembly window.

        N ote     By default, IDA will generate automatic names for referenced values. For example,
                  functions are named sub_XXXX, where XXXX is their memory address; the name
                  loc_XXXX indicates branch locations in the current function or locations that are
                  not contained in a function. These names may not help you understand what
                  the disassembly is doing, but you can rename these references to make them more
                  meaningful. To rename references, move the cursor to the reference text and press N
                  or right-click and select Rename from the menu. The changes to the name should
                  propagate everywhere it is referenced.

                  Analyzing Stack Variables and Arguments
                  Another feature in IDA’s disassembly window is its analysis of stack variables
                  and arguments. When I discussed calling conventions in “Application Binary
                  Interface” on page 123, I indicated that parameters are generally passed on
                  the stack, but that the stack also stores temporary local variables, which are
                  used by functions to store important values that can’t fit into the available
                  registers. IDA Pro will analyze the function and determine how many argu-
                  ments it takes and which local variables it uses. Figure 6-8 shows these vari-
                  ables at the start of a disassembled function as well as a few instructions that
                  use these variables.

                                                   Local variables
                                                   Passed arguments

                                                                 Uses of stack

Figure 6-8: A disassembled function showing local variables and arguments

                      You can rename these local variables and arguments and look up all
                  their cross-references, but cross-references for local variables and argu-
                  ments will stay within the same function.

128   Chapter 6
Identifying Key Functionality
Next, you need to determine where the executable you’re disassembling
handles the network protocol. The most straightforward way to do this is
to inspect all parts of the executable in turn and determine what they do.
But if you’re disassembling a large commercial product, this method is very
inefficient. Instead, you’ll need a way to quickly identify areas of functional-
ity for further analysis. In this section, I’ll discuss four typical approaches
for doing so, including extracting symbolic information, looking up which
libraries are imported into the executable, analyzing strings, and identify-
ing automated code.

Extracting Symbolic Information
Compiling source code into a native executable is a lossy process, espe-
cially when the code includes symbolic information, such as the names of
variables and functions or the form of in-memory structures. Because this
information is rarely needed for a native executable to run correctly, the
compilation process may just discard it. But dropping this information
makes it very difficult to debug problems in the built executable.
     All compilers support the ability to convert symbolic information and
generate debug symbols with information about the original source code line
associated with an instruction in memory as well as type information for
functions and variables. However, developers rarely leave in debug symbols
intentionally, choosing instead to remove them before a public release to
prevent people from discovering their proprietary secrets (or bad code).
Still, sometimes developers slip up, and you can take advantage of those
slipups to aid reverse engineering.
     IDA Pro loads debug symbols automatically whenever possible, but
sometimes you’ll need to hunt down the symbols on your own. Let’s look
at the debug symbols used by Windows, macOS, and Linux, as well as where
the symbolic information is stored and how to get IDA to load it correctly.
     When a Windows executable is built using common compilers (such as
Microsoft Visual C++), the debug symbol information isn’t stored inside the
executable; instead, it’s stored in a section of the executable that provides
the location of a program database (PDB) file. In fact, all the debug informa-
tion is stored in this PDB file. The separation of the debug symbols from
the executable makes it easy to distribute the executable without debug
information while making that information readily available for debugging.
     PDB files are rarely distributed with executables, at least in closed-
source software. But one very important exception is Microsoft Windows.
To aid debugging efforts, Microsoft releases public symbols for most exe-
cutables installed as part of Windows, including the kernel. Although these
PDB files don’t contain all the debug information from the compilation
process (Microsoft strips out information they don’t want to make public,

                                                     Application Reverse Engineering   129
                  such as detailed type information), the files still contain most of the func-
                  tion names, which is often what you want. The upshot is that when reverse
                  engineering Windows executables, IDA Pro should automatically look up
                  the symbol file on Microsoft’s public symbol server and process it. If you
                  happen to have the symbol file (because it came with the executable), load
                  it by placing it next to the executable in a directory and then have IDA Pro
                  disassemble the executable. You can also load PDB files after initial disas-
                  sembly by selecting File4Load File4PDB File.
                       Debug symbols are most significant in reverse engineering in IDA Pro
                  when naming functions in the disassembly and Functions windows. If the
                  symbols also contain type information, you should see annotations on the
                  function calls that indicate the types of parameters, as shown in Figure 6-9.

Figure 6-9: Disassembly with debug symbols

                      Even without a PDB file, you might be able to access some symbolic
                  information from the executable. Dynamic libraries, for example, must
                  export some functions for another executable to use: that export will pro-
                  vide some basic symbolic information, including the names of the external
                  functions. From that information, you should be able to drill down to find
                  what you’re looking for in the Exports window. Figure 6-10 shows what this
                  information would look like for the ws2_32.dll Windows network library.

130   Chapter 6
Figure 6-10: Exports from the ws2_32.dll library

     Debug symbols work similarly on macOS, except debugging informa-
tion is contained in a debugging symbols package (dSYM), which is created
alongside the executable rather than in a single PDB file. The dSYM pack-
age is a separate macOS package directory and is rarely distributed with
commercial applications. However, the Mach-O executable format can store
basic symbolic information, such as function and data variable names, in
the executable. A developer can run a tool called Strip, which will remove
all this symbolic information from a Mach-O binary. If they do not run
Strip, then the Mach-O binary may still contain useful symbolic informa-
tion for reverse engineering.
     On Linux, ELF executable files package all debug and other symbolic
information into a single executable file by placing debugging informa-
tion into its own section in the executable. As with macOS, the only way to
remove this information is with the Strip tool; if the developer fails to do
so before release, you might be in luck. (Of course, you’ll have access to the
source code for most programs running on Linux.)

Viewing Imported Libraries
On a general purpose operating system, calls to network APIs aren’t likely
to be built directly into the executable. Instead, functions will be dynami-
cally linked at runtime. To determine what an executable imports dynami-
cally, view the Imports window in IDA Pro, as shown in Figure 6-11.
     In the figure, various network APIs are imported from the ws2_32.dll
library, which is the BSD sockets implementation for Windows. When you
double-click an entry, you should see the import in a disassembly window.
From there, you can find references to that function by using IDA Pro to
show the cross-references to that address.

                                                    Application Reverse Engineering   131
Figure 6-11: The Imports window

                      In addition to network functions, you might also see that various cryp-
                  tographic libraries have been imported. Following these references can lead
                  you to where encryption is used in the executable. By using this imported
                  information, you may be able to trace back to the original callee to find out
                  how it’s been used. Common encryption libraries include OpenSSL and the
                  Windows Crypt32.dll.

                  Analyzing Strings
                  Most applications contain strings with printable text information, such
                  as text to display during application execution, text for logging purposes,
                  or text left over from the debugging process that isn’t used. The text, espe-
                  cially internal debug information, might hint at what a disassembled func-
                  tion is doing. Depending on how the developer added debug information,
                  you might find the function name, the original C source code file, or even
                  the line number in the source code where the debug string was printed.
                  (Most C and C++ compilers support a syntax to embed these values into a
                  string during compilation.)
                       IDA Pro tries to find printable text strings as part of its analysis process.
                  To display these strings, open the Strings window. Click a string of interest,
                  and you’ll see its definition. Then you can attempt to find references to the
                  string that should allow you to trace back to the functionality associated
                  with it.
                       String analysis is also useful for determining which libraries an execut-
                  able was statically linked with. For example, the ZLib compression library
                  is commonly statically linked, and the linked executable should always con-
                  tain the following string (the version number might differ):

                  inflate 1.2.8 Copyright 1995-2013 Mark Adler

                      By quickly discovering which libraries are included in an executable,
                  you might be able to successfully guess the structure of the protocol.

132   Chapter 6
Identifying Automated Code
Certain types of functionality lend themselves to automated identification.
For example, encryption algorithms typically have several magic constants
(numbers defined by the algorithm that are chosen for particular math-
ematical properties) as part of the algorithm. If you find these magic con-
stants in the executable, you know a particular encryption algorithm is at
least compiled into the executable (though it isn’t necessarily used). For
example, Listing 6-3 shows the initialization of the MD5 hashing algorithm,
which uses magic constant values.

void md5_init( md5_context *ctx )
{
    ctx->state[0] = 0x67452301;
    ctx->state[1] = 0xEFCDAB89;
    ctx->state[2] = 0x98BADCFE;
    ctx->state[3] = 0x10325476;
}

Listing 6-3: MD5 initialization showing magic constants

     Armed with knowledge of the MD5 algorithm, you can search for
this initialization code in IDA Pro by selecting a disassembly window and
choosing Search4Immediate value. Complete the dialog as shown in
Figure 6-12 and click OK.

Figure 6-12: The IDA Pro search box for
MD5 constant

     If MD5 is present, your search should display a list of places where that
unique value is found. Then you can switch to the disassembly window to
try to determine what code uses that value. You can also use this technique
with algorithms, such as the AES encryption algorithm, which uses special
s-box structures that contain similar magic constants.
     However, locating algorithms using IDA Pro’s search box can be time
consuming and error prone. For example, the search in Figure 6-12 will
pick up MD5 as well as SHA-1, which uses the same four magic constants

                                                          Application Reverse Engineering   133
                  (and adds a fifth). Fortunately, there are tools that can do these searches
                  for you. One example, PEiD (available from http://www.softpedia.com/get/
                  Programming/Packers-Crypters-Protectors/PEiD-updated.shtml), determines
                  whether a Windows PE file is packed with a known packing tool, such as
                  UPX. It includes a few plug-ins, one of which will detect potential encryp-
                  tion algorithms and indicate where in the executable they are referenced.
                       To use PEiD to detect cryptographic algorithms, start PEiD and
                  click the top-right button … to choose a PE executable to analyze. Then
                  run the plug-in by clicking the button on the bottom right and selecting
                  Plugins4Krypto Analyzer. If the executable contains any cryptographic
                  algorithms, the plug-in should identify them and display a dialog like the
                  one in Figure 6-13. You can then enter the referenced address value u into
                  IDA Pro to analyze the results.

                                              

Figure 6-13: The result of PEiD cryptographic
                  algorithm analysis

     Dynamic Reverse Engineering
                  Dynamic reverse engineering is about inspecting the operation of a running
                  executable. This method of reversing is especially useful when analyzing
                  complex functionality, such as custom cryptography or compression rou-
                  tines. The reason is that instead of staring at the disassembly of complex
                  functionality, you can step through it one instruction at a time. Dynamic
                  reverse engineering also lets you test your understanding of the code by
                  allowing you to inject test inputs.
                       The most common way to perform dynamic reverse engineering is to
                  use a debugger to halt a running application at specific points and inspect
                  data values. Although several debugging programs are available to choose
                  from, we’ll use IDA Pro, which contains a basic debugger for Windows
                  applications and synchronizes between the static and debugger view. For
                  example, if you rename a function in the debugger, that change will be
                  reflected in the static disassembly.

134   Chapter 6
N ote   Although I use IDA Pro on Windows in the following discussion, the basic techniques
        are applicable to other operating systems and debuggers.

            To run the currently disassembled executable in IDA Pro’s debugger,
        press F9. If the executable needs command line arguments, add them by
        selecting Debugger4Process Options and filling in the Parameters text
        box in the displayed dialog. To stop debugging a running process, press
        ctrl -F2.

        Setting Breakpoints
        The simplest way to use a debugger’s features is to set breakpoints at places of
        interest in the disassembly, and then inspect the state of the running pro-
        gram at these breakpoints. To set a breakpoint, find an area of interest and
        press F2. The line of disassembly should turn red, indicating that the break-
        point has been set correctly. Now, whenever the program tries to execute
        the instruction at that breakpoint, the debugger should stop and give you
        access to the current state of the program.

        Debugger Windows
        By default, the IDA Pro debugger shows three important windows when the
        debugger hits a breakpoint.

        The EIP Window
        The first window displays a disassembly view based on the instruction in
        the EIP register that shows the instruction currently being executed (see
        Figure 6-14). This window works much like the disassembly window does
        while doing static reverse engineering. You can quickly navigate from this
        window to other functions and rename references (which are reflected in
        your static disassembly). When you hover the mouse over a register, you
        should see a quick preview of the value, which is very useful if the register
        points to a memory address.

Figure 6-14: The debugger EIP window

                                                               Application Reverse Engineering   135
                  The ESP Window
                  The debugger also shows an ESP window that reflects the current location of
                  the ESP register, which points to the base of the current thread’s stack. Here
                  is where you can identify the parameters being passed to function calls or
                  the value of local variables. For example, Figure 6-15 shows the stack values
                  just before calling the send function. I’ve highlighted the four parameters.
                  As with the EIP window, you can double-click references to navigate to that
                  location.

Figure 6-15: The debugger ESP window

                  The State of the General Purpose Registers
                  The General registers default window shows the current state of the general
                  purpose registers. Recall that registers are used to store the current values
                  of various program states, such as loop counters and memory addresses.
                  For memory addresses, this window provides a convenient way to navigate
                  to a memory view window: click the arrow next to each address to navigate
                  from the last active memory window to the memory address corresponding
                  to that register value.
                       To create a new memory window, right-click the array and select Jump
                  in new window. You’ll see the condition flags from the EFLAGS register on
                  the right side of the window, as shown in Figure 6-16.

Figure 6-16: The General registers window

136   Chapter 6
       Where to Set Breakpoints?
       Where are the best places to set breakpoints when you’re investigating a
       network protocol? A good first step is to set breakpoints on calls to the
       send and recv functions, which send and receive data from the network
       stack. Cryptographic functions are also a good target: you can set break-
       points on functions that set the encryption key or the encryption and
       decryption functions. Because the debugger synchronizes with the static
       disassembler in IDA Pro, you can also set breakpoints on code areas that
       appear to be building network protocol data. By stepping through instruc-
       tions with breakpoints, you can better understand how the underlying
       algorithms work.

Reverse Engineering Managed Languages
       Not all applications are distributed as native executables. For example,
       applications written in managed languages like .NET and Java compile to an
       intermediate machine language, which is commonly designed to be CPU
       and operating system agnostic. When the application is executed, a virtual
       machine or runtime executes the code. In .NET this intermediate machine
       language is called common intermediate language (CIL); in Java it’s called Java
       byte code.
            These intermediate languages contain substantial amounts of meta-
       data, such as the names of classes and all internal- and external-facing
       method names. Also, unlike for native-compiled code, the output of
       managed languages is fairly predictable, which makes them ideal for
       decompiling.
            In the following sections, I’ll examine how .NET and Java applications
       are packaged. I’ll also demonstrate a few tools you can use to reverse engi-
       neer .NET and Java applications efficiently.

       .NET Applications
       The .NET runtime environment is called the common language runtime
       (CLR). A .NET application relies on the CLR as well as a large library of
       basic functionality called the base class library (BCL).
            Although .NET is primarily a Microsoft Windows platform (it is devel-
       oped by Microsoft after all), a number of other, more portable versions are
       available. The best known is the Mono Project, which runs on Unix-like
       systems and covers a wide range of CPU architectures, including SPARC
       and MIPS.
            If you look at the files distributed with a .NET application, you’ll see
       files with .exe and .ddl extensions, and you’d be forgiven for assuming
       they’re just native executables. But if you load these files into an x86 dis-
       assembler, you’ll be greeted with a message similar to the one shown in
       Figure 6-17.

                                                            Application Reverse Engineering   137
Figure 6-17: A .NET executable in an
                  x86 disassembler

                      As it turns out, .NET only uses the .exe and .dll file formats as conve-
                  nient containers for the CIL code. In the .NET runtime, these containers
                  are referred to as assemblies.
                      Assemblies contain one or more classes, enumerations, and/or
                  structures. Each type is referred to by a name, typically consisting of a
                  namespace and a short name. The namespace reduces the likelihood of
                  conflicting names but can also be useful for categorization. For example,
                  any types under the namespace System.Net deal with network functionality.

                  Using ILSpy
                  You’ll rarely, if ever, need to interact with raw CIL because tools like
                  Reflector (https://www.red-gate.com/products/dotnet-development/reflector/)
                  and ILSpy (http://ilspy.net/) can decompile CIL data into C# or Visual
                  Basic source and display the original CIL. Let’s look at how to use ILSpy,
                  a free open source tool that you can use to find an application’s network
                  functionality. Figure 6-18 shows ILSpy’s main interface.
                       The interface is split into two windows. The left window u is a tree-
                  based listing of all assemblies that ILSpy has loaded. You can expand the
                  tree view to see the namespaces and the types an assembly contains v. The
                  right window shows disassembled source code w. The assembly you select in
                  the left window is expanded on the right.
                       To work with a .NET application, load it into ILSpy by pressing ctrl+O
                  and selecting the application in the dialog. If you open the application’s
                  main executable file, ILSpy should automatically load any assembly refer-
                  enced in the executable as necessary.
                       With the application open, you can search for the network function-
                  ality. One way to do so is to search for types and members whose names
                  sound like network functions. To search all loaded assemblies, press F3. A
                  new window should appear on the right side of your screen, as shown in
                  Figure 6-19.

138   Chapter 6
                                                                         

                 

Figure 6-18: The ILSpy main interface

                                                                           

                                         

Figure 6-19: The ILSpy Search window

                                            Application Reverse Engineering   139
                        Enter a search term at u to filter out all loaded types and display them
                   in the window below. You can also search for members or constants by
                   selecting them from the drop-down list at v. For example, to search for
                   literal strings, select Constant. When you’ve found an entry you want to
                   inspect, such as TcpNetworkListener w, double-click it and ILSpy should
                   automatically decompile the type or method.
                        Rather than directly searching for specific types and members, you can
                   also search an application for areas that use built-in network or cryptogra-
                   phy libraries. The base class library contains a large set of low-level socket
                   APIs and libraries for higher-level protocols, such as HTTP and FTP. If you
                   right-click a type or member in the left window and select Analyze, a new
                   window should appear, as shown at the right side of Figure 6-20.

                                                    

                                                                     

                                                                                

Figure 6-20: ILSpy analyzing a type

                        This new window is a tree, which when expanded, shows the types of
                   analyses that can be performed on the item you selected in the left window.
                   Your options will depend on what you selected to analyze. For example, ana-
                   lyzing a type u shows three options, although you’ll typically only need to
                   use the following two forms of analysis:
                       Instantiated By Shows which methods create new instances of this type
                       Exposed By Shows which methods or properties use this type in their
                       declaration or parameters

140   Chapter 6
            If you analyze a member, a method, or a property, you’ll get two
        options v:
            Uses Shows what other members or types the selected member uses
            Used By Shows what other members use the selected member (say, by
            calling the method)
             You can expand all entries w.
             And that’s pretty much all there is to statically analyzing a .NET appli-
        cation. Find some code of interest, inspect the decompiled code, and then
        start analyzing the network protocol.

N ote   Most of .NET’s core functionality is in the base class library distributed with the
        .NET runtime environment and available to all .NET applications. The assemblies
        in the BCL provide several basic network and cryptographic libraries, which applica-
        tions are likely to need if they implement a network protocol. Look for areas that refer-
        ence types in the System.Net and System.Security.Cryptography namespaces. These
        are mostly implemented in the MSCORLIB and System assemblies. If you can trace
        back from calls to these important APIs, you’ll discover where the application handles
        the network protocol.

        Java Applications
        Java applications differ from .NET applications in that the Java compiler
        doesn’t merge all types into a single file; instead, it compiles each source
        code file into a single Class file with a .class extension. Because separate Class
        files in filesystem directories aren’t very convenient to transfer between sys-
        tems, Java applications are often packaged into a Java archive, or JAR. A JAR
        file is just a ZIP file with a few additional files to support the Java runtime.
        Figure 6-21 shows a JAR file opened in a ZIP decompression program.

Figure 6-21: An example JAR file opened with a ZIP application

                                                                   Application Reverse Engineering   141
                       To decompile Java programs, I recommend using JD-GUI (http://jd.benow​
                  .ca/), which works in essentially the same as ILSpy when decompiling .NET
                  applications. I won’t cover using JD-GUI in depth but will just highlight a few
                  important areas of the user interface in Figure 6-22 to get you up to speed.

         
                                                       

                            

    
                                                  

Figure 6-22: JD-GUI with an open JAR File

                        Figure 6-22 shows the JD-GUI user interface when you open the JAR
                  file jce.jar , which is installed by default when you install Java and can usu-
                  ally be found in JAVAHOME/lib. You can open individual class files or mul-
                  tiple JAR files at one time depending on the structure of the application
                  you’re reverse engineering. When you open a JAR file, JD-GUI will parse the
                  metadata as well as the list of classes, which it will present in a tree structure.
                  In Figure 6-22 we can see two important piece of information JD-GUI has
                  extracted. First, a package named javax.crypto , which defines the classes
                  for various Java cryptographic operations. Underneath the package name is
                  list of classes defined in that package, such as CryptoAllPermissionCollection​
                  .class . If you click the class name in the left window, a decompiled version
                  of the class will be shown on the right . You can scroll through the decom-
                  piled code, or click on the fields and methods exposed by the class  to
                  jump to them in the decompiled code window.
                        The second important thing to note is that any identifier underlined in
                  the decompiled code can be clicked, and the tool will navigate to the defini-
                  tion. If you clicked the underlined all_allowed identifier , the user inter-
                  face would navigate to the definition of the all_allowed field in the current
                  decompiled class.

142   Chapter 6
Dealing with Obfuscation
All the metadata included with a typical .NET or Java application makes
it easier for a reverse engineer to work out what an application is doing.
However, commercial developers, who employ special “secret sauce” net-
work protocols, tend to not like the fact that these applications are much
easier to reverse engineer. The ease with which these languages are decom-
piled also makes it relatively straightforward to discover horrible security
holes in custom network protocols. Some developers might not like you
knowing this, so they use obscurity as a security solution.
     You’ll likely encounter applications that are intentionally obfuscated
using tools such as ProGuard for Java or Dotfuscator for .NET. These tools
apply various modifications to the compiled application that are designed
to frustrate a reverse engineer. The modification might be as simple as
changing all the type and method names to meaningless values, or it might
be more elaborate, such as employing runtime decryption of strings and
code. Whatever the method, obfuscation will make decompiling the code
more difficult. For example, Figure 6-23 shows an original Java class next
to its obfuscated version, which was obtained after running it through
ProGuard.

               Original                                      Obfuscated

Figure 6-23: Original and obfuscated class file comparison

    If you encounter an obfuscated application, it can be difficult to deter-
mine what it’s doing using normal decompilers. After all, that’s the point of
the obfuscation. However, here are a few tips to use when tackling them:

•   Keep in mind that external library types and methods (such as core
    class libraries) cannot be obfuscated. Calls to the socket APIs must
    exist in the application if it does any networking, so search for them.

                                                             Application Reverse Engineering   143
                  •   Because .NET and Java are easy to load and execute dynamically, you
                      can write a simple test harness to load the obfuscated application and
                      run the string or code decryption routines.
                  •   Use dynamic reverse engineering as much as possible to inspect types
                      at runtime to determine what they’re used for.

     Reverse Engineering Resources
                  The following URLs provide access to excellent information resources
                  for reverse engineering software. These resources provide more details
                  on reverse engineering or other related topics, such as executable file
                  formats.

                  •   OpenRCE Forums: http://www.openrce.org/
                  •   ELF File Format: http://refspecs.linuxbase.org/elf/elf.pdf
                  •   macOS Mach-O Format: https://web.archive.org/web/20090901205800/
                      http://developer.apple.com/mac/library/documentation/DeveloperTools/
                      Conceptual/MachORuntime/Reference/reference.html
                  •   PE File Format: https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/
                      ms680547(v=vs.85).aspx

                     For more information on the tools used in this chapter, including
                  where to download them, turn to Appendix A.

     Final Words
                  Reverse engineering takes time and patience, so don’t expect to learn it
                  overnight. It takes time to understand how the operating system and the
                  architecture work together, to untangle the mess that optimized C can pro-
                  duce in the disassembler, and to statically analyze your decompiled code. I
                  hope I’ve given you some useful tips on reverse engineering an executable
                  to find its network protocol code.
                       The best approach when reverse engineering is to start on small exe-
                  cutables that you already understand. You can compare the source of these
                  small executables to the disassembled machine code to better understand
                  how the compiler translated the original programming language.
                       Of course, don’t forget about dynamic reverse engineering and using
                  a debugger whenever possible. Sometimes just running the code will be a
                  more efficient method than static analysis. Not only will stepping through
                  a program help you to better understand how the computer architecture
                  works, but it will also allow you to analyze a small section of code fully. If
                  you’re lucky, you might get to analyze a managed language executable writ-
                  ten in .NET or Java using one of the many tools available. Of course, if the
                  developer has obfuscated the executable, analysis becomes more difficult,
                  but that’s part of the fun of reverse engineering.

144   Chapter 6
