                                7
    N etwork P rotocol S ec u rit y

Network protocols transfer information between par-
ticipants in a network, and there’s a good chance that
information is sensitive. Whether the information
includes credit card details or top secret information
from government systems, it’s important to provide
security. Engineers consider many requirements for security when they
initially design a protocol, but vulnerabilities often surface over time, espe-
cially when a protocol is used on public networks where anyone monitoring
traffic can attack it.
     All secure protocols should do the following:

•   Maintain data confidentiality by protecting data from being read
•   Maintain data integrity by protecting data from being modified
                  •   Prevent an attacker from impersonating the server by implementing
                      server authentication
                  •   Prevent an attacker from impersonating the client by implementing cli-
                      ent authentication

                       In this chapter, I’ll discuss ways in which these four requirements are
                  met in common network protocols, address potential weaknesses to look
                  out for when analyzing a protocol, and describe how these requirements
                  are implemented in a real-world secure protocol. I’ll cover how to identify
                  which protocol encryption is in use or what flaws to look for in subsequent
                  chapters.
                       The field of cryptography includes two important techniques many net-
                  work protocols use, both of which protect data or a protocol in some way:
                  encryption provides data confidentiality, and signing provides data integrity
                  and authentication.
                       Secure network protocols heavily use encryption and signing, but
                  cryptography can be difficult to implement correctly: it’s common to find
                  implementation and design mistakes that lead to vulnerabilities that can
                  break a protocol’s security. When analyzing a protocol, you should have a
                  solid understanding of the technologies and algorithms involved so you can
                  spot and even exploit serious weaknesses. Let’s look at encryption first to
                  see how mistakes in the implementation can compromise the security of an
                  application.

     Encryption Algorithms
                  The history of encryption goes back thousands of years, and as electronic
                  communications have become easier to monitor, encryption has become
                  considerably more important. Modern encryption algorithms often rely on
                  very complex mathematical models. However, just because a protocol uses
                  complex algorithms doesn’t mean it’s secure.
                       We usually refer to an encryption algorithm as a cipher or code depend-
                  ing on how it’s structured. When discussing the encrypting operation, the
                  original, unencrypted message is referred to as plaintext. The output of the
                  encryption algorithm is an encrypted message called cipher text. The major-
                  ity of algorithms also need a key for encryption and decryption. The effort
                  to break or weaken an encryption algorithm is called cryptanalysis.
                       Many algorithms that were once thought to be secure have shown
                  numerous weaknesses and even backdoors. In part, this is due to the mas-
                  sive increase in computing performance since the invention of such algo-
                  rithms (some of which date back to the 1970s), making feasible attacks that
                  we once thought possible only in theory.
                       If you want to break secure network protocols, you need to understand
                  some of the well-known cryptographic algorithms and where their weak-
                  nesses lie. Encryption doesn’t have to involve complex mathematics. Some
                  algorithms are only used to obfuscate the structure of the protocol on the

146   Chapter 7
network, such as strings or numbers. Of course, if an algorithm is simple, its
security is generally low. Once the mechanism of obfuscation is discovered,
it provides no real security.
     Here I’ll provide an overview some common encryption algorithms, but
I won’t cover the construction of these ciphers in depth because in protocol
analysis, we only need to understand the algorithm in use.

Substitution Ciphers
A substitution cipher is the simplest form of encryption. Substitution ciphers
use an algorithm to encrypt a value based on a substitution table that con-
tains one-to-one mapping between the plaintext and the corresponding
cipher text value, as shown in Figure 7-1. To decrypt the cipher text, the
process is reversed: the cipher value is looked up in a table (that has been
reversed), and the original plaintext value is reproduced. Figure 7-1 shows
an example substitution cipher.

  Plaintext       H       E        L         L   O

                                                     A = Q, B = I, H = X
                           Substitution table
                                                     E = Z, L = P, O = B

Cipher text       X       Z        P         P   B

Figure 7-1: Substitution cipher encryption

     In Figure 7-1, the substitution table (meant as just a simple example)
has six defined substitutions shown to the right. In a full substitution
cipher, many more substitutions would typically be defined. During encryp-
tion, the first letter is chosen from the plaintext, and the plaintext letter’s
substitution is then looked up in the substitution table. Here, H in HELLO
is replaced with the letter X. This process continues until all the letters are
encrypted.
     Although substitution can provide adequate protection against casual
attacks, it fails to withstand cryptanalysis. Frequency analysis is commonly
used to crack substitution ciphers by correlating the frequency of symbols
found in the cipher text with those typically found in plaintext data sets.
For example, if the cipher protects a message written in English, frequency
analysis might determine the frequency of certain common letters, punc-
tuation, and numerals in a large body of written works. Because the letter
E is the most common in the English language, in all probability the most
frequent character in the enciphered message will represent E. By following
this process to its logical conclusion, it’s possible to build the original substi-
tution table and decipher the message.

                                                             Network Protocol Security   147
                  XOR Encryption
                  The XOR encryption algorithm is a very simple technique for encrypt-
                  ing and decrypting data. It works by applying the bitwise XOR operation
                  between a byte of plaintext and a byte of the key, which results in the cipher
                  text. For example, given the byte 0x48 and the key byte 0x82, the result of
                  XORing them would be 0xCA.
                       Because the XOR operation is symmetric, applying that same key byte
                  to the cipher text returns the original plaintext. Figure 7-2 shows the XOR
                  encryption operation with a single-byte key.

                                  'H'     'e'     'l'     'l'     'o'
                    Plaintext
                                 0x48    0x65    0x6C    0x6C    0x6F

                                                        XOR operation

                                  Fixed key      0x82

                  Cipher text    0xCA    0xE7    0xEE    0xEE    0xED

Figure 7-2: An XOR cipher operation with a single-byte key

                       Specifying a single-byte key makes the encryption algorithm very simple
                  and not very secure. It wouldn’t be difficult for an attacker to try all 256 pos-
                  sible values for the key to decrypt the cipher text into plaintext, and increas-
                  ing the size of the key wouldn’t help. As the XOR operation is symmetric, the
                  cipher text can be XORed with the known plaintext to determine the key.
                  Given enough known plaintext, the key could be calculated and applied to
                  the rest of the cipher text to decrypt the entire message.
                       The only way to securely use XOR encryption is if the key is the same
                  size as the message and the values in the key are chosen completely at ran-
                  dom. This approach is called one-time pad encryption and is quite difficult to
                  break. If an attacker knows even a small part of the plaintext, they won’t be
                  able to determine the complete key. The only way to recover the key would
                  be to know the entire plaintext of the message; in that case, obviously, the
                  attacker wouldn’t need to recover the key.
                       Unfortunately, the one-time pad encryption algorithm has significant
                  problems and is rarely used in practice. One problem is that when using a
                  one-time pad, the size of the key material you send must be the same size
                  as any message to the sender and recipient. The only way a one time pad
                  can be secure is if every byte in the message is encrypted with a completely
                  random value. Also, you can never reuse a one-time pad key for different

148   Chapter 7
       messages, because if an attacker can decrypt your message one time, then
       they can recover the key, and then subsequent messages encrypted with the
       same key are compromised.
            If XOR encryption is so inferior, why even mention it? Well, even
       though it isn’t “secure,” developers still use it out of laziness because it’s
       easy to implement. XOR encryption is also used as a primitive to build
       more secure encryption algorithms, so it’s important to understand how
       it works.

Random Number Generators
       Cryptographic systems heavily rely on good quality random numbers. In
       this chapter, you’ll see them used as per-session keys, initialization vectors,
       and the large primes p and q for the RSA algorithm. However, getting truly
       random data is difficult because computers are by nature deterministic: any
       given program should produce the same output when given the same input
       and state.
            One way to generate relatively unpredictable data is by sampling physi-
       cal processes. For example, you could time a user’s key presses on the key-
       board or sample a source of electrical noise, such as the thermal noise in a
       resistor. The trouble with these sorts of sources is they don’t provide much
       data—perhaps only a few hundred bytes every second at best, which isn’t
       enough for a general purpose cryptographic system. A simple 4096-bit RSA
       key requires at least two random 256-byte numbers, which would take sev-
       eral seconds to generate.
            To make this sampled data go further, cryptographic libraries imple-
       ment pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs), which use an initial seed
       value and generate a sequence of numbers that, in theory, shouldn’t be pre-
       dictable without knowledge of the internal state of the generator. The qual-
       ity of PRNGs varies wildly between libraries: the C library function rand(),
       for instance, is completely useless for cryptographically secure protocols. A
       common mistake is to use a weak algorithm to generate random numbers
       for cryptographic uses.

Symmetric Key Cryptography
       The only secure way to encrypt a message is to send a completely random
       key that’s the same size as the message before the encryption can take place
       as a one-time pad. Of course, we don’t want to deal with such large keys.
       Fortunately, we can instead construct a symmetric key algorithm that uses
       mathematical constructs to make a secure cipher. Because the key size is
       considerably shorter than the message you want to send and doesn’t depend
       on how much needs to be encrypted, it’s easier to distribute.
            If the algorithm used has no obvious weakness, the limiting factor for
       security is the key size. If the key is short, an attacker could brute-force the
       key until they find the correct one.

                                                                Network Protocol Security   149
                         There are two main types of symmetric ciphers: block and stream
                     ciphers. Each has its advantages and disadvantages, and choosing the
                     wrong cipher to use in a protocol can seriously impact the security of net-
                     work communications.

                     Block Ciphers
                     Many well-known symmetric key algorithms, such as the Advanced Encryption
                     Standard (AES) and the Data Encryption Standard (DES), encrypt and decrypt
                     a fixed number of bits (known as a block) every time the encryption algo-
                     rithm is applied. To encrypt or decrypt a message, the algorithm requires
                     a key. If the message is longer than the size of a block, it must be split into
                     smaller blocks and the algorithm applied to each in turn. Each application
                     of the algorithm uses the same key, as shown in Figure 7-3. Notice that the
                     same key is used for encryption and decryption.

                                                 0x48 0x65 0x6C 0x6C       0x6F   0x21 0x21 0x21

                                                Plaintext block
Key

 0xAF 0x4D        0xBF   0xDD 0xE5 0xC0 0x47 0xA6                      Encrypt

                                                 0xF3      0x19 0xAD 0x18 0x2D 0x31 0x22 0x51

                                                Cipher text block

                                                 0xF3      0x19 0xAD 0x18 0x2D 0x31 0x22 0x51

                                                Cipher text block

                                                                      Decrypt

                                                 0x48 0x65 0x6C 0x6C       0x6F   0x21 0x21 0x21

                                                Plaintext block

Figure 7-3: Block cipher encryption

                         When a symmetric key algorithm is used for encryption, the plaintext
                     block is combined with the key as described by the algorithm, resulting in
                     the generation of the cipher text. If we then apply the decryption algorithm
                     combined with the key to the cipher text, we recover the original plaintext.

150   Chapter 7
                    DES
                    Probably the oldest block cipher still used in modern applications is the
                    DES, which was originally developed by IBM (under the name Lucifer)
                    and was published as a Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) in 1979.
                    The algorithm uses a Feistel network to implement the encryption process.
                    A Feistel network, which is common in many block ciphers, operates by
                    repeatedly applying a function to the input for a number of rounds. The
                    function takes as input the value from the previous round (the original
                    plaintext) as well as a specific subkey that is derived from the original key
                    using a key-scheduling algorithm.
                         The DES algorithm uses a 64-bit block size and a 64-bit key. However,
                    DES requires that 8 bits of the key be used for error checking, so the effec-
                    tive key is only 56 bits. The result is a very small key that is unsuitable for
                    modern applications, as was proven in 1998 by the Electronic Frontier
                    Foundation’s DES cracker—a hardware-key brute-force attacker that was
                    able to discover an unknown DES key in about 56 hours. At the time, the
                    custom hardware cost about $250,000; today’s cloud-based cracking tools
                    can crack a key in less than a day far more cheaply.

                    Triple DES
                    Rather than throwing away DES completely, cryptographers developed a
                    modified form that applies the algorithm three times. The algorithm in
                    Triple DES (TDES or 3DES) uses three separate DES keys, providing an effec-
                    tive key size of 168 bits (although it can be proven that the security is actu-
                    ally lower than the size would suggest). As shown in Figure 7-4, in Triple
                    DES, the DES encrypt function is first applied to the plaintext using the
                    first key. Next, the output is decrypted using the second key. Then the out-
                    put is encrypted again using the third key, resulting in the final cipher text.
                    The operations are reversed to perform decryption.

 0x48     0x65    0x6C      0x6C    0x6F    0x21    0x21       0x21

Plaintext block

                   DES
Key 1                                                DES
                  encrypt          Key 2
                                                   decrypt                            DES
                                                                      Key 3
                                                                                     encrypt

                                            0xF3     0x19      0xAD    0x18   0x2D    0x31     0x22     0x51

                                           Cipher text block

Figure 7-4: The Triple DES encryption process

                                                                                       Network Protocol Security   151
                  AES
                  A far more modern encryption algorithm is AES, which is based on the
                  algorithm Rijndael. AES uses a fixed block size of 128 bits and can use
                  three different key lengths: 128, 192, and 256 bits; they are sometimes
                  referred to as AES128, AES192, and AES256, respectively. Rather than
                  using a Feistel network, AES uses a substitution-permutation network, which
                  consists of two main components: substitution boxes (S-Box) and permutation
                  boxes (P-Box). The two components are chained together to form a single
                  round of the algorithm. As with the Feistel network, this round can be
                  applied multiple times with different values of the S-Box and P-Box to pro-
                  duce the encrypted output.
                      An S-Box is a basic mapping table not unlike a simple substitution
                  cipher. The S-Box takes an input, looks it up in a table, and produces
                  output. As an S-Box uses a large, distinct lookup table, it’s very helpful in
                  identifying particular algorithms. The distinct lookup table provides a very
                  large fingerprint, which can be discovered in application executables. I
                  explained this in more depth in Chapter 6 when I discussed techniques to
                  find unknown cryptographic algorithms by reverse engineering binaries.

                  Other Block Ciphers
                  DES and AES are the block ciphers that you’ll most commonly encounter,
                  but there are others, such as those listed in Table 7-1 (and still others in
                  commercial products).

Table 7-1: Common Block Cipher Algorithms

                   Cipher name              Block size (bits)   Key size (bits)   Year introduced
                   Data Encryption          64                  56                1979
                   Standard (DES)
                   Blowfish                 64                  32–448            1993
                   Triple Data Encryption   64                  56, 112, 168      1998
                   Standard (TDES/3DES)
                   Serpent                  128                 128, 192, 256     1998
                   Twofish                  128                 128, 192, 256     1998
                   Camellia                 128                 128, 192, 256     2000
                   Advanced Encryption      128                 128, 192, 256     2001
                   Standard (AES)

                      The block and key size help you determine which cipher a protocol is
                  using based on the way the key is specified or how the encrypted data is
                  divided into blocks.

                  Block Cipher Modes
                  The algorithm of a block cipher defines how the cipher operates on blocks
                  of data. Alone, a block-cipher algorithm has some weaknesses, as you’ll

152   Chapter 7
soon see. Therefore, in a real-world protocol, it is common to use the block
cipher in combination with another algorithm called a mode of operation.
The mode provides additional security properties, such as making the out-
put of the encryption less predictable. Sometimes the mode also changes
the operation of the cipher by, for example, converting a block cipher into
a stream cipher (which I’ll explain in more detail in “Stream Ciphers” on
page 158). Let’s take a look at some of the more common modes as well as
their security properties and weaknesses.

Electronic Code Book
The simplest and default mode of operation for block ciphers is Electronic
Code Book (ECB). In ECB, the encryption algorithm is applied to each fixed-
size block from the plaintext to generate a series of cipher text blocks.
The size of the block is defined by the algorithm in use. For example, if AES
is the cipher, each block in ECB mode must be 16 bytes in size. The plain-
text is divided into individual blocks, and the cipher algorithm applied.
(Figure 7-3 showed the ECB mode at work.)
     Because each plaintext block is encrypted independently in ECB, it
will always encrypt to the same block of cipher text. As a consequence, ECB
doesn’t always hide large-scale structures in the plaintext, as in the bitmap
image shown in Figure 7-5. In addition, an attacker can corrupt or manipu-
late the decrypted data in independent-block encryption by shuffling
around blocks of the cipher text before it is decrypted.

                                 ECB encrypt

        Original image                            Encrypted image

Figure 7-5: ECB encryption of a bitmap image

Cipher Block Chaining
Another common mode of operation is Cipher Block Chaining (CBC), which is
more complex than ECB and avoids its pitfalls. In CBC, the encryption of a
single plaintext block depends on the encrypted value of the previous block.
The previous encrypted block is XORed with the current plaintext block, and
then the encryption algorithm is applied to this combined result. Figure 7-6
shows an example of CBC applied to two blocks.
     At the top of Figure 7-6 are the original plaintext blocks. At the bottom
is the resulting cipher text generated by applying the block-cipher algo-
rithm as well as the CBC mode algorithm. Before each plaintext block is
encrypted, the plaintext is XORed with the previous encrypted block. After
the blocks have been XORed together, the encryption algorithm is applied.
This ensures that the output cipher text is dependent on the plaintext as
well as the previous encrypted blocks.

                                                        Network Protocol Security   153
                                         0x48     0x65      0x6C   0x6C   0x6F     0x2C   0x20   0x57

                                        Plaintext block 0

IV

 0x25     0x39    0x29   0xF7   0x06    0xFA     0xCC    0x40                  XOR operation

Key

 0xAF    0x4D     0xBF   0xDD   0xE5    0xC0     0x47    0xA6        Encrypt

                                        Cipher text block 0

                                         0x6A     0xB5      0xA0   0x3A   0xE4     0xF6   0x8A   0x22

                                          0x6F    0x72      0x6C   0x64   0x21     0x21   0x21   0x21

                                        Plaintext block 1

                                                                     Encrypt

                                        Cipher text block 1

                                          0x8F    0xCD      0xAC   0x9E   0x4A     0xC4   0x3B   0x02

Figure 7-6: The CBC mode of operation

                        Because the first block of plaintext has no previous cipher text block
                   with which to perform the XOR operation, you combine it with a manually
                   chosen or randomly generated block called an initialization vector (IV). If the
                   IV is randomly generated, it must be sent with the encrypted data, or the
                   receiver will not be able to decrypt the first block of the message. (Using a

154   Chapter 7
fixed IV is an issue if the same key is used for all communications, because
if the same message is encrypted multiple times, it will always encrypt to the
same cipher text.)
     To decrypt CBC, the encryption operations are performed in reverse:
decryption happens from the end of the message to the front, decrypting
each cipher text block with the key and at each step XORing the decrypted
block with the encrypted block that precedes it in the cipher text.

Alternative Modes
Other modes of operation for block ciphers are available, including those
that can convert a block cipher into a stream cipher, and special modes,
such as Galois Counter Mode (GCM), which provide data integrity and confi-
dentiality. Table 7-2 lists several common modes of operation and indicates
whether they generate a block or stream cipher (which I’ll discuss in the
section “Stream Ciphers” on page 158). To describe each in detail would
be outside the scope of this book, but this table provides a rough guide for
further research.

Table 7-2: Common Block Cipher Modes of Operation

 Mode name               Abbreviation   Mode type
 Electronic Code Book    ECB            Block
 Cipher Block Chaining   CBC            Block
 Output Feedback         OFB            Stream
 Cipher Feedback         CFB            Stream
 Counter                 CTR            Stream
 Galois Counter Mode     GCM            Stream with data integrity

Block Cipher Padding
Block ciphers operate on a fixed-size message unit: a block. But what if you
want to encrypt a single byte of data and the block size is 16 bytes? This is
where padding schemes come into play. Padding schemes determine how to
handle the unused remainder of a block during encryption and decryption.
     The simplest approach to padding is to pad the extra block space with
a specific known value, such as a repeating-zero byte. But when you decrypt
the block, how do you distinguish between padding bytes and meaningful
data? Some network protocols specify an explicit-length field, which you
can use to remove the padding, but you can’t always rely on this.
     One padding scheme that solves this problem is defined in the Public
Key Cryptography Standard #7 (PKCS#7). In this scheme, all the padded bytes
are set to a value that represents how many padded bytes are present. For
example, if three bytes of padding are present, each byte is set to the value 3,
as shown in Figure 7-7.

                                                           Network Protocol Security   155
                              5 bytes of data               3 bytes of padding

                    'H'     'e'     'l'     'l'    'o'
                                                           0x03   0x03    0x03
                   0x48    0x65    0x6C    0x6C   0x6F

                      3 bytes of data              5 bytes of padding

                    'A'    'B'      'C'
                                           0x05   0x05     0x05   0x05    0x05
                   0x41   0x42     0x43

Figure 7-7: Examples of PKCS#7 padding

                       What if you don’t need padding? For instance, what if the last block
                  you’re encrypting is already the correct length? If you simply encrypt the
                  last block and transmit it, the decryption algorithm will interpret legiti-
                  mate data as part of a padded block. To remove this ambiguity, the encryp-
                  tion algorithm must send a final dummy block that only contains padding
                  in order to signal to the decryption algorithm that the last block can be
                  discarded.
                       When the padded block is decrypted, the decryption process can eas-
                  ily verify the number of padding bytes present. The decryption process
                  reads the last byte in the block to determine the expected number of
                  padding bytes. For example, if the decryption process reads a value of 3,
                  it knows that three bytes of padding should be present. The decryption
                  process then reads the other two bytes of expected padding, verifying that
                  each byte also has a value of 3. If padding is incorrect, either because all
                  the expected padding bytes are not the same value or the padding value
                  is out of range (the value must be less than or equal to the size of a block
                  and greater than 0), an error occurs that could cause the decryption pro-
                  cess to fail. The manner of failure is a security consideration in itself.

                  Padding Oracle Attack
                  A serious security hole, known as the padding oracle attack, occurs when the
                  CBC mode of operation is combined with the PKCS#7 padding scheme. The
                  attack allows an attacker to decrypt data and in some cases encrypt their own
                  data (such as a session token) when sent via this protocol, even if they don’t
                  know the key. If an attacker can decrypt a session token, they might recover
                  sensitive information. But if they can encrypt the token, they might be able to
                  do something like circumvent access controls on a website.
                      For example, consider Listing 7-1, which decrypts data from the net-
                  work using a private DES key.

156   Chapter 7
def decrypt_session_token(byte key[])
{
u byte iv[] = read_bytes(8);
      byte token[] = read_to_end();

v bool error = des_cbc_decrypt(key, iv, token);

     if(error) {
    w write_string("ERROR");
     } else {
    x write_string("SUCCESS");
     }
}

Listing 7-1: A simple DES decryption from the network

     The code reads the IV and the encrypted data from the network u
and passes it to a DES CBC decryption routine using an internal applica-
tion key v. In this case, it decrypts a client session token. This use case
is common in web application frameworks, where the client is effectively
stateless and must send a token with each request to verify its identity.
     The decryption function returns an error condition that signals
whether the decryption failed. If so, it sends the string ERROR to the client w;
otherwise, it sends the string SUCCESS x. Consequently, this code provides an
attacker with information about the success or failure of decrypting an arbi-
trary encrypted block from a client. In addition, if the code uses PKCS#7
for padding and an error occurs (because the padding doesn’t match the
correct pattern in the last decrypted block), an attacker could use this
information to perform the padding oracle attack and then decrypt the
block of data the attacker sent to a vulnerable service.
     This is the essence of the padding oracle attack: by paying attention
to whether the network service successfully decrypted the CBC-encrypted
block, the attacker can infer the block’s underlying unencrypted value.
(The term oracle refers to the fact that the attacker can ask the service a
question and receive a true or false answer. Specifically, in this case, the
attacker can ask whether the padding for the encrypted block they sent to
the service is valid.)
     To better understand how the padding oracle attack works, let’s return
to how CBC decrypts a single block. Figure 7-8 shows the decryption of a
block of CBC-encrypted data. In this example, the plaintext is the string
Hello with three bytes of PKCS#7 padding after it.
     By querying the web service, the attacker has direct control over the
original cipher text and the IV. Because each plaintext byte is XORed with
an IV byte during the final decryption step, the attacker can directly con-
trol the plaintext output by changing the corresponding byte in the IV. In
the example shown in Figure 7-8, the last byte of the decrypted block is
0x2B, which gets XORed with the IV byte 0x28 and outputs 0x03, a pad-
ding byte. But if you change the last IV byte to 0xFF, the last byte of the
cipher text decrypts to 0xD4, which is no longer a valid padding byte, and
the decryption service returns an error.

                                                         Network Protocol Security   157
                  Cipher text   0x1E   0x26   0x70     0x5F   0x2A   0x96   0x65   0x04

                                                       DES decrypt

                  Decrypted     0xE7   0x44   0xF2     0xC9   0x08   0x8B   0x0E   0x2B

                                ⊕      ⊕       ⊕       ⊕      ⊕      ⊕      ⊕      ⊕
                           IV   0xAF   0x21   0x9E     0xA5   0x67   0x88   0x0D   0x28

                                 'H'    'e'    'l'      'l'    'o'
                    Plaintext                                        0x03   0x03   0x03
                                0x48   0x65   0x6C     0x6C   0x6F

Figure 7-8: CBC decryption with IV

                       Now the attacker has everything they need to figure out the padding
                  value. They query the web service with dummy cipher texts, trying all pos-
                  sible values for the last byte in the IV. Whenever the resulting decrypted
                  value is not equal to 0x01 (or by chance another valid padding arrange-
                  ment), the decryption returns an error. But once padding is valid, the
                  decryption will return success.
                       With this information, the attacker can determine the value of that byte
                  in the decrypted block, even though they don’t have the key. For example,
                  say the attacker sends the last IV byte as 0x2A. The decryption returns suc-
                  cess, which means the decrypted byte XORed with 0x2A should equal 0x01.
                  Now the attacker can calculate the decrypted value by XORing 0x2A with
                  0x01, yielding 0x2B; if the attacker XORs this value with the original IV
                  byte (0x28), the result is 0x03, the original padding value, as expected.
                       The next step in the attack is to use the IV to generate a value of 0x02 in
                  the lowest two bytes of the plaintext. In the same manner that the attacker
                  used brute force on the lowest byte earlier, now they can brute force the
                  second-to-lowest byte. Next, because the attacker knows the value of the low-
                  est byte, it’s possible to set it to 0x02 with the appropriate IV value. Then, they
                  can perform brute force on the second-to-lowest byte until the decryption is
                  successful, which means the second byte now equals 0x02 when decrypted. By
                  repeating this process until all bytes have been calculated, an attacker could
                  use this technique to decrypt any block.

                  Stream Ciphers
                  Unlike block ciphers, which encrypt blocks of a message, stream ciphers
                  work at the individual bit level. The most common algorithm used for

158   Chapter 7
       stream ciphers generates a pseudorandom stream of bits, called the key stream,
       from an initial key. This key stream is then arithmetically applied to the mes-
       sage, typically using the XOR operation, to produce the cipher text, as shown
       in Figure 7-9.

                      'H'    'e'    'l'      'l'     'o'
         Plaintext
                     0x48   0x65   0x6C     0x6C    0x6F

                     ⊕       ⊕      ⊕          ⊕     ⊕      XOR operation

       Key stream    0x82   0xCC   0x19     0xa2    0xF1

       Cipher text   0xCA   0xA9   0x75     0xCE    0x9E

Figure 7-9: A stream cipher operation

           As long as the arithmetic operation is reversible, all it takes to decrypt
       the message is to generate the same key stream used for encryption and
       perform the reverse arithmetic operation on the cipher text. (In the case of
       XOR, the reverse operation is actually XOR.) The key stream can be gen-
       erated using a completely custom algorithm, such as in RC4, or by using a
       block cipher and an accompanying mode of operation.
           Table 7-3 lists some common algorithms that you might find in real-
       world applications.

Table 7-3: Common Stream Ciphers

        Cipher name                     Key size (bits)                Year introduced
        A5/1 and A5/2 (used in          54 or 64                       1989
        GSM voice encryption)
        RC4                             Up to 2048                     1993
        Counter mode (CTR)              Dependent on block cipher      N/A
        Output Feedback mode (OFB)        Dependent on block cipher    N/A
        Cipher Feedback mode (CFB)        Dependent on block cipher    N/A

Asymmetric Key Cryptography
       Symmetric key cryptography strikes a good balance between security and
       convenience, but it has a significant problem: participants in the network
       need to physically exchange secret keys. This is tough to do when the net-
       work spans multiple geographical regions. Fortunately, asymmetric key cryp-
       tography (commonly called public key encryption) can mitigate this issue.

                                                                      Network Protocol Security   159
                      An asymmetric algorithm requires two types of keys: public and private.
                  The public key encrypts a message, and the private key decrypts it. Because
                  the public key cannot decrypt a message, it can be given to anyone, even
                  over a public network, without fear of its being captured by an attacker and
                  used to decrypt traffic, as shown in Figure 7-10.

                                         Plaintext                           Cipher text

                                          Encrypt                             Decrypt

                  Public key                             Private key

                                        Cipher text                           Plaintext

Figure 7-10: Asymmetric key encryption and decryption

                       Although the public and private keys are related mathematically, asym-
                  metric key algorithms are designed to make retrieving a private key from
                  a public key very time consuming; they’re built upon mathematical primi-
                  tives known as trapdoor functions. (The name is derived from the concept
                  that it’s easy to go through a trapdoor, but if it shuts behind you, it’s dif-
                  ficult to go back.) These algorithms rely on the assumption that there is no
                  workaround for the time-intensive nature of the underlying mathematics.
                  However, future advances in mathematics or computing power might dis-
                  prove such assumptions.

                  RSA Algorithm
                  Surprisingly, not many unique asymmetric key algorithms are in common
                  use, especially compared to symmetric ones. The RSA algorithm is currently
                  the most widely used to secure network traffic and will be for the foreseeable
                  future. Although newer algorithms are based on mathematical constructs
                  called elliptic curves, they share many general principles with RSA.
                       The RSA algorithm, first published in 1977, is named after its original
                  developers—Ron Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard Adleman. Its security
                  relies on the assumption that it’s difficult to factor large integers that are
                  the product of two prime numbers.

160   Chapter 7
                         Figure 7-11 shows the RSA encryption and decryption process. To gener-
                    ate a new key pair using RSA, you generate two large, random prime num-
                    bers, p and q, and then choose a public exponent (e). (It’s common to use the
                    value 65537, because it has mathematical properties that help ensure the
                    security of the algorithm.) You must also calculate two other numbers: the
                    modulus (n), which is the product of p and q, and a private exponent (d), which
                    is used for decryption. (The process to generate d is rather complicated and
                    beyond the scope of this book.) The public exponent combined with the
                    modulus constitutes the public key, and the private exponent and modulus
                    form the private key.
                         For the private key to remain private, the private exponent must be
                    kept secret. And because the private exponent is generated from the origi-
                    nal primes, p and q, these two numbers must also be kept secret.

                   'H'  'e'  'l'  'l'  'o'
      Plaintext                                      Cipher text (c)       0xAABBCCDDEE . . .
                  0x48 0x65 0x6C 0x6C 0x6F

 Message (m)            0x48656C6C6F                                            Decrypt
                                                                                c d mod n

                            Encrypt
                           me mod n                   Message (m)            0x48656C6C6F

                                                                        'H'  'e'  'l'  'l'  'o'
Cipher text (c)       0xAABBCCDDEE . . .                   Plaintext
                                                                       0x48 0x65 0x6C 0x6C 0x6F

Figure 7-11: A simple example of RSA encryption and decryption

                        The first step in the encryption process is to convert the message to an
                    integer, typically by assuming the bytes of the message actually represent a
                    variable-length integer. This integer, m, is raised to the power of the public
                    exponent. The modulo operation, using the value of the public modulus n, is
                    then applied to the raised integer me. The resulting cipher text is now a value
                    between zero and n. (So if you have a 1024-bit key, you can only ever encrypt
                    a maximum of 1024 bits in a message.) To decrypt the message, you apply the
                    same process, substituting the public exponent for the private one.

                                                                                Network Protocol Security   161
                       RSA is very computationally expensive to perform, especially relative
                  to symmetric ciphers like AES. To mitigate this expense, very few applica-
                  tions use RSA directly to encrypt a message. Instead, they generate a ran-
                  dom session key and use this key to encrypt the message with a symmetric
                  cipher, such as AES. Then, when the application wants to send a message to
                  another participant on the network, it encrypts only the session key using
                  RSA and sends the RSA-encrypted key along with the AES-encrypted mes-
                  sage. The recipient decrypts the message first by decrypting the session key,
                  and then uses the session key to decrypt the actual message. Combining
                  RSA with a symmetric cipher like AES provides the best of both worlds: fast
                  encryption with public key security.

                  RSA Padding
                  One weakness of this basic RSA algorithm is that it is deterministic: if you
                  encrypt the same message multiple times using the same public key, RSA
                  will always produce the same encrypted result. This allows an attacker to
                  mount what is known as a chosen plaintext attack in which the attacker has
                  access to the public key and can therefore encrypt any message. In the most
                  basic version of this attack, the attacker simply guesses the plaintext of an
                  encrypted message. They continue encrypting their guesses using the pub-
                  lic key, and if any of the encrypted guesses match the value of the original
                  encrypted message, they know they’ve successfully guessed the target plain-
                  text, meaning they’ve effectively decrypted the message without private key
                  access.
                       To counter chosen plaintext attacks, RSA uses a form of padding dur-
                  ing the encryption process that ensures the encrypted output is nonde-
                  terministic. (This “padding” is different from the block cipher padding
                  discussed earlier. There, padding fills the plaintext to the next block
                  boundary so the encryption algorithm has a full block to work with.)
                  Two padding schemes are commonly used with RSA: one is specified in
                  the Public Key Cryptography Standard #1.5; the other is called Optimal
                  Asymmetric Encryption Padding (OAEP). OAEP is recommended for all new
                  applications, but both schemes provide enough security for typical use
                  cases. Be aware that not using padding with RSA is a serious security
                  vulnerability.

                  Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange
                  RSA isn’t the only technique used to exchange keys between network partic-
                  ipants. Several algorithms are dedicated to that purpose; foremost among
                  them is the Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange (DH) algorithm.
                      The DH algorithm was developed by Whitfield Diffie and Martin
                  Hellman in 1976 and, like RSA, is built upon the mathematical primi-
                  tives of exponentiation and modular arithmetic. DH allows two partici-
                  pants in a network to exchange keys and prevents anyone monitoring
                  the network from being able to determine what that key is. Figure 7-12
                  shows the operation of the algorithm.

162   Chapter 7
         Client                                                                Server

       Determine
                                                                               Group
         group                        Send group parameter
                                                                             parameter
       parameter

       Generate                                                               Generate
     private key A                                                          private key B

                                          Public network

       Calculate                                                              Calculate
       public key                                                             public key
      from group                                                             from group
      and private                                                            and private
         key A                                                                  key B

       Combine                           Send public key                     Combine
      public key B                                                          public key A
      and private                                                           and private
        key A                                                                  key B

                                       Shared key generated

Figure 7-12: The Diffie–Hellman Key Exchange algorithm

                           The participant initiating the exchange determines a parameter, which
                     is a large prime number, and sends it to the other participant: the chosen
                     value is not a secret and can be sent in the clear. Then each participant
                     generates their own private key value—usually using a cryptographically
                     secure random number generator—and computes a public key using this
                     private key and a selected group parameter that is requested by the client.
                     The public keys can safely be sent between the participants without the risk
                     of revealing the private keys. Finally, each participant calculates a shared key
                     by combining the other’s public key with their own private key. Both partici-
                     pants now have the shared key without ever having directly exchanged it.
                           DH isn’t perfect. For example, this basic version of the algorithm can’t
                     handle an attacker performing a man-in-the-middle attack against the key-
                     exchange. The attacker can impersonate the server on the network and
                     exchange one key with the client. Next, the attacker exchanges a different

                                                                              Network Protocol Security   163
                  key with the server, resulting in the attacker now having two separate keys
                  for the connection. Then the attacker can decrypt data from the client and
                  forward it on to the server, and vice versa.

     Signature Algorithms
                  Encrypting a message prevents attackers from viewing the information
                  being sent over the network, but it doesn’t identify who sent it. Just because
                  someone has the encryption key doesn’t mean they are who they say they are.
                  With asymmetric encryption, you don’t even need to manually exchange
                  the key ahead of time, so anyone can encrypt data with your public key and
                  send it to you.
                        Signature algorithms solve this problem by generating a unique signature for
                  a message. The message recipient can use the same algorithm used to gener-
                  ate the signature to prove the message came from the signer. As an added
                  advantage, adding a signature to a message protects it against tampering if
                  it’s being transmitted over an untrusted network. This is important, because
                  encrypting data does not provide any guarantee of data integrity; that is, an
                  encrypted message can still be modified by an attacker with knowledge of the
                  underlying network protocol.
                        All signature algorithms are built upon cryptographic hashing algorithms.
                  First, I’ll describe hashing in more detail, and then I’ll explain some of the
                  most common signature algorithms.

                  Cryptographic Hashing Algorithms
                  Cryptographic hashing algorithms are functions that are applied to a mes-
                  sage to generate a fixed-length summary of that message, which is usually
                  much shorter than the original message. These algorithms are also called
                  message digest algorithms. The purpose of hashing in signature algorithms is to
                  generate a relatively unique value to verify the integrity of a message and to
                  reduce the amount of data that needs to be signed and verified.
                      For a hashing algorithm to be suitable for cryptographic purposes, it
                  has to fulfill three requirements:
                      Pre-image resistance Given a hash value, it should be difficult (such
                      as by requiring a massive amount of computing power) to recover a
                      message.
                      Collision resistance It should be difficult to find two different mes-
                      sages that hash to the same value.
                      Nonlinearity It should be difficult to create a message that hashes to
                      any given value.
                      A number of hashing algorithms are available, but the most common
                  are members of either the Message Digest (MD) or Secure Hashing Algorithm
                  (SHA) families. The Message Digest family includes the MD4 and MD5

164   Chapter 7
algorithms, which were developed by Ron Rivest. The SHA family, which
contains the SHA-1 and SHA-2 algorithms, among others, is published
by NIST.
     Other simple hashing algorithms, such as checksums and cyclic redun-
dancy checks (CRC), are useful for detecting changes in a set of data; how-
ever, they are not very useful for secure protocols. An attacker can easily
change the checksum, as the linear behavior of these algorithms makes it
trivial to determine how the checksum changes, and this modification of
the data is protected so the target has no knowledge of the change.

Asymmetric Signature Algorithms
Asymmetric signature algorithms use the properties of asymmetric cryptog-
raphy to generate a message signature. Some algorithms, such as RSA, can
be used to provide the signature and the encryption, whereas others, such
as the Digital Signature Algorithm (DSA), are designed for signatures only. In
both cases, the message to be signed is hashed, and a signature is generated
from that hash.
      Earlier you saw how RSA can be used for encryption, but how can it be
used to sign a message? The RSA signature algorithm relies on the fact that
it’s possible to encrypt a message using the private key and decrypt it with
the public one. Although this “encryption” is no longer secure (the key to
decrypt the message is now public), it can be used to sign a message.
      For example, the signer hashes the message and applies the RSA
decryption process to the hash using their private key; this encrypted
hash is the signature. The recipient of the message can convert the signa-
ture using the signer’s public key to get the original hash value and com-
pare it against their own hash of the message. If the two hashes match, the
sender must have used the correct private key to encrypt the hash; if the
recipient trusts that the only person with the private key is the signer, the
signature is verified. Figure 7-13 shows this process.

               Message

            Message hash                  Verify                Message hash

                         Private key                   Public key

                 RSA                                                  RSA
               encrypt                                              decrypt

                                       RSA signature

Figure 7-13: RSA signature processing

                                                                    Network Protocol Security   165
                  Message Authentication Codes
                  Unlike RSA, which is an asymmetric algorithm, Message Authentication Codes
                  (MACs) are symmetric signature algorithms. As with symmetric encryption,
                  symmetric signature algorithms rely on sharing a key between the sender
                  and recipient.
                       For example, say you want to send me a signed message and we both
                  have access to a shared key. First, you’d combine the message with the
                  key in some way. (I’ll discuss how to do this in more detail in a moment.)
                  Then you’d hash the combination to produce a value that couldn’t easily
                  be reproduced without the original message and the shared key. When you
                  sent me the message, you’d also send this hash as the signature. I could
                  verify that the signature is valid by performing the same algorithm as you
                  did: I’d combine the key and message, hash the combination, and compare
                  the resulting value against the signature you sent. If the two values were the
                  same, I could be sure you’re the one who sent the message.
                       How would you combine the key and the message? You might be tempted
                  to try something simple, such as just prefixing the message with the key and
                  hashing to the combined result, as in Figure 7-14.

                     Inner padding block                         Message

                                                           MD5

                                                           MAC

Figure 7-14: A simple MAC implementation

                      But with many common hashing algorithms (including MD5 and
                  SHA-1), this would be a serious security mistake, because it opens a vul-
                  nerability known as the length-extension attack. To understand why, you
                  need to know a bit about the construction of hashing algorithms.

                  Length-Extension and Collision Attacks
                  Many common hashing algorithms, including MD5 and SHA-1, consist of a
                  block structure. When hashing a message, the algorithm must first split the
                  message into equal-sized blocks to process. (MD5, for example, uses a block
                  size of 64 bytes.)
                       As the hashing algorithm proceeds, the only state it maintains between
                  each block is the hash value of the previous block. For the first block, the
                  previous hash value is a set of well-chosen constants. The well-chosen con-
                  stants are specified as part of the algorithm and are generally important
                  for the secure operation. Figure 7-15 shows an example of how this works
                  in MD5.

166   Chapter 7
                0x67452301
                0xEFCDAB89
Initial hash
                0x98BADCFE
                0x10325476

                     MD5                  Block 0

                0xAAAAAAAA
                0xB B B B B B B B
   Hash 0
                0xCCCCCCCC
                0xDDDDDDDD

                     MD5                  Block 1      Message

               0xE E E E E E E E
               0xF F F F F F F F
   Hash 1
               0xGGGGGGGG
               0xHHHHHHHH

                     MD5                  Block 2

                0xI I I I I I I I
                0x J J J J J J J J
Final hash
                0xKKKKKKKK
                0xL L L L L L L L

Figure 7-15: The block structure of MD5

                                                    Network Protocol Security   167
                       It’s important to note that the final output from the block-hashing pro-
                  cess depends only on the previous block hash and the current block of the
                  message. No permutation is applied to the final hash value. Therefore, it’s
                  possible to extend the hash value by starting the algorithm at the last hash
                  instead of the predefined constants and then running through blocks of
                  data you want to add to the final hash.
                       In the case of a MAC in which the key has been prefixed at the start of
                  the message, this structure might allow an attacker to alter the message in
                  some way, such as by appending extra data to the end of an uploaded file.
                  If the attacker can append more blocks to the end of the message, they can
                  calculate the corresponding value of the MAC without knowing the key
                  because the key has already been hashed into the state of the algorithm by
                  the time the attacker has control.
                       What if you move the key to the end of the message rather than attach-
                  ing it to the front? Such an approach certainly prevents the length-extension
                  attack, but there’s still a problem. Instead of an extension, the attacker needs
                  to find a hash collision—that is, a message with the same hash value as the
                  real message being sent. Because many hashing algorithms (including MD5)
                  are not collision resistant, the MAC may be open to this kind of collision
                  attack. (One hashing algorithm that’s not vulnerable to this attack is SHA-3.)

                  Hashed Message Authentication Codes
                  You can use a Hashed Message Authentication Code (HMAC) to counter the
                  attacks described in the previous section. Instead of directly appending the
                  key to the message and using the hashed output to produce a signature, an
                  HMAC splits the process into two parts.
                       First, the key is XORed with a padding block equal to the block size of
                  the hashing algorithm. This first padding block is filled with a repeating
                  value, typically the byte 0x36. The combined result is the first key, some-
                  times called the inner padding block. This is prefixed to the message, and
                  the hashing algorithm is applied. The second step takes the hash value
                  from the first step, prefixes the hash with a new key (called the outer pad-
                  ding block, which typically uses the constant 0x5C), and applies the hash
                  algorithm again. The result is the final HMAC value. Figure 7-16 diagrams
                  this process.

                    Inner padding block                                Message

                                                        MD5

                       Outer padding block         Intermediate hash

                                             MD5

                                          HMAC

Figure 7-16: HMAC construction

168   Chapter 7
            This construction is resistant to length-extension and collision attacks
        because the attacker can’t easily predict the final hash value without the key.

Public Key Infrastructure
        How do you verify the identity of the owner of a public key in public key
        encryption? Simply because a key is published with an associated identity—
        say, Bob Smith from London—doesn’t mean it really comes from Bob Smith
        from London. For example, if I’ve managed to make you trust my public key
        as coming from Bob, anything you encrypt to him will be readable only by
        me, because I own the private key.
             To mitigate this threat, you implement a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI),
        which refers to the combined set of protocols, encryption key formats, user
        roles, and policies used to manage asymmetric public key information across
        a network. One model of PKI, the web of trust (WOT), is used by such applica-
        tions as Pretty Good Privacy (PGP). In the WOT model, the identity of a public
        key is attested to by someone you trust, perhaps someone you’ve met in per-
        son. Unfortunately, although the WOT works well for email, where you’re
        likely to know who you’re communicating with, it doesn’t work as well for
        automated network applications and business processes.

        X.509 Certificates
        When a WOT won’t do, it’s common to use a more centralized trust model,
        such as X.509 certificates, which generate a strict hierarchy of trust rather
        than rely on directly trusting peers. X.509 certificates are used to verify
        web servers, sign executable programs, or authenticate to a network service.
        Trust is provided through a hierarchy of certificates using asymmetric sig-
        nature algorithms, such as RSA and DSA.
            To complete this hierarchy, valid certificates must contain at least four
        pieces of information:

        •   The subject, which specifies the identity for the certificate
        •   The subject’s public key
        •   The issuer, which identifies the signing certificate
        •   A valid signature applied over the certificate and authenticated by the
            issuer’s private key

            These requirements create a hierarchy called a chain of trust between
        certificates, as shown in Figure 7-17. One advantage to this model is that
        because only public key information is ever distributed, it’s possible to pro-
        vide component certificates to users via public networks.

                                                                Network Protocol Security   169
                                        Issuer: SuperSignCA
                                        Subject: SuperSignCA

                                           Root certificate
                                 Sign                          Sign

                  Issuer: SuperSignCA               Issuer: SuperSignCA
                  Subject: Badger Software Ltd      Subject: www.badgers.com

                    Code-signing certificate           Web server certificate

Figure 7-17: The X.509 certificate chain of trust

                        Note that there is usually more than one level in the hierarchy, because
                  it would be unusual for the root certificate issuer to directly sign certificates
                  used by an application. The root certificate is issued by an entity called a
                  certificate authority (CA), which might be a public organization or company
                  (such as Verisign) or a private entity that issues certificates for use on inter-
                  nal networks. The CA’s job is to verify the identity of anyone it issues certifi-
                  cates to.
                        Unfortunately, the amount of actual checking that occurs is not always
                  clear; often, CAs are more interested in selling signed certificates than in
                  doing their jobs, and some CAs do little more than check whether they’re
                  issuing a certificate to a registered business address. Most diligent CAs should
                  at least refuse to generate certificates for known companies, such as Microsoft
                  or Google, when the certificate request doesn’t come from the company in
                  question. By definition, the root certificate can’t be signed by another certifi-
                  cate. Instead, the root certificate is a self-signed certificate where the private key
                  associated with the certificate’s public key is used to sign itself.

                  Verifying a Certificate Chain
                  To verify a certificate, you follow the issuance chain back to the root cer-
                  tificate, ensuring at each step that every certificate has a valid signature
                  that hasn’t expired. At this point, you decide whether you trust the root
                  certificate—and, by extension, the identity of the certificate at the end of
                  the chain. Most applications that handle certificates, like web browsers and
                  operating systems, have a trusted root certificate database.
                       What’s to stop someone who gets a web server certificate from sign-
                  ing their own fraudulent certificate using the web server’s private key? In

170   Chapter 7
practice, they can do just that. From a cryptography perspective, one pri-
vate key is the same as any other. If you based the trust of a certificate on
the chain of keys, the fraudulent certificate would chain back to a trusted
root and appear to be valid.
     To protect against this attack, the X.509 specification defines the
basic constraints parameter, which can be optionally added to a certificate.
This parameter is a flag that indicates the certificate can be used to sign
another certificate and thus act as a CA. If a certificate’s CA flag is set to
false (or if the basic constraints parameter is missing), the verification of
the chain should fail if that certificate is ever used to sign another certifi-
cate. Figure 7-18 shows this basic constraint parameter in a real certificate
that says this certificate should be valid to act as a certificate authority.
     But what if a certificate issued for verifying a web server is used instead
to sign application code? In this situation, the X.509 certificate can specify
a key usage parameter, which indicates what uses the certificate was gener-
ated for. If the certificate is ever used for something it was not designed to
certify, the verification chain should fail.
     Finally, what happens if the private key associated with a given certifi-
cate is stolen or a CA accidentally issues a fraudulent certificate (as has hap-
pened a few times)? Even though each certificate has an expiration date, this
date might be many years in the future. Therefore, if a certificate needs to
be revoked, the CA can publish a certificate revocation list (CRL). If any certifi-
cate in the chain is on the revocation list, the verification process should fail.

Figure 7-18: X.509 certificate basic constraints

                                                           Network Protocol Security   171
                      As you can see, the certificate chain verification could potentially fail in
                  a number of places.

     Case Study: Transport Layer Security
                  Let’s apply some of the theory behind protocol security and cryptog-
                  raphy to a real-world protocol. Transport Layer Security (TLS), formerly
                  called Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), is the most common security protocol in
                  use on the internet. TLS was originally developed as SSL by Netscape in
                  the mid-1990s for securing HTTP connections. The protocol has gone
                  through multiple revisions: SSL versions 1.0 through 3.0 and TLS ver-
                  sions 1.0 through 1.2. Although it was originally designed for HTTP, you
                  can use TLS for any TCP protocol. There’s even a variant, the Datagram
                  Transport Layer Security (DTLS) protocol, to use with unreliable protocols,
                  such as UDP.
                       TLS uses many of the constructs described in this chapter, including
                  symmetric and asymmetric encryption, MACs, secure key exchange, and
                  PKI. I’ll discuss the role each of these cryptographic tools plays in the secu-
                  rity of a TLS connection and touch on some attacks against the protocol.
                  (I’ll only discuss TLS version 1.0, because it’s the most commonly supported
                  version, but be aware that versions 1.1 and 1.2 are slowly becoming more
                  common due to a number of security issues with version 1.0.)

                  The TLS Handshake
                  The most important part of establishing a new TLS connection is the hand-
                  shake, where the client and server negotiate the type of encryption they’ll
                  use, exchange a unique key for the connection, and verify each other’s
                  identity. All communication uses a TLS Record protocol—a predefined tag-
                  length-value structure that allows the protocol parser to extract individual
                  records from the stream of bytes. All handshake packets are assigned a tag
                  value of 22 to distinguish them from other packets. Figure 7-19 shows the
                  flow of these handshake packets in a simplified form. (Some packets are
                  optional, as indicated in the figure.)
                       As you can see from all the data being sent back and forth, the hand-
                  shake process can be time-intensive: sometimes it can be truncated or
                  bypassed entirely by caching a previously negotiated session key or by the
                  client’s asking the server to resume a previous session by providing a unique
                  session identifier. This isn’t a security issue because, although a malicious
                  client could request the resumption of a session, the client still won’t know
                  the private negotiated session key.

172   Chapter 7
        Client                                                 Server

                                    Client HELLO

                                    Server HELLO                        Required packets
                                                                        Optional packets
                                  Server certificate

                               Request client certificate

                                 Server HELLO Done

                             Client certificate and verify

                                Client key exchange

                                 Change cipher spec

                                    Client finished

                             Change cipher specification

                                   Encrypted traffic

Figure 7-19: The TLS handshake process

                  Initial Negotiation
                  As the first step in the handshake, the client and server negotiate the secu-
                  rity parameters they want to use for the TLS connection using a HELLO
                  message. One of the pieces of information in a HELLO message is the client
                  random, a random value that ensures the connection process cannot be eas-
                  ily replayed. The HELLO message also indicates what types of ciphers the
                  client supports. Although TLS is designed to be flexible with regard to what
                  encryption algorithms it uses, it only supports symmetric ciphers, such as
                  RC4 or AES, because using public key encryption would be too expensive
                  from a computational perspective.
                       The server responds with its own HELLO message that indicates what
                  cipher it has chosen from the available list provided by the client. (The
                  connection ends if the pair cannot negotiate a common cipher.) The
                  server HELLO message also contains the server random, another random
                  value that adds additional replay protection to the connection. Next, the
                  server sends its X.509 certificate, as well as any necessary intermediate CA
                  certificates, so the client can make an informed decision about the iden-
                  tity of the server. Then the server sends a HELLO Done packet to inform
                  the client it can proceed to authenticate the connection.

                                                                          Network Protocol Security   173
                  Endpoint Authentication
                  The client must verify that the server certificates are legitimate and that
                  they meet the client’s own security requirements. First, the client must ver-
                  ify the identity in the certificate by matching the certificate’s Subject field
                  to the server’s domain name. For example, Figure 7-20 shows a certificate
                  for the domain www.domain.com. The Subject contains a Common Name
                  (CN) u field that matches this domain.

                                     

Figure 7-20: The Certificate Subject for www.domain.com

                       A certificate’s Subject and Issuer fields are not simple strings but
                  X.500 names, which contain other fields, such as the Organization (typi-
                  cally the name of the company that owns the certificate) and Email (an
                  arbitrary email address). However, only the CN is ever checked during the
                  handshake to verify an identity, so don’t be confused by the extra data. It’s
                  also possible to have wildcards in the CN field, which is useful for shar-
                  ing certificates with multiple servers running on a subdomain name. For
                  example, a CN set to *.domain.com would match both www.domain.com and
                  blog.domain.com.
                       After the client has checked the identity of the endpoint (that is, the
                  server at the other end of the connection), it must ensure that the certifi-
                  cate is trusted. It does so by building the chain of trust for the certificate
                  and any intermediate CA certificates, checking to make sure none of the
                  certificates appear on any certificate revocation lists. If the root of the

174   Chapter 7
chain is not trusted by the client, it can assume the certificate is suspect
and drop the connection to the server. Figure 7-21 shows a simple chain
with an intermediate CA for www.domain.com.

Figure 7-21: The chain of trust for www.domain.com

      TLS also supports an optional client certificate that allows the server to
authenticate the client. If the server requests a client certificate, it sends a
list of acceptable root certificates to the client during its HELLO phase. The
client can then search its available certificates and choose the most appro-
priate one to send back to the server. It sends the certificate—along with a
verification message containing a hash of all the handshake messages sent
and received up to this point—signed with the certificate’s private key. The
server can verify that the signature matches the key in the certificate and
grant the client access; however, if the match fails, the server can close the
connection. The signature proves to the server that the client possesses the
private key associated with the certificate.

Establishing Encryption
When the endpoint has been authenticated, the client and server can finally
establish an encrypted connection. To do so, the client sends a randomly
generated pre-master secret to the server encrypted with the server’s certificate
public key. Next, both client and server combine the pre-master secret with
the client and server randoms, and they use this combined value to seed a
random number generator that generates a 48-byte master secret, which will
be the session key for the encrypted connection. (The fact that both the

                                                          Network Protocol Security   175
                  server and the client generate the master key provides replay protection for
                  the connection, because if either endpoint sends a different random during
                  negotiation, the endpoints will generate different master secrets.)
                       When both endpoints have the master secret, or session key, an
                  encrypted connection is possible. The client issues a change cipher spec
                  packet to tell the server it will only send encrypted messages from here
                  on. However, the client needs to send one final message to the server
                  before normal traffic can be transmitted: the finished packet. This packet
                  is encrypted with the session key and contains a hash of all the handshake
                  messages sent and received during the handshake process. This is a crucial
                  step in protecting against a downgrade attack, in which an attacker modifies
                  the handshake process to try to reduce the security of the connection by
                  selecting weak encryption algorithms. Once the server receives the finished
                  message, it can validate that the negotiated session key is correct (other-
                  wise, the packet wouldn’t decrypt) and check that the hash is correct. If not,
                  it can close the connection. But if all is correct, the server will send its own
                  change cipher spec message to the client, and encrypted communications
                  can begin.
                       Each encrypted packet is also verified using an HMAC, which provides
                  data authentication and ensures data integrity. This verification is particu-
                  larly important if a stream cipher, such as RC4, has been negotiated; other-
                  wise, the encrypted blocks could be trivially modified.

                  Meeting Security Requirements
                  The TLS protocol successfully meets the four security requirements listed at
                  the beginning of this chapter and summarized in Table 7-4.

Table 7-4: How TLS Meets Security Requirements

                  Security requirement     How it’s met
                  Data confidentiality     Selectable strong cipher suites
                                           Secure key exchange
                  Data integrity           Encrypted data is protected by an HMAC
                                           Handshake packets are verified by final hash verification
                  Server authentication    The client can choose to verify the server endpoint using
                                           the PKI and the issued certificate
                  Client authentication    Optional certificate-based client authentication

                        But there are problems with TLS. The most significant one, which as
                  of this writing has not been corrected in the latest versions of the protocol,
                  is its reliance on certificate-based PKI. The protocol depends entirely on
                  trust that certificates are issued to the correct people and organizations. If
                  the certificate for a network connection indicates the application is com-
                  municating to a Google server, you assume that only Google would be able
                  to purchase the required certificate. Unfortunately, this isn’t always the
                  case. Situations in which corporations and governments have subverted the
                  CA process to generate certificates have been documented. In addition,

176   Chapter 7
mistakes have been made when CAs didn’t perform their due diligence and
issued bad certificates, such as the Google certificate shown in Figure 7-22
that eventually had to be revoked.

Figure 7-22: A certificate for Google “wrongly” issued
by CA TÜRKTRUST

      One partial fix to the certificate model is a process called certificate pin-
ning. Pinning means that an application restricts acceptable certificates
and CA issuers for certain domains. As a result, if someone manages to
fraudulently obtain a valid certificate for www.google.com, the application
will notice that the certificate doesn’t meet the CA restrictions and will fail
the connection.
      Of course, certificate pinning has its downsides and so is not applicable
to every scenario. The most prevalent issue is the management of the pinning
list; specifically, building an initial list might not be too challenging a task,
but updating the list adds additional burdens. Another issue is that a devel-
oper cannot easily migrate the certificates to another CA or easily change
certificates without also having to issue updates to all clients.
      Another problem with TLS, at least when it comes to network surveil-
lance, is that a TLS connection can be captured from the network and
stored by an attacker until it’s needed. If that attacker ever obtains the
server’s private key, all historical traffic could be decrypted. For this rea-
son, a number of network applications are moving toward exchanging keys
using the DH algorithm in addition to using certificates for identity verifi-
cation. This allows for perfect forward secrecy—even if the private key is com-
promised, it shouldn’t be easy to also calculate the DH-generated key.

                                                           Network Protocol Security   177
     Final Words
                  This chapter focused on the basics of protocol security. Protocol security
                  has many aspects and is a very complex topic. Therefore, it’s important to
                  understand what could go wrong and identify the problem during any pro-
                  tocol analysis.
                       Encryption and signatures make it difficult for an attacker to capture
                  sensitive information being transmitted over a network. The process of
                  encryption converts plaintext (the data you want to hide) into cipher text
                  (the encrypted data). Signatures are used to verify that the data being
                  transmitted across a network hasn’t been compromised. An appropriate
                  signature can also be used to verify the identity of the sender. The ability to
                  verify the sender is very useful for authenticating users and computers over
                  an untrusted network.
                       Also described in this chapter are some possible attacks against cryp-
                  tography as used in protocol security, including the well-known padding
                  oracle attack, which could allow an attack to decrypt traffic being sent to
                  and from a server. In later chapters, I’ll explain in more detail how to ana-
                  lyze a protocol for its security configuration, including the encryption algo-
                  rithms used to protect sensitive data.

178   Chapter 7
