                                9
               T he R oot C a u ses o f
                 V u lnerabilities

This chapter describes the common root causes of
security vulnerabilities that result from the implemen-
tation of a protocol. These causes are distinct from
vulnerabilities that derive from a protocol’s specifica-
tion (as discussed in Chapter 7). A vulnerability does
not have to be directly exploitable for it to be con-
sidered a vulnerability. It might weaken the security
stance of the protocol, making other attacks easier. Or
it might allow access to more serious vulnerabilities.
     After reading this chapter, you’ll begin to see patterns in protocols that
will help you identify security vulnerabilities during your analysis. (I won’t
discuss how to exploit the different classes until Chapter 10.)
                       In this chapter, I’ll assume you are investigating the protocol using all
                  means available to you, including analyzing the network traffic, reverse
                  engineering the application’s binaries, reviewing source code, and manu-
                  ally testing the client and servers to determine actual vulnerabilities. Some
                  vulnerabilities will always be easier to find using techniques such as fuzzing
                  (a technique by which network protocol data is mutated to uncover issues)
                  whereas others will be easier to find by reviewing code.

     Vulnerability Classes
                  When you’re dealing with security vulnerabilities, it’s useful to categorize
                  them into a set of distinct classes to assess the risk posed by the exploita-
                  tion of the vulnerability. As an example, consider a vulnerability that, when
                  exploited, allows an attack to compromise the system an application is run-
                  ning on.

                  Remote Code Execution
                  Remote code execution is a catchall term for any vulnerability that allows an
                  attacker to run arbitrary code in the context of the application that imple-
                  ments the protocol. This could occur through hijacking the logic of the
                  application or influencing the command line of subprocesses created dur-
                  ing normal operation.
                       Remote code execution vulnerabilities are usually the most security
                  critical because they allow an attacker to compromise the system on which
                  the application is executing. Such a compromise would provide the attacker
                  with access to anything the application can access and might even allow the
                  hosting network to be compromised.

                  Denial-of-Service
                  Applications are generally designed to provide a service. If a vulnerability
                  exists that when exploited causes an application to crash or become unre-
                  sponsive, an attacker can use that vulnerability to deny legitimate users
                  access to a particular application and the service it provides. Commonly
                  referred to as a denial-of-service vulnerability, it requires few resources, some-
                  times as little as a single network packet, to bring down the entire applica-
                  tion. Without a doubt, this can be quite detrimental in the wrong hands.
                       We can categorize denial-of-service vulnerabilities as either persistent or
                  nonpersistent. A persistent vulnerability permanently prevents legitimate users
                  from accessing the service (at least until an administrator corrects the issue).
                  The reason is that exploiting the vulnerability corrupts some stored state that
                  ensures the application crashes when it’s restarted. A nonpersistent vulner-
                  ability lasts only as long as an attacker is sending data to cause the denial-of-
                  service condition. Usually, if the application is allowed to restart on its own or
                  given sufficient time, service will be restored.

208   Chapter 9
       Information Disclosure
       Many applications are black boxes, which in normal operation provide you
       with only certain information over the network. An information disclosure
       vulnerability exists if there is a way to get an application to provide infor-
       mation it wasn’t originally designed to provide, such as the contents of
       memory, filesystem paths, or authentication credentials. Such information
       might be directly useful to an attacker because it could aid further exploita-
       tion. For example, the information could disclose the location of important
       in-memory structures that could help in remote code execution.

       Authentication Bypass
       Many applications require users to supply authentication credentials to
       access an application completely. Valid credentials might be a username
       and password or a more complex verification, like a cryptographically
       secure exchange. Authentication limits access to resources, but it can also
       reduce an application’s attack surface when an attacker is unauthenticated.
            An authentication bypass vulnerability exists in an application if there is
       a way to authenticate to the application without providing all the authen-
       tication credentials. Such vulnerabilities might be as simple as an applica-
       tion incorrectly checking a password—for example, because it compares a
       simple checksum of the password, which is easy to brute force. Or vulner-
       abilities could be due to more complex issues, such as SQL injection (dis-
       cussed later in “SQL Injection” on page 228).

       Authorization Bypass
       Not all users are created equal. Applications may support different types of
       users, such as read-only, low-privilege, or administrator, through the same
       interface. If an application provides access to resources like files, it might
       need to restrict access based on authentication. To allow access to secured
       resources, an authorization process must be built in to determine which
       rights and resources have been assigned to a user.
           An authorization bypass vulnerability occurs when an attacker can gain
       extra rights or access to resources they are not privileged to access. For
       example, an attacker might change the authenticated user or user privi-
       leges directly, or a protocol might not correctly check user permissions.

note   Don’t confuse authorization bypass with authentication bypass vulnerabilities.
       The major difference between the two is that an authentication bypass allows you
       to authenticate as a specific user from the system’s point of view; an authorization
       bypass allows an attacker to access a resource from an incorrect authentication state
       (which might in fact be unauthenticated).

           Having defined the vulnerability classes, let’s look at their causes in more
       detail and explore some of the protocol structures in which you’ll find them.

                                                               The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   209
                  Each type of root cause contains a list of the possible vulnerability classes that
                  it might lead to. Although this is not an exhaustive list, I cover those you are
                  most likely to encounter regularly.

     Memory Corruption Vulnerabilities
                  If you’ve done any analysis, memory corruption is most likely the primary
                  security vulnerability you’ll have encountered. Applications store their cur-
                  rent state in memory, and if that memory can be corrupted in a controlled
                  way, the result can cause any class of security vulnerability. Such vulner-
                  abilities can simply cause an application to crash (resulting in a denial-of-
                  service condition) or be more dangerous, such as allowing an attacker to
                  run executable code on the target system.

                  Memory-Safe vs. Memory-Unsafe Programming Languages
                  Memory corruption vulnerabilities are heavily dependent on the pro-
                  gramming language the application was developed in. When it comes to
                  memory corruption, the biggest difference between languages is tied to
                  whether a language (and its hosting environment) is memory safe or memory
                  unsafe. Memory-safe languages, such as Java, C#, Python, and Ruby, do not
                  normally require the developer to deal with low-level memory manage-
                  ment. They sometimes provide libraries or constructs to perform unsafe
                  operations (such as C#’s unsafe keyword). But using these libraries or con-
                  structs requires developers to make their use explicit, which allows that
                  use to be audited for safety. Memory-safe languages will also commonly
                  perform bounds checking for in-memory buffer access to prevent out-of-
                  bounds reads and writes. Just because a language is memory safe doesn’t
                  mean it’s completely immune to memory corruption. However, corruption
                  is more likely to be a bug in the language runtime than a mistake by the
                  original developer.
                       On the other hand, memory-unsafe languages, such as C and C++,
                  perform very little memory access verification and lack robust mechanisms
                  for automatically managing memory. As a result, many types of memory
                  corruption can occur. How exploitable these vulnerabilities are depends
                  on the operating system, the compiler used, and how the application is
                  structured.
                       Memory corruption is one of the oldest and best known root causes of
                  vulnerabilities; therefore, considerable effort has been made to eliminate it.
                  (I’ll discuss some of the mitigation strategies in more depth in Chapter 10
                  when I detail how you might exploit these vulnerabilities.)

                  Memory Buffer Overflows
                  Perhaps the best known memory corruption vulnerability is a buffer overflow.
                  This vulnerability occurs when an application tries to put more data into a
                  region of memory than that region was designed to hold. Buffer overflows

210   Chapter 9
may be exploited to get arbitrary programs to run or to bypass security
restrictions, such as user access controls. Figure 9-1 shows a simple buf-
fer overflow caused by input data that is too large for the allocated buffer,
resulting in memory corruption.

             Allocated buffer                        Corruption

   0        0       0       0           0       ?     ?        ?         ?

   'A'     'A'     'A'     'A'         'A'     'A'   'A'      'A'

                                Input buffer

Figure 9-1: Buffer overflow memory corruption

     Buffer overflows can occur for either of two reasons: Commonly referred
to as a fixed-length buffer overflow, an application incorrectly assumes the input
buffer will fit into the allocated buffer. A variable-length buffer overflow occurs
because the size of the allocated buffer is incorrectly calculated.

Fixed-Length Buffer Overflows
By far, the simplest buffer overflow occurs when an application incorrectly
checks the length of an external data value relative to a fixed-length buffer
in memory. That buffer might reside on the stack, be allocated on a heap,
or exist as a global buffer defined at compile time. The key is that the mem-
ory length is determined prior to knowledge of the actual data length.
     The cause of the overflow depends on the application, but it can be
as simple as the application not checking length at all or checking length
incorrectly. Listing 9-1 is an example.

def read_string()
{
u byte str[32];
  int i = 0;

  do
  {
  v str[i] = read_byte();
     i = i + 1;
  }
w while(str[i-1] != 0);
  printf("Read String: %s\n", str);
}

Listing 9-1: A simple fixed-length buffer overflow

    This code first allocates the buffer where it will store the string (on the
stack) and allocates 32 bytes of data u. Next, it goes into a loop that reads a

                                                           The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   211
                  byte from the network and stores it an incrementing index in the buffer v.
                  The loop exits when the last byte read from the network is equal to zero,
                  which indicates that the value has been sent w.
                       In this case, the developer has made a mistake: the loop doesn’t verify
                  the current length at w and therefore reads as much data as available
                  from the network, leading to memory corruption. Of course, this problem
                  is due to the fact that unsafe programming languages do not perform
                  bounds checks on arrays. This vulnerability might be very simple to exploit
                  if no compiler mitigations are in place, such as stack cookies to detect the
                  corruption.

                                            Unsa fe S tring F unctions

                      The C programming language does not define a string type. Instead, it uses
                      memory pointers to a list of char types. The end of the string is indicated by a
                      zero-value character. This isn’t a security problem directly. However, when the
                      built-in libraries to manipulate strings were developed, safety was not consid-
                      ered. Consequently, many of these string functions are very dangerous to use in
                      a security-critical application.
                            To understand how dangerous these functions can be, let’s look at an
                      example using strcpy, the function that copies strings. This function takes only
                      two arguments: a pointer to the source string and a pointer to the destination
                      memory buffer to store the copy. Notice that nothing indicates the length of the
                      destination memory buffer. And as you’ve already seen, a memory-unsafe lan-
                      guage like C doesn’t keep track of buffer sizes. If a programmer tries to copy a
                      string that is longer than the destination buffer, especially if it’s from an external
                      untrusted source, memory corruption will occur.
                            More recent C compilers and standardizations of the language have added
                      more secure versions of these functions, such as strcpy_s, which adds a destina-
                      tion length argument. But if an application uses an older string function, such as
                      strcpy, strcat, or sprintf, then there’s a good chance of a serious memory cor-
                      ruption vulnerability.

                       Even if a developer performs a length check, that check may not be done
                  correctly. Without automatic bounds checking on array access, it is up to the
                  developer to verify all reads and writes. Listing 9-2 shows a corrected version
                  of Listing 9-1 that takes into account strings that are longer than the buffer
                  size. Still, even with the fix, a vulnerability is lurking in the code.

                  def read_string_fixed()
                  {
                  u byte str[32];
                    int i = 0;

212   Chapter 9
  do
  {
 v str[i] = read_byte();
     i = i + 1;
  }
w while((str[i-1] != 0) && (i < 32));

  /* Ensure zero terminated if we ended because of length */
x str[i] = 0;

    printf("Read String: %s\n", str);
}

Listing 9-2: An off-by-one buffer overflow

     As in Listing 9-1, at u and v, the code allocates a fixed-stack buffer
and reads the string in a loop. The first difference is at w. The developer
has added a check to make sure to exit the loop if it has already read 32
bytes, the maximum the stack buffer can hold. Unfortunately, to ensure
that the string buffer is suitably terminated, a zero byte is written to the last
position available in the buffer x. At this point, i has the value of 32. But
because languages like C start buffer indexing from 0, this actually means it
will write 0 to the 33rd element of the buffer, thereby causing corruption, as
shown in Figure 9-2.

                   Allocated buffer

     0      0            ...             0      0      ?          ?         ?

 str[0]                               str[30]       str[32]

Figure 9-2: An off-by-one error memory corruption

     This results in an off-by-one error (due to the shift in index position), a
common error in memory-unsafe languages with zero-based buffer index-
ing. If the overwritten value is important—for example, if it is the return
address for the function—this vulnerability can be exploitable.

Variable-Length Buffer Overflows
An application doesn’t have to use fixed-length buffers to stored protocol
data. In most situations, it’s possible for the application to allocate a buf-
fer of the correct size for the data being stored. However, if the application
incorrectly calculates the buffer size, a variable-length buffer overflow can
occur.
     As the length of the buffer is calculated at runtime based on the length
of the protocol data, you might think a variable-length buffer overflow is
unlikely to be a real-world vulnerability. But this vulnerability can still occur

                                                           The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   213
                      in a number of ways. For one, an application might simply incorrectly cal-
                      culate the buffer length. (Applications should be rigorously tested prior to
                      being made generally available, but that’s not always the case.)
                           A bigger issue occurs if the calculation induces undefined behavior by
                      the language or platform. For example, Listing 9-3 demonstrates a common
                      way in which the length calculation is incorrect.

                      def read_uint32_array()
                      {
                        uint32 len;
                        uint32[] buf;

                          // Read the number of words from the network
                  u       len = read_uint32();

                          // Allocate memory buffer
                  v       buf = malloc(len * sizeof(uint32));

                          // Read values
                          for(uint32 i = 0; i < len; ++i)
                          {
                  w         buf[i] = read_uint32();
                          }
                          printf("Read in %d uint32 values\n", len);
                      }

Listing 9-3: An incorrect allocation length calculation

                           Here the memory buffer is dynamically allocated at runtime to contain
                      the total size of the input data from the protocol. First, the code reads a
                      32-bit integer, which it uses to determine the number of following 32-bit
                      values in the protocol u. Next, it determines the total allocation size and
                      then allocates a buffer of a corresponding size v. Finally, the code starts a
                      loop that reads each value from the protocol into the allocated buffer w.
                           What could possibly go wrong? To answer, let’s take a quick look at
                      integer overflows.

                      Integer Overflows
                      At the processor instruction level, integer arithmetic operations are com-
                      monly performed using modulo arithmetic. Modulo arithmetic allows values
                      to wrap if they go above a certain value, which is called the modulus. A pro-
                      cessor uses modulo arithmetic if it supports only a certain native integer
                      size, such as 32 or 64 bits. This means that the result of any arithmetic oper-
                      ation must always be within the ranges allowed for the fixed-size integer
                      value. For example, an 8-bit integer can take only the values between 0 and
                      255; it cannot possibly represent any other values. Figure 9-3 shows what
                      happens when you multiply a value by 4, causing the integer to overflow.

214   Chapter 9
     MSB                       LSB
×4          01000001                 Original length: 0x41

 1          00000100                 Overflowed length: 0x104

 =          00000100                 Allocation length: 0x04

Figure 9-3: A simple integer overflow

     Although this figure shows 8-bit integers for the sake of brevity, the same
logic applies to 32-bit integers. When we multiply the original length 0x41
or 65 by 4, the result is 0x104 or 260. That result can’t possibly fit into an
8-bit integer with a range of 0 to 255. So the processor drops the overflowed
bit (or more likely stores it in a special flag indicating that an overflow has
occurred), and the result is the value 4—not what we expected. The proces-
sor might issue an error to indicate that an overflow has occurred, but mem-
ory-unsafe programming languages typically ignore this sort of error. In fact,
the act of wrapping the integer value is used in architectures such as x86 to
indicate the signed result of an operation. Higher-level languages might indi-
cate the error, or they might not support integer overflow at all, for instance,
by extending the size of the integer on demand.
     Returning to Listing 9-3, you can see that if an attacker supplies a suit-
ably chosen value for the buffer length, the multiplication by 4 will over-
flow. This results in a smaller number being allocated to memory than is
being transmitted over the network. When the values are being read from
the network and inserted into the allocated buffer, the parser uses the orig-
inal length. Because the original length of the data doesn’t match up to the
size of the allocation, values will be written outside of the buffer, causing
memory corruption.

             W hat H appens If W e A llocate Zero By tes?

     Consider what happens when we calculate an allocation length of zero bytes.
     Would the allocation simply fail because you can’t allocate a zero-length buf-
     fer? As with many issues in languages like C, it is up to the implementation to
     determine what occurs (the dreaded implementation-defined behavior). In the
     case of the C allocator function, malloc, passing zero as the requested size can
     return a failure, or it can return a buffer of indeterminate size, which hardly
     instills confidence.

                                                               The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   215
                    Out-of-Bounds Buffer Indexing
                    You’ve already seen that memory-unsafe languages do not perform bounds
                    checks. But sometimes a vulnerability occurs because the size of the buf-
                    fer is incorrect, leading to memory corruption. Out-of-bounds indexing
                    stems from a different root cause: instead of incorrectly specifying the
                    size of a data value, we’ll have some control over the position in the buffer
                    we’ll access. If incorrect bounds checking is done on the access position,
                    a vulnerability exists. The vulnerability can in many cases be exploited to
                    write data outside the buffer, leading to selective memory corruption. Or it
                    can be exploited by reading a value outside the buffer, which could lead to
                    information disclosure or even remote code execution. Listing 9-4 shows an
                    example that exploits the first case—writing data outside the buffer.

                  u byte app_flags[32];

                   def update_flag_value()
                   {
                   v byte index = read_byte();
                     byte value = read_byte();

                      printf("Writing %d to index %d\n", value, index);

                   w app_flags[index] = value;
                   }

Listing 9-4: Writing to an out-of-bound buffer index

                         This short example shows a protocol with a common set of flags that
                    can be updated by the client. Perhaps it’s designed to control certain server
                    properties. The listing defines a fixed buffer of 32 flags at u. At v it reads
                    a byte from the network, which it will use as the index (with a range of 0 to
                    255 possible values), and then it writes the byte to the flag buffer w. The
                    vulnerability in this case should be obvious: an attacker can provide values
                    outside the range of 0 to 32 with the index, leading to selective memory
                    corruption.
                         Out-of-bounds indexing doesn’t just have to involve writing. It works
                    just as well when values are read from a buffer with an incorrect index. If
                    the index were used to read a value and return it to the client, a simple
                    information disclosure vulnerability would exist.
                         A particularly critical vulnerability could occur if the index were used
                    to identify functions within an application to run. This usage could be
                    something simple, such as using a command identifier as the index, which
                    would usually be programmed by storing memory pointers to functions in
                    a buffer. The index is then used to look up the function used to handle the
                    specified command from the network. Out-of-bounds indexing would result
                    in reading an unexpected value from memory that would be interpreted
                    as a pointer to a function. This issue can easily result in exploitable remote

216   Chapter 9
    code execution vulnerabilities. Typically, all that is required is finding an
    index value that, when read as a function pointer, would cause execution to
    transfer to a memory location an attacker can easily control.

    Data Expansion Attack
    Even modern, high-speed networks compress data to reduce the number
    of raw octets being sent, whether to improve performance by reducing data
    transfer time or to reduce bandwidth costs. At some point, that data must
    be decompressed, and if compression is done by an application, data expan-
    sion attacks are possible, as shown in Listing 9-5.

    void read_compressed_buffer()
    {
      byte buf[];
      uint32 len;
      int i = 0;

        // Read the decompressed size
u       len = read_uint32();

        // Allocate memory buffer
v       buf = malloc(len);

w       gzip_decompress_data(buf)

        printf("Decompressed in %d bytes\n", len);
    }

Listing 9-5: Example code vulnerable to a data expansion attack

        Here, the compressed data is prefixed with the total size of the decom-
    pressed data. The size is read from the network u and is used to allocate the
    required buffer v. After that, a call is made to decompress the data to the
    buffer w using a streaming algorithm, such as gzip. The code does not check
    the decompressed data to see if it will actually fit into the allocated buffer.
        Of course, this attack isn’t limited to compression. Any data transforma-
    tion process, whether it’s encryption, compression, or text encoding conver-
    sions, can change the data size and lead to an expansion attack.

    Dynamic Memory Allocation Failures
    A system’s memory is finite, and when the memory pool runs dry, a dynamic
    memory allocation pool must handle situations in which an application needs
    more. In the C language, this usually results in an error value being returned
    from the allocation functions (usually a NUL pointer); in other languages, it
    might result in the termination of the environment or the generation of an
    exception.
        Several possible vulnerabilities may arise from not correctly handling
    a dynamic memory allocation failure. The most obvious is an application
    crash, which can lead to a denial-of-service condition.

                                                             The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   217
     Default or Hardcoded Credentials
                  When one is deploying an application that uses authentication, default cre-
                  dentials are commonly added as part of the installation process. Usually,
                  these accounts have a default username and password associated with them.
                  The defaults create a problem if the administrator deploying the applica-
                  tion does not reconfigure the credentials for these accounts prior to mak-
                  ing the service available.
                      A more serious problem occurs when an application has hard-
                  coded credentials that can be changed only by rebuilding the applica-
                  tion. These credentials may have been added for debugging purposes
                  during development and not removed before final release. Or they could
                  be an intentional backdoor added with malicious intent. Listing 9-6 shows
                  an example of authentication compromised by hardcoded credentials.

                  def process_authentication()
                  {
                  u string username = read_string();
                    string password = read_string();

                    // Check for debug user, don't forget to remove this before release
                  v if(username == "debug")
                    {
                      return true;
                    }
                    else
                    {
                    w return check_user_password(username, password);
                    }
                  }

Listing 9-6: An example of default credentials

                      The application first reads the username and password from the net-
                  work u and then checks for a hardcoded username, debug v. If the appli-
                  cation finds username debug, it automatically passes the authentication
                  process; otherwise, it follows the normal checking process w. To exploit
                  such a default username, all you’d need to do is log in as the debug user. In
                  a real-world application, the credentials might not be that simple to use.
                  The login process might require you to have an accepted source IP address,
                  send a magic string to the application prior to login, and so on.

     User Enumeration
                  Most user-facing authentication mechanisms use usernames to control access
                  to resources. Typically, that username will be combined with a token, such as
                  a password, to complete authentication. The user identity doesn’t have to be a
                  secret: usernames are often a publicly available email address.
                       There are still some advantages to not allowing someone, especially
                  unauthenticated users, to gain access to this information. By identifying

218   Chapter 9
        valid user accounts, it is more likely that an attacker could brute force
        passwords. Therefore, any vulnerability that discloses the existence of
        valid usernames or provides access to the user list is an issue worth iden-
        tifying. A vulnerability that discloses the existence of users is shown in
        Listing 9-7.

        def process_authentication()
        {
          string username = read_string();
          string password = read_string();

        u if(user_exists(username) == false)
          {
          v write_error("User " + username " doesn't exist");
          }
          else
          {
          w if(check_user_password(username, password))
            {
               write_success("User OK");
            }
            else
            {
            x write_error("User " + username " password incorrect");
            }
          }
        }

Listing 9-7: Disclosing the existence of users in an application

             The listing shows a simple authentication process where the username
        and password are read from the network. It first checks for the existence of
        a user u; if the user doesn’t exist, an error is returned v. If the user exists,
        the listing checks the password for that user w. Again, if this fails, an error
        is written x. You’ll notice that the two error messages in v and x are dif-
        ferent depending on whether the user does not exist or only the password is
        incorrect. This information is sufficient to determine which usernames are
        valid.
             By knowing a username, an attacker can more easily brute force valid
        authentication credentials. (It’s simpler to guess only a password rather
        than both a password and username.) Knowing a username can also give
        an attacker enough information to mount a successful social-engineering
        attack that would convince a user to disclose their password or other sensi-
        tive information.

Incorrect Resource Access
        Protocols that provide access to resources, such as HTTP or other file-shar-
        ing protocols, use an identifier for the resource you want to access. That
        identifier could be a file path or other unique identifier. The application

                                                                     The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   219
                      must resolve that identifier in order to access the target resource. On suc-
                      cess, the contents of the resource are accessed; otherwise, the protocol
                      throws an error.
                          Several vulnerabilities can affect such protocols when they’re process-
                      ing resource identifiers. It’s worth testing for all possible vulnerabilities and
                      carefully observing the response from the application.

                      Canonicalization
                      If the resource identifier is a hierarchical list of resources and directories,
                      it’s normally referred to as a path. Operating systems typically define the
                      way to specify relative path information is to use two dots (..) to indicate a
                      parent directory relationship. Before a file can be accessed, the OS must
                      find it using this relative path information. A very naive remote file proto-
                      col could take a path supplied by a remote user, concatenate it with a base
                      directory, and pass that directly to the OS, as shown in Listing 9-8. This is
                      known as a canonicalization vulnerability.

                   def send_file_to_client()
                   {
                  u string name = read_string();
                     // Concatenate name from client with base path
                  v string fullPath = "/files" + name;

                  w       int fd = open(fullPath, READONLY);

                          // Read file to memory
                  x       byte data[] read_to_end(fd);

                          // Send to client
                  y       write_bytes(data, len(data));
                      }

Listing 9-8: A path canonicalization vulnerability

                           This listing reads a string from the network that represents the name of
                      the file to access u. This string is then concatenated with a fixed base path
                      into the full path v to allow access only to a limited area of the filesystem.
                      The file is then opened by the operating system w, and if the path contains
                      relative components, they are resolved. Finally, the file is read into memory x
                      and returned to the client y.
                           If you find code that performs this same sequence of operations, you’ve
                      identified a canonicalization vulnerability. An attacker could send a relative
                      path that is resolved by the OS to a file outside the base directory, resulting
                      in sensitive files being disclosed, as shown in Figure 9-4.
                           Even if an application does some checking on the path before sending
                      it to the OS, the application must correctly match how the OS will inter-
                      pret the string. For example, on Microsoft Windows backslashes (\) and
                      forward slashes (/) are acceptable as path separators. If an application
                      checks only backslashes, the standard for Windows, there might still be a
                      vulnerability.

220   Chapter 9
 Normal operation

                                         Protocol data

            /files                          /passwd

         Concatenate

                        /files/passwd

         Canonicalize

                        /files/passwd

 Vulnerable operation

                                         Protocol data

            /files                      /../etc/passwd

         Concatenate

                     /files/../etc/passwd

         Canonicalize

                        /etc/passwd

Figure 9-4: A normal path canonicalization operation versus
a vulnerable one

     Although having the ability to download files from a system might be
enough to compromise it, a more serious issue results if the canonicaliza-
tion vulnerability occurs in file upload protocols. If you can upload files to
the application-hosting system and specify an arbitrary path, it’s much eas-
ier to compromise a system. You could, for example, upload scripts or other
executable content to the system and get the system to execute that content,
leading to remote code execution.

Verbose Errors
If, when an application attempts to retrieve a resource, the resource is not
found, applications typically return some error information. That error
can be as simple as an error code or a full description of what doesn’t exist;
however, it should not disclose any more information than required. Of
course, that’s not always the case.
     If an application returns an error message when requesting a resource
that doesn’t exist and inserts local information about the resource being

                                                         The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   221
                  accessed into the error, a simple vulnerability is present. If a file was being
                  accessed, the error might contain the local path to the file that was passed
                  to the OS: this information might prove useful for someone trying to get
                  further access to the hosting system, as shown in Listing 9-9.

                  def send_file_to_client_with_error()
                  {
                  u string name = read_string();

                    // Concatenate name from client with base path
                  v string fullPath = "/files" + name;

                  w if(!exist(fullPath))
                    {
                    x write_error("File " + fullPath + " doesn't exist");
                    }
                    else
                    {
                    y write_file_to_client(fullPath);
                    }
                  }

Listing 9-9: An error message information disclosure

                       This listing shows a simple example of an error message being returned
                  to a client when a requested file doesn’t exist. At u it reads a string from
                  the network that represents the name of the file to access. This string is
                  then concatenated with a fixed base path into the full path at v. The exis-
                  tence of the file is checked with the operating system at w. If the file doesn’t
                  exist, the full path to the file is added to an error string and returned to the
                  client x; otherwise, the data is returned y.
                       The listing is vulnerable to disclosing the location of the base path
                  on the local filesystem. Furthermore, the path could be used with other
                  vulnerabilities to get more access to the system. It could also disclose the
                  current user running the application if, for example, the resource directory
                  was in the user’s home directory.

     Memory Exhaustion Attacks
                  The resources of the system on which an application runs are finite: avail-
                  able disk space, memory, and processing power have limits. Once a critical
                  system resource is exhausted, the system might start failing in unexpected
                  ways, such as by no longer responding to new network connections.
                       When dynamic memory is used to process a protocol, the risk of over-
                  allocating memory or forgetting to free the allocated blocks always exists,
                  resulting in memory exhaustion. The simplest way in which a protocol can be
                  susceptible to a memory exhaustion vulnerability is if it allocates memory
                  dynamically based on an absolute value transmitted in the protocol. For
                  example, consider Listing 9-10.

222   Chapter 9
        def read_buffer()
        {
          byte buf[];
          uint32 len;
          int i = 0;

         // Read the number of bytes from the network
       u len = read_uint32();

         // Allocate memory buffer
       v buf = malloc(len);

         // Allocate bytes from network
       w read_bytes(buf, len);

            printf("Read in %d bytes\n", len);
        }

Listing 9-10: A memory exhaustion attack

             This listing reads a variable-length buffer from the protocol. First, it
        reads in the length in bytes u as an unsigned 32-bit integer. Next, it tries
        to allocate a buffer of that length, prior to reading it from the network v.
        Finally, it reads the data from the network w. The problem is that an
        attacker could easily specify a very large length, say 2 gigabytes, which
        when allocated would block out a large region of memory that no other
        part of the application could access. The attacker could then slowly send
        data to the server (to try to prevent the connection from closing due to a
        timeout) and, by repeating this multiple times, eventually starve the system
        of memory.
             Most systems would not allocate physical memory until it was used,
        thereby limiting the general impact on the system as a whole. However,
        this attack would be more serious on dedicated embedded systems where
        memory is at a premium and virtual memory is nonexistent.

Storage Exhaustion Attacks
        Storage exhaustion attacks are less likely to occur with today’s multi-terabyte
        hard disks but can still be a problem for more compact embedded systems or
        devices without storage. If an attacker can exhaust a system’s storage capacity,
        the application or others on that system could begin failing. Such an attack
        might even prevent the system from rebooting. For example, if an operating
        system needs to write certain files to disk before starting but can’t, a perma-
        nent denial-of-service condition can occur.
             The most common cause of this type of vulnerability is in the logging
        of operating information to disk. For example, if logging is very verbose,
        generating a few hundred kilobytes of data per connection, and the maxi-
        mum log size has no restrictions, it would be fairly simple to flood storage
        by making repeated connections to a service. Such an attack might be

                                                            The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   223
                  particularly effective if an application logs data sent to it remotely and sup-
                  ports compressed data. In such a case, an attacker could spend very little
                  network bandwidth to cause a large amount of data to be logged.

     CPU Exhaustion Attacks
                  Even though today’s average smartphone has multiple CPUs at its disposal,
                  CPUs can do only a certain number of tasks at one time. It is possible
                  to cause a denial-of-service condition if an attacker can consume CPU
                  resources with a minimal amount of effort and bandwidth. Although this
                  can be done in several ways, I’ll discuss only two: exploiting algorithmic
                  complexity and identifying external controllable parameters to crypto-
                  graphic systems.

                  Algorithmic Complexity
                  All computer algorithms have an associated computational cost that repre-
                  sents how much work needs to be performed for a particular input to get
                  the desired output. The more work an algorithm requires, the more time it
                  needs from the system’s processor. In an ideal world, an algorithm should
                  take a constant amount of time, no matter what input it receives. But that is
                  rarely the case.
                       Some algorithms become particularly expensive as the number of input
                  parameters increases. For example, consider the sorting algorithm Bubble
                  Sort. This algorithm inspects each value pair in a buffer and swaps them
                  if the left value of the pair is greater than the right. This has the effect of
                  bubbling the higher values to the end of the buffer until the entire buffer is
                  sorted. Listing 9-11 shows a simple implementation.

                  def bubble_sort(int[] buf)
                  {
                    do
                    {
                       bool swapped = false;
                       int N = len(buf);
                       for(int i = 1; i < N - 1; ++i)
                       {
                         if(buf[i-1] > buf[i])
                         {
                           // Swap values
                           swap( buf[i-1], buf[i] );
                           swapped = true;
                         }
                       }
                    } while(swapped == false);
                  }

Listing 9-11: A simple Bubble Sort implementation

224   Chapter 9
     The amount of work this algorithm requires is proportional to the num-
ber of elements (let’s call the number N) in the buffer you need to sort. In
the best case, this necessitates a single pass through the buffer, requiring N
iterations, which occurs when all elements are already sorted. In the worst
case, when the buffer is sorted in reverse, the algorithm needs to repeat the
sort process N 2 times. If an attacker could specify a large number of reverse-
sorted values, the computational cost of doing this sort becomes significant.
As a result, the sort could consume 100 percent of a CPU’s processing time
and lead to denial-of-service.
     In a real-world example of this, it was discovered that some program-
ming environments, including PHP and Java, used an algorithm for the
hash table implementations that took N 2 operations in the worst case. A
hash table is a data structure that holds values keyed to another value, such
as a textual name. The keys are first hashed using a simple algorithm, which
then determines a bucket into which the value is placed. The N 2 algorithm is
used when inserting the new value into the bucket; ideally, there should be
few collisions between the hash values of keys so the size of the bucket is
small. But by crafting a set of keys with the same hash (but, crucially, differ-
ent key values), an attacker could cause a denial-of-service condition on a
network service (such as a web server) by sending only a few requests.

                                 Big-O Notation

    Big-O notation, a common representation of computational complexity, repre-
    sents the upper bound for an algorithm’s complexity. Table 9-1 lists some com-
    mon Big-O notations for various algorithms, from least to most complex.

Table 9-1: Big-O Notation for Worst-Case Algorithm Complexity

     Notation      Description
     O(1)          Constant time; the algorithm always takes the same amount
                   of time.
     O(log N)      Logarithmic; the worst case is proportional to the logarithm of
                   the number of inputs.
     O(N)          Linear time; the worst case is proportional to the number of
                   inputs.
            2
     O(N )         Quadratic; the worst case is proportional to the square of the
                   number of inputs.
         N
     O(2 )         Exponential; the worst case is proportional to 2 raised to the
                   power N.

         Bear in mind that these are worst-case values that don’t necessarily repre-
    sent real-world complexity. That said, with knowledge of a specific algorithm,
    such as the Bubble Sort, there is a good chance that an attacker could inten-
    tionally trigger the worst case.

                                                          The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   225
                      Configurable Cryptography
                      Cryptographic primitives processing, such as hashing algorithms, can also
                      create a significant amount of computational workload, especially when deal-
                      ing with authentication credentials. The rule in computer security is that
                      passwords should always be hashed using a cryptographic digest algorithm
                      before they are stored. This converts the password into a hash value, which
                      is virtually impossible to reverse into the original password. Even if the hash
                      was disclosed, it would be difficult to get the original password. But someone
                      could still guess the password and generate the hash. If the guessed password
                      matches when hashed, then they’ve discovered the original password. To
                      mitigate this problem, it’s typical to run the hashing operation multiple times
                      to increase an attacker’s computational requirement. Unfortunately, this pro-
                      cess also increases computational cost for the application, which might be a
                      problem when it comes to a denial-of-service condition.
                           A vulnerability can occur if either the hashing algorithm takes an expo-
                      nential amount of time (based on the size of the input) or the algorithm’s
                      number of iterations can be specified externally. The relationship between
                      the time required by most cryptographic algorithms and a given input is
                      fairly linear. However, if you can specify the algorithm’s number of itera-
                      tions without any sensible upper bound, processing could take as long as the
                      attacker desired. Such a vulnerable application is shown in Listing 9-12.

                   def process_authentication()
                   {
                  u string username = read_string();
                     string password = read_string();
                  v int iterations = read_int();

                          for(int i = 0; i < interations; ++i)
                          {
                  w         password = hash_password(password);
                          }

                  x       return check_user_password(username, password);
                      }

Listing 9-12: Checking a vulnerable authentication

                           First, the username and password are read from the network u. Next,
                      the hashing algorithm’s number of iterations is read v, and the hashing
                      process is applied that number of times w. Finally, the hashed password is
                      checked against one stored by the application x. Clearly, an attacker could
                      supply a very large value for the iteration count that would likely consume a
                      significant amount of CPU resources for an extended period of time, espe-
                      cially if the hashing algorithm is computationally complex.
                           A good example of a cryptographic algorithm that a client can config-
                      ure is the handling of public/private keys. Algorithms such as RSA rely on
                      the computational cost of factoring a large public key value. The larger the
                      key value, the more time it takes to perform encryption/decryption and the
                      longer it takes to generate a new key pair.

226   Chapter 9
Format String Vulnerabilities
        Most programming languages have a mechanism to convert arbitrary data
        into a string, and it’s common to define some formatting mechanism to
        specify how the developer wants the output. Some of these mechanisms are
        quite powerful and privileged, especially in memory-unsafe languages.
             A format string vulnerability occurs when the attacker can supply a string
        value to an application that is then used directly as the format string. The
        best-known, and probably the most dangerous, formatter is used by the C
        language’s printf and its variants, such as sprintf, which print to a string.
        The printf function takes a format string as its first argument and then a list
        of the values to format. Listing 9-13 shows such a vulnerable application.

        def process_authentication()
        {
              string username = read_string();
              string password = read_string();

               // Print username and password to terminal
               printf(username);
               printf(password);

               return check_user_password(username, password))
        }

Listing 9-13: The printf format string vulnerability

            The format string for printf specifies the position and type of data
        using a %? syntax where the question mark is replaced by an alphanumeric
        character. The format specifier can also include formatting information,
        such as the number of decimal places in a number. An attacker who can
        directly control the format string could corrupt memory or disclose infor-
        mation about the current stack that might prove useful for further attacks.
        Table 9-2 shows a list of common printf format specifiers that an attacker
        could abuse.

Table 9-2: List of Commonly Exploitable printf Format Specifiers

         Format           Description                      Potential vulnerabilities
         specifier
         %d, %p, %u, %x   Prints integers                  Can be used to disclose information
                                                           from the stack if returned to an attacker
         %s               Prints a zero terminated         Can be used to disclose information
                          string                           from the stack if returned to an attacker
                                                           or cause invalid memory accesses to
                                                           occur, leading to denial-of-service
         %n               Writes the current number        Can be used to cause selective memory
                          of printed characters to         corruption or application crashes
                          a pointer specified in the
                          arguments

                                                                    The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   227
     Command Injection
                  Most OSes, especially Unix-based OSes, include a rich set of utilities
                  designed for various tasks. Sometimes developers decide that the easiest
                  way to execute a particular task, say password updating, is to execute an
                  external application or operating system utility. Although this might not be
                  a problem if the command line executed is entirely specified by the devel-
                  oper, often some data from the network client is inserted into the command
                  line to perform the desired operation. Listing 9-14 shows such a vulnerable
                  application.

                  def update_password(string username)
                  {
                  u string oldpassword = read_string();
                    string newpassword = read_string();

                      if(check_user_password(username, oldpassword))
                      {
                        // Invoke update_password command
                      v system("/sbin/update_password -u " + username + " -p " + newpassword);
                      }
                  }

Listing 9-14: A password update vulnerable to command injection

                      The listing updates the current user’s password as long as the origi-
                  nal password is known u. It then builds a command line and invokes
                  the Unix-style system function v. Although we don’t control the username
                  or oldpassword parameters (they must be correct for the system call to be
                  made), we do have complete control over newpassword. Because no sanitiza-
                  tion is done, the code in the listing is vulnerable to command injection
                  because the system function uses the current Unix shell to execute the
                  command line. For example, we could specify a value for newpassword such
                  as password; xcalc, which would first execute the password update com-
                  mand. Then the shell could execute xcalc as it treats the semicolon as a
                  separator in a list of commands to execute.

     SQL Injection
                  Even the simplest application might need to persistently store and retrieve
                  data. Applications can do this in a number of ways, but one of the most
                  common is to use a relational database. Databases offer many advantages,
                  not least of which is the ability to issue queries against the data to perform
                  complex grouping and analysis.
                       The de facto standard for defining queries to relational databases is the
                  Structured Query Language (SQL). This text-based language defines what data
                  tables to read and how to filter that data to get the results the application
                  wants. When using a text-based language there is a temptation is to build
                  queries using string operations. However, this can easily result in a vulner-
                  ability like command injection: instead of inserting untrusted data into a

228   Chapter 9
          command line without appropriately escaping, the attacker inserts data into
          a SQL query, which is executed on the database. This technique can modify
          the operation of the query to return known results. For example, what if the
          query extracted the current password for the authenticating user, as shown in
          Listing 9-15?

       def process_authentication()
       {
      u string username = read_string();
         string password = read_string();

      v       string sql = "SELECT password FROM user_table WHERE user = '" + username "'";

      w       return run_query(sql) == password;
          }

Listing 9-15: An example of authentication vulnerable to SQL injection

               This listing reads the username and password from the network u.
          Then it builds a new SQL query as a string, using a SELECT statement to
          extract the password associated with the user from the user table v.
          Finally, it executes that query on the database and checks that the pass-
          word read from the network matches the one in the database w.
               The vulnerability in this listing is easy to exploit. In SQL, the strings
          need to be enclosed in single quotes to prevent them from being inter-
          preted as commands in the SQL statement. If a username is sent in the
          protocol with an embedded single quote, an attacker could terminate the
          quoted string early. This would lead to an injection of new commands into
          the SQL query. For example, a UNION SELECT statement would allow the query
          to return an arbitrary password value. An attacker could use the SQL injec-
          tion to bypass the authentication of an application.
               SQL injection attacks can even result in remote code execution. For
          example, although disabled by default, Microsoft’s SQL Server’s database
          function xp_cmdshell allows you to execute OS commands. Oracle’s database
          even allows uploading arbitrary Java code. And of course, it’s also possible
          to find applications that pass raw SQL queries over the network. Even if a
          protocol is not intended for controlling the database, there’s still a good
          chance that it can be exploited to access the underlying database engine.

Text-Encoding Character Replacement
          In an ideal world, everyone would be able to use one type of text encoding
          for all different languages. But we don’t live in an ideal world, and we use
          multiple text encodings as discussed in Chapter 3, such as ASCII and vari-
          ants of Unicode.
               Some conversions between text encodings cannot be round-tripped:
          converting from one encoding to another loses important information such
          that if the reverse process is applied, the original text can’t be restored. This

                                                                    The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   229
                  is especially problematic when converting from a wide character set such as
                  Unicode to a narrow one such as ASCII. It’s simply impossible to encode the
                  entire Unicode character set in 7 bits.
                       Text-encoding conversions manage this problem in one of two ways.
                  The simplest approach replaces the character that cannot be represented
                  with a placeholder, such as the question mark (?) character. This might be
                  a problem if the data value refers to something where the question mark is
                  used as a delimiter or as a special character, for example, as in URL parsing
                  where it represents the beginning of a query string.
                       The other approach is to apply a best-fit mapping. This is used for
                  characters for which there is a similar character in the new encoding. For
                  example, the quotation mark characters in Unicode have left-facing and
                  right-facing forms that are mapped to specific code points, such as U+201C
                  and U+201D for left and right double quotation marks. These are outside
                  the ASCII range, but in a conversion to ASCII, they’re commonly replaced
                  with the equivalent character, such as U+0022 or the quotation mark. Best-
                  fit mapping can become a problem when the converted text is processed by
                  the application. Although slightly corrupted text won’t usually cause much
                  of a problem for a user, the automatic conversion process could cause the
                  application to mishandle the data.
                       The important implementation issue is that the application first veri-
                  fies the security condition using one encoded form of a string. Then it uses
                  the other encoded form of a string for a specific action, such as reading a
                  resource or executing a command, as shown in Listing 9-16.

                  def add_user()
                  {
                  u string username = read_unicode_string();

                    // Ensure username doesn't contain any single quotes
                  v if(username.contains("'") == false)
                    {
                      // Add user, need to convert to ASCII for the shell
                    w system("/sbin/add_user '" + username.toascii() + "'");
                    }
                  }

Listing 9-16: A text conversion vulnerability

                       In this listing, the application reads in a Unicode string representing a
                  user to add to the system u. It will pass the value to the add_user command,
                  but it wants to avoid a command injection vulnerability; therefore, it first
                  ensures that the username doesn’t contain any single quote characters that
                  could be misinterpreted v. Once satisfied that the string is okay, it converts
                  it to ASCII (Unix systems typically work on a narrow character set, although
                  many support UTF-8) and ensures that the value is enclosed with single
                  quotes to prevent spaces from being misinterpreted w.

230   Chapter 9
             Of course, if the best-fit mapping rules convert other characters back
        to a single quote, it would be possible to prematurely terminate the quoted
        string and return to the same sort of command injection vulnerabilities dis-
        cussed earlier.

Final Words
        This chapter showed you that many possible root causes exist for vulner-
        abilities, with a seemingly limitless number of variants in the wild. Even if
        something doesn’t immediately look vulnerable, persist. Vulnerabilities can
        appear in the most surprising places.
             I’ve covered vulnerabilities ranging from memory corruptions, caus-
        ing an application to behave in a different manner than it was originally
        designed, to preventing legitimate users from accessing the services pro-
        vided. It can be a complex process to identify all these different issues.
             As a protocol analyzer, you have a number of possible angles. It is also
        vital that you change your strategy when looking for implementation vulner-
        abilities. Take into account whether the application is written in memory-safe
        or unsafe languages, keeping in mind that you are less likely to find memory
        corruption in, for example, a Java application.

                                                           The Root Causes of Vulnerabilities   231
