
Chapter 3. Landing Pad (Zicfilp)
To enforce forward-edge control-flow integrity, the Zicfilp extension introduces a landing pad (LPAD)
instruction. The LPAD instruction must be placed at the program locations that are valid targets of
indirect jumps or calls. The LPAD instruction (See Section 3.4) is encoded using the AUIPC major
opcode with rd=x0.

Compilers emit a landing pad instruction as the first instruction of an address-taken function, as well
as at any indirect jump targets. A landing pad instruction is not required in functions that are only
reached using a direct call or direct jump.

The landing pad is designed to provide integrity to control transfers performed using indirect calls
and jumps, and this is referred to as forward-edge protection. When the Zicfilp is active, the hart
tracks an expected landing pad (ELP) state that is updated by an indirect_call or indirect_jump to
require a landing pad instruction at the target of the branch. If the instruction at the target is not a
landing pad, then a software-check exception is raised.

A landing pad may be optionally associated with a 20-bit label. With labeling enabled, the number of
landing pads that can be reached from an indirect call or jump sites can be defined using
programming language-based policies. Labeling of the landing pads enables software to achieve
greater precision in pairing up indirect call/jump sites with valid targets. When labeling of landing
pads is used, indirect call or indirect jump site can specify the expected label of the landing pad and
thereby constrain the set of landing pads that may be reached from each indirect call or indirect jump
site in the program.

In the simplest form, a program can be built with a single label value to implement a coarse-grained
version of forward-edge control-flow integrity. By constraining gadgets to be preceded by a landing
pad instruction that marks the start of indirect callable functions, the program can significantly
reduce the available gadget space. A second form of label generation may generate a signature, such as
a MAC, using the prototype of the function. Programs that use this approach would further constrain
the gadgets accessible from a call site to only indirectly callable functions that match the prototype of
the called functions. Another approach to label generation involves analyzing the control-flow-graph
(CFG) of the program, which can lead to even more stringent constraints on the set of reachable
gadgets. Such programs may further use multiple labels per function, which means that if a function is
called from two or more call sites, the functions can be labeled as being reachable from each of the call
sites. For instance, consider two call sites A and B, where A calls the functions X and Y, and B calls the
functions Y and Z. In a single label scheme, functions X, Y, and Z would need to be assigned the same
label so that both call sites A and B can invoke the common function Y. This scheme would allow call
site A to also call function Z and call site B to also call function X. However, if function Y was assigned
two labels - one corresponding to call site A and the other to call site B, then Y can be invoked by both
call sites, but X can only be invoked by call site A and Z can only be invoked by call site B. To support
multiple labels, the compiler could generate a call-site-specific entry point for shared functions, with
each entry point having its own landing pad instruction followed by a direct branch to the start of the
function. This would allow the function to be labeled with multiple labels, each corresponding to a
specific call site. A portion of the label space may be dedicated to labeled landing pads that are only
valid targets of an indirect jump (and not an indirect call).

The LPAD instruction uses the code points defined as HINTs for the AUIPC opcode. When Zicfilp is not
active at a privilege level or when the extension is not implemented, the landing pad instruction
executes as a no-op. A program that is built with LPAD instructions can thus continue to operate
correctly, but without forward-edge control-flow integrity, on processors that do not support the
Zicfilp extension or if the Zicfilp extension is not active.

Compilers and linkers should provide an attribute flag to indicate if the program has been compiled
with the Zicfilp extension and use that to determine if the Zicfilp extension should be activated. The
dynamic loader should activate the use of Zicfilp extension for an application only if all executables
(the application and the dependent dynamically linked libraries) used by that application use the
Zicfilp extension.

When Zicfilp extension is not active or not implemented, the hart does not require landing pad
instructions at the targets of indirect calls/jumps, and the landing instructions revert to being no-ops.
This allows a program compiled with landing pad instructions to operate correctly but without
forward-edge control-flow integrity.

The Zicfilp extensions may be activated for use individually and independently for each privilege
mode.

The Zicfilp extension depends on the Zicsr extension.

3.1. Landing Pad Enforcement
To enforce that the target of an indirect call or indirect jump must be a valid landing pad instruction,
the hart maintains an expected landing pad (ELP) state to determine if a landing pad instruction is
required at the target of an indirect call or an indirect jump. The ELP state can be one of:

  • 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED
  • 1 - LP_EXPECTED

The ELP state is initialized to NO_LP_EXPECTED by the hart upon reset.

The Zicfilp extension, when enabled, determines if an indirect call or an indirect jump must land on a
landing pad, as specified in Listing 6. If is_lp_expected is 1, then the hart updates the ELP to
LP_EXPECTED.

Listing 6. Landing pad expected determination

   is_lp_expected = ( (JALR || C.JR || C.JALR) &&
                      (rs1 != x1) && (rs1 != x5) && (rs1 != x7) ) ? 1 : 0;

An indirect branch using JALR, C.JALR, or C.JR with rs1 as x7 is termed a software guarded branch.
Such branches do not need to land on a LPAD instruction and thus do not set ELP to LP_EXPECTED.

               When the register source is a link register and the register destination is x0, then it’s a
               return from a procedure and does not require a landing pad at the target.

               When the register source and register destination are both link registers, then it is a
               semantically-direct-call. For example, the call offset pseudoinstruction may expand to
               a two instruction sequence composed of a lui ra, imm20 or a auipc ra, imm20
               instruction followed by a jalr ra, imm12(ra) instruction where ra is the link register
               (either x1 or x5). Since the address of the procedure was not explicitly taken and the
               computed address is not obtained from mutable memory, such semantically-direct calls do
               not require a landing pad to be placed at the target. Compilers and JITers must use the
               semantically-direct calls only if the rs1 was computed as a PC-relative or an absolute
               offset to the symbol.
   
               The tail offset pseudoinstruction used to tail call a far-away procedure may also be
               expanded to a two instruction sequence composed of a lui x7, imm20 or auipc x7,
               imm20 followed by a jalr x0, x7. Since the address of the procedure was not explicitly
               taken and the computed address is not obtained from mutable memory, such
               semantically-direct tail-calls do not require a landing pad to be placed at the target.

               Software guarded branches may also be used by compilers to generate code for constructs
               like switch-cases. When using the software guarded branches, the compiler is required to
               ensure it has full control on the possible jump targets (e.g., by obtaining the targets from a
               read-only table in memory and performing bounds checking on the index into the table,
               etc.).

The landing pad may be labeled. Zicfilp extension designates the register x7 for use as the landing pad
label register. To support labeled landing pads, the indirect call/jump sites establish an expected
landing pad label (e.g., using the LUI instruction) in the bits 31:12 of the x7 register. The LPAD
instruction is encoded with a 20-bit immediate value called the landing-pad-label (LPL) that is
matched to the expected landing pad label. When LPL is encoded as zero, the LPAD instruction does not
perform the label check and in programs built with this single label mode of operation the indirect
call/jump sites do not need to establish an expected landing pad label value in x7.

When ELP is set to LP_EXPECTED, if the next instruction in the instruction stream is not 4-byte aligned,
or is not LPAD, or if the landing pad label encoded in LPAD is not zero and does not match the expected
landing pad label in bits 31:12 of the x7 register, then a software-check exception (cause=18) with xtval
set to "landing pad fault (code=2)" is raised else the ELP is updated to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

                The tracking of ELP and the requirement for a landing pad instruction at the target of
                indirect call and jump enables a processor implementation to significantly reduce or to
                prevent speculation to non-landing-pad instructions. Constraining speculation using this
                technique, greatly reduces the gadget space and increases the difficulty of using
                techniques such as branch-target-injection, also known as Spectre variant 2, which use
                speculative execution to leak data through side channels.

               The LPAD requires a 4-byte alignment to address the concatenation of two instructions A
                and B accidentally forming an unintended landing pad in the program. For example,
                consider a 32-bit instruction where the bytes 3 and 2 have a pattern of ?017h (for
                example, the immediate fields of a LUI, AUIPC, or a JAL instruction), followed by a 16-bit or
                a 32-bit instruction. When patterns that can accidentally form a valid landing pad are
                detected, the assembler or linker can force instruction A to be aligned to a 4-byte boundary
                to force the unintended LPAD pattern to become misaligned, and thus not a valid landing
                pad, or may use an alternate register allocation to prevent the accidental landing pad.

3.2. Zicfilp CSRs
This section specifies the CSR state of the Zicfilp extension.

3.2.1. Machine Environment Configuration Register (menvcfg)
   63    62      61    60                                                                                         48
 STCE   PBMTE   ADUE                                                WPRI

   47                                                                                                             32
                                                       WPRI

   31                                                                                                             16
                                                       WPRI

   15                                              8          7       6     5          4    3      2      1       0
                            WPRI                          CBZE     CBCFE        CBIE       WPRI   LPE    WPRI   FIOM

Figure 4. Machine environment configuration register (menvcfg)

Zicfilp extension introduces the LPE field (bit 2) in menvcfg. When the LPE field is set to 1 and S-mode
is implemented, the Zicfilp extension is enabled in S-mode. If LPE field is set to 1 and S-mode is not
implemented, the Zicfilp extension is enabled in U-mode.

When the LPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in S-mode, and the following rules apply
to S-mode:

  • The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED.
  • The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.

If the LPE field is 0 and S-mode is not implemented, these rules apply to U-mode.

3.2.2. Supervisor Environment Configuration Register (senvcfg)
   63                                                                                                             48
                                                       WPRI

   47                                                                                                             32
                                                       WPRI

   31                                                                                                             16
                                                       WPRI

   15                                              8          7       6     5          4    3      2      1       0
                            WPRI                          CBZE     CBCFE        CBIE       WPRI   LPE    WPRI   FIOM

Figure 5. Supervisor environment configuration register (senvcfg)

Zicfilp extension introduces the LPE field (bit 2) in senvcfg. When the LPE field is set to 1, the Zicfilp
extension is enabled in VU/U-mode. When the LPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in
VU/U-mode and the following rules apply to VU/U-mode:

  • The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED.
  • The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.

3.2.3. Hypervisor Environment Configuration Register (henvcfg)
   63       62             61          60                                                                                                                      48
 STCE      PBMTE      ADUE                                                                          WPRI

   47                                                                                                                                                          32
                                                                                        WPRI

   31                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                                                        WPRI

   15                                                                              8           7      6      5            4     3              2    1              0
                                            WPRI                                           CBZE     CBCFE         CBIE         WPRI       LPE      WPRI       FIOM

Figure 6. Hypervisor environment configuration register (henvcfg)

Zicfilp extension introduces the LPE field (bit 2) in henvcfg. When the LPE field is set to 1, the Zicfilp
extension is enabled in VS-mode. When the LPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in VS-
mode and the following rules apply to VS-mode:

  • The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED.
  • The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.

3.2.4. Machine Status Register (mstatus)
   63       62                                                                                                                                                 48
   SD                                                                                      WPRI

   47                                                   42             41          40          39    38      37          36     35         34       33         32
                                WPRI                             MPELP         WPRI        MPV       GVA    MBE          SBE        SXL[1:0]            UXL[1:0]

   31                                                                              24          23    22      21          20     19         18       17         16
                                            WPRI                                           SPELP     TSR    TW           TVM   MXR        SUM      MPRV      XS[1:0]

   15       14             13          12          11   10             9           8           7      6      5            4     3              2    1              0
 XS[1:0]         FS[1:0]                MPP[1:0]             VS[1:0]           SPP         MPIE     UBE     SPIE     WPRI      MIE        WPRI     SIE        WPRI

Figure 7. Machine-mode status register (mstatus) for RV64

The Zicfilp extension introduces the SPELP (bit 23) and MPELP (bit 41) fields that hold the previous ELP,
and are updated as specified in Section 3.5. The xPELP fields are encoded as follows:

  • 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED - no landing pad instruction expected.
  • 1 - LP_EXPECTED - a landing pad instruction is expected.

3.2.5. Supervisor Status Register (sstatus)
   63       62                                                                                                                                                 48
   SD                                                                                      WPRI

   47                                                                                                                                      34       33         32
                                                                            WPRI                                                                        UXL[1:0]

   31                                                                              24          23    22                  20     19         18       17         16
                                            WPRI                                           SPELP            WPRI               MXR        SUM      WPRI      XS[1:0]

   15       14             13          12          11   10             9           8           7      6      5            4                    2    1              0
 XS[1:0]         FS[1:0]                    WPRI             VS[1:0]           SPP         WPRI     UBE     SPIE               WPRI                SIE        WPRI

Figure 8. Supervisor-mode status register (sstatus) when SXLEN=64

Access to the SPELP field introduced by Zicfilp accesses the homonymous fields of mstatus when V=0
and the homonymous fields of vsstatus when V=1.

3.2.6. Virtual Supervisor Status Register (vsstatus)
   63      62                                                                                                                                48
   SD                                                                              WPRI

   47                                                                                                                     34      33         32
                                                                    WPRI                                                              UXL[1:0]

   31                                                                      24          23      22           20     19     18      17         16
                                    WPRI                                           SPELP             WPRI         MXR    SUM    WPRI       XS[1:0]

   15      14             13   12          11    10             9          8           7        6     5      4             2      1              0
 XS[1:0]        FS[1:0]             WPRI              VS[1:0]          SPP         WPRI       UBE    SPIE         WPRI           SIE        WPRI

Figure 9. Virtual supervisor status register (vsstatus) when VSXLEN=64

The Zicfilp extension introduces the SPELP (bit 23) field that holds the previous ELP, and is updated as
specified in Section 3.5. The SPELP field is encoded as follows:

  • 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED - no landing pad instruction expected.
  • 1 - LP_EXPECTED - a landing pad instruction is expected.

3.2.7. Machine Security Configuration Register (mseccfg)
   63                                                                                                                                        48
                                                                                WPRI

   47                                                                                                                                        32
                                                                                WPRI

   31                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                WPRI

   15                                      11    10             9          8           7                            3      2      1              0
                     WPRI                       MLPE      SSEED       USEED                          WPRI                RLB    MMWP        MML

Figure 10. Machine security configuration register (mseccfg) when MXLEN=64

The Zicfilp extension introduces the MLPE (bit 10) field in mseccfg. When MLPE field is 1, Zicfilp
extension is enabled in M-mode. When the MLPE field is 0, the Zicfilp extension is not enabled in M-
mode and the following rules apply to M-mode.

  • The hart does not update the ELP state; it remains as NO_LP_EXPECTED.
  • The LPAD instruction operates as a no-op.

3.2.8. Debug Control and Status Register (dcsr)
        31                                                             28                      27                                                               24
                                   debugver                                                                                0

        23                                                                                     19                 18                  17                        16
                                                   0                                                           pelp              ebreakvs                  ebreakvu

        15                   14                    13                  12                      11                 10                   9                        8
    ebreakm                  0                 ebreaks               ebreaku                  stepie         stopcount              stoptime                cause

        7                    6                     5                   4                        3                 2                    1                        0
                cause                              v                 mprven                   nmip             step                                prv

Figure 11. Debug Control and Status (dcsr)

The Zicfilp extension introduces the pelp (bit 18) in dcsr. The pelp field holds the previous ELP, and is
updated as specified in Section 3.5. The pelp field is encoded as follows:

  • 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED - no landing pad instruction expected.
  • 1 - LP_EXPECTED - a landing pad instruction is expected.

3.2.9. Resumable NMI Status Register (mnstatus)
   63                                                                                                                                                                48
                                                                                   WPRI

   47                                                                                                                                                                32
                                                                                   WPRI

   31                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                   WPRI

   15                   13        12          11         10      9             8          7            6               4        3              2                      0
             WPRI                      MNPP             WPRI   MNPELP       WPRI      MNPV                 WPRI                NMIE                      WPRI

Figure 12. Resumable NMI Status (mnstatus) when MXLEN=64

The Zicfilp extension introduces the MNPELP (bit 9) in mnstatus. The MNPELP field holds the previous
ELP, and is updated as specified in Section 3.5. The MNPELP field is encoded as follows:

  • 0 - NO_LP_EXPECTED - no landing pad instruction expected.
  • 1 - LP_EXPECTED - a landing pad instruction is expected.

3.3. Landing-Pad-Enabled (LPE) State
The term xLPE is used to determine if forward-edge CFI using landing pads provided by the Zicfilp
extension is enabled at a privilege mode.

When S-mode is implemented, it is determined as follows:

                           Table 2. xLPE determination when S-mode is implemented
    Privilege Mode                                                 xLPE
           M                                                  mseccfg.MLPE
        S or HS                                               menvcfg.LPE
           VS                                                 henvcfg.LPE
        U or VU                                               senvcfg.LPE

When S-mode is not implemented, it is determined as follows:

                         Table 3. xLPE determination when S-mode is not implemented
    Privilege Mode                                                 xLPE
           M                                                  mseccfg.MLPE
           U                                                  menvcfg.LPE

                The Zicfilp must be explicitly enabled for use at each privilege mode.

               Programs compiled with the LPAD instruction continue to function correctly, but without
                forward-edge CFI protection, when the Zicfilp extension is not implemented or is not
                enabled.

3.4. Landing Pad Instruction
When Zicfilp is enabled, LPAD is the only instruction allowed to execute when the ELP state is
LP_EXPECTED. If Zicfilp is not enabled then the instruction is a no-op. If Zicfilp is enabled, the LPAD
instruction causes a software-check exception with xtval set to "landing pad fault (code=2)" if any of
the following conditions are true:

  • The pc is not 4-byte aligned and ELP is LP_EXPECTED.
  • The ELP is LP_EXPECTED and the LPL is not zero and the LPL does not match the expected landing
    pad label in bits 31:12 of the x7 register.

The behavior of the trap if a software-check exception is raised by this instruction is specified in
section Section 3.5. If a software-check exception is not caused then the ELP is updated to
NO_LP_EXPECTED.

 31                                                                12    11           7   6            0
                                   LPL                                         rd             opcode
                                                                              00000           AUIPC

The operation of the LPAD instruction is as follows:

Listing 7. LPAD operation

  if (xLPE == 1 && ELP == LP_EXPECTED)
       // If PC not 4-byte aligned then software-check exception
       if pc[1:0] != 0
            raise software-check exception
       // If landing pad label not matched -> software-check exception
       else if (inst.LPL != x7[31:12] && inst.LPL != 0)
            raise software-check exception
       else
            ELP = NO_LP_EXPECTED
  else
       no-op
  endif

3.5. Preserving Expected Landing Pad State on
Traps
A trap may need to be delivered to the same or to a higher privilege mode upon completion of JALR
/C.JALR/C.JR, but before the instruction at the target of indirect call/jump was decoded, due to:

 • Asynchronous interrupts.
 • Synchronous exceptions with priority higher than that of a software-check exception with xtval
   set to "landing pad fault (code=2)" (See Table 3.7 of Privileged Specification [3]).

The software-check exception caused by Zicfilp has higher priority than an illegal-instruction
exception but lower priority than instruction access-fault.

The software-check exception due to the instruction not being an LPAD instruction when ELP is
LP_EXPECTED or an software-check exception caused by the LPAD instruction itself (See Section 3.4)
leads to a trap being delivered to the same or to a higher privilege mode.

In such cases, the ELP prior to the trap, the previous ELP, must be preserved by the trap delivery such
that it can be restored on a return from the trap. To store the previous ELP state on trap delivery to M-
mode, an MPELP bit is provided in the mstatus CSR. To store the previous ELP state on trap delivery to
S/HS-mode, an SPELP bit is provided in the mstatus CSR. The SPELP bit in mstatus can be accessed
through the sstatus CSR. To store the previous ELP state on traps to VS-mode, a SPELP bit is defined
in the vsstatus (VS-modes version of sstatus). To store the previous ELP state on transition to Debug
Mode, a pelp bit is defined in the dcsr register.

When a trap is taken into privilege mode x, the xPELP is set to ELP and ELP is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

An MRET or SRET instruction is used to return from a trap in M-mode or S-mode, respectively. When
executing an xRET instruction, if xPP holds the value y, then ELP is set to the value of xPELP if yLPE is 1;
otherwise, it is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED; xPELP is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

Upon entry into Debug Mode, the pelp bit in dcsr is updated with the ELP at the privilege level the
hart was previously in, and the ELP is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED. When a hart resumes from Debug Mode,
if dcsr.prv holds the value y, then ELP is set to the value of pelp if yLPE is 1; otherwise, it is set to
NO_LP_EXPECTED.

When the Smrnmi [4] extension is implemented, a MNPELP field (bit 9) is provided in the mnstatus
CSR to hold the previous ELP state on a trap to the RNMI handler. When a RNMI trap is delivered, the
MNPELP is set to ELP and ELP set to NO_LP_EXPECTED. Upon a MNRET, if the mnstatus.MNPP holds the
value y, then ELP is set to the value of MNPELP if yLPE is 1; otherwise, it is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED.

               The trap handler in privilege mode x must save the xPELP bit and the x7 register before
               performing an indirect call/jump if xLPE=1. If the privilege mode x can respond to
               interrupts and xLPE=1, then the trap handler should also save these values before
              enabling interrupts.

               The trap handler in privilege mode x must restore the saved xPELP bit and the x7 register
               before executing the xRET instruction to return from a trap.

