                                                                                     CHAPTER 11
                                    The Future Evolution of eBPF

eBPF is not finished yet! Like most software, it’s under continual development within
the Linux kernel, and it’s being added to the Windows operating system as well. In
this chapter we’ll look at some of the likely future paths for this technology.
Since it was introduced within the Linux kernel, BPF has evolved into its own subsys‐
tem with its own mailing list and maintainers.1 As eBPF’s popularity increased and
interest broadened beyond the Linux kernel community, it made sense to create a
neutral body that could coordinate among the different parties involved. That body is
the eBPF Foundation.

The eBPF Foundation
The eBPF Foundation was set up in 2021 by Google, Isovalent, Meta (then known as
Facebook), Microsoft, and Netflix, under the auspices of the Linux Foundation. The
foundation acts as a neutral body that can hold funds and intellectual property, such
that various commercial companies can collaborate with one another.
The intent was not to change anything about the way eBPF technology is developed
by the Linux kernel community and contributors to the Linux BPF subsystem. The
foundation’s activities are directed by the BPF Steering Committee, which is entirely
composed of the technical experts who build the technology, including the Linux ker‐
nel BPF maintainers and representatives from other core eBPF projects.
The eBPF Foundation focuses on eBPF as a technology platform and the ecosystem of
tools that enable eBPF development. Projects that build on top of eBPF looking for

1 Shout-out to Alexei Starovoitov and Andrii Nakryiko from Meta, and Daniel Borkmann from Isovalent, who
  maintain the BPF subtree in the Linux kernel.

neutral ownership may find a better home in other foundations. For example, Cilium,
Pixie, and Falco are all part of the CNCF, which makes sense as they are all intended
to be used in cloud native environments.
One of the key drivers of this collaboration beyond the existing Linux maintainers
was the interest that Microsoft had in developing eBPF within the Windows operat‐
ing system. This brings about a need to define a standard for eBPF,2 such that pro‐
grams written for one OS can be used on another. This work is being done under the
auspices of the eBPF Foundation.

eBPF for Windows
Work is well underway at Microsoft to support eBPF for Windows. As I write this in
the closing months of 2022, there are already functional demos that show Cilium
Layer 4 load balancing and eBPF-based connection tracking running on Windows.
I’ve said before that eBPF programming is kernel programming, and at first glance it
might seem unintuitive that a program written to run in the Linux kernel and that has
access to Linux kernel data structures would in any way be able to operate in an
entirely different operating system. But in practice, particularly when it comes to net‐
working, all operating systems will have quite a lot in common. A network packet has
the same structure whether it was created on a Windows or Linux machine, and the
layers of the network stack have to be handled the same way.
You’ll also recall that eBPF programs consist of a set of bytecode instructions that are
processed by a virtual machine (VM) implemented within the kernel. That VM can
be implemented within Windows too!
Figure 11-1 shows the eBPF for Windows architectural overview, taken from the
project’s GitHub repo. As you can see from this diagram, eBPF for Windows reuses
some open source components from the existing eBPF ecosystem, such as libbpf, and
the support in Clang for producing eBPF bytecode. The Linux kernel is licensed
under GPL, and Windows is proprietary, so the Windows project can’t reuse any
parts of the Linux kernel’s implementation of the verifier.3 Instead, it uses the PRE‐
VAIL verifier and the uBPF JIT compiler (both of which are permissively licensed so
that they can be used by a broader range of projects and organizations).

2 Dave Thaler presented on the state of this standardization work at the Linux Plumbers Conference.
3 Well, it could, but doing so would require Microsoft to also release the Windows source code under the GPL
  license.

204   |   Chapter 11: The Future Evolution of eBPF
Figure 11-1. Architectural overview of eBPF for Windows, adapted from https://oreil.ly/
HxKsu

One interesting difference is that eBPF code is verified and JIT-compiled in a Win‐
dows Secure environment in user space rather than within the kernel (the uBPF inter‐
preter shown in the kernel in Figure 11-1 is used only in debug builds and not
production environments).

                                                                   eBPF for Windows   |   205
It would be unrealistic to expect that every single eBPF program written to run on
Linux will work on Windows. But this isn’t so different from the challenge of getting
eBPF programs to run on different Linux kernel versions: even with CO-RE support,
internal kernel data structures can be changed as well as added or removed between
versions. It is the eBPF programmer’s job to handle these possibilities gracefully.
Speaking of changes to the Linux kernel, what changes can we expect to see in eBPF
in the coming years?

Linux eBPF Evolution
The capabilities of eBPF have evolved with practically every kernel release since 3.15.
If you want to know what features are available in any given version, the BCC project
maintains a useful list. And I certainly expect more additions over the coming years.
The best way to predict what’s coming is simply to listen to the people who are work‐
ing on it. For example, at the 2022 Linux Plumbers Conference, eBPF maintainer
Alexei Starovoitov gave a talk discussing how he expects to see the C language used
by eBPF programs to evolve.4 We’ve already seen eBPF evolve from supporting a few
thousand instructions to practically unlimited complexity, with the addition of sup‐
port for loops and an ever-increasing set of BPF helper functions. As additional capa‐
bilities are added into the C that’s supported, and with the support of the verifier,
eBPF C could evolve to allow all the flexibility of developing kernel modules, but with
the safety and dynamic loading characteristics of eBPF.
Some of the other ideas being discussed and developed for new eBPF features and
capabilities include:
Signed eBPF programs
    Software supply chain security has been a hot topic for the past few years, and a
    key element is the ability to check that a program you’re thinking of running
    comes from the expected source and has not been tampered with. One way to
    achieve this is, in general, to validate a cryptographic signature that accompanies
    a program. You might think this is something the kernel could do for eBPF pro‐
    grams, perhaps as part of the verification step, but unfortunately this is not
    straightforward! As you’ve seen in this book, user space loaders dynamically
    adjust programs with information about where maps are located, and for CO-RE
    purposes, which from a signing perspective is hard to distinguish from malicious
    modifications. This is a problem for which the eBPF community is keen to find a
    solution.

4 Alexei Starovoitov discusses the journey of BPF from restricted C language to extended and safe C in this
  video.

206   |    Chapter 11: The Future Evolution of eBPF
Long-lived kernel pointers
   An eBPF program can retrieve a pointer to a kernel object using a helper func‐
   tion or a kfunc, but a pointer is valid only during that execution of the program.
   The pointer cannot be stored in a map for later retrieval. The idea of typed
   pointer support will allow for more flexibility in this area.
Memory allocation
   It’s not safe for eBPF programs to simply call memory allocation functions like
   kmalloc(), but there is a proposal that suggests an eBPF-specific alternative.
When will you be able to take advantage of new eBPF features as they emerge? As an
end user, the features you’re able to take advantage of depend on the version of the
kernel you’re running in production, and as I discussed in Chapter 1, it can take sev‐
eral years for kernel releases to make it to stable distributions of Linux. As an individ‐
ual you might opt for a bleeding-edge kernel, but the vast majority of organizations
running server deployments use a stable, supported version. eBPF programmers have
to take into account that if they write code that takes advantage of the newest features
added to the kernel, the features are unlikely to be usable in most production envi‐
ronments for some years to come. Some organizations will have sufficiently urgent
needs that it’s worth rolling out newer kernel versions more quickly in order to early-
adopt new eBPF features.
For example, in another forward-looking talk on building tomorrow’s networking,
Daniel Borkmann discussed a feature called Big TCP. This was added to Linux in ver‐
sion 5.19 to enable network speeds of 100 GBit/s (and faster) by batching up network
packets to be processed in the kernel. Most Linux distributions won’t support a kernel
this recent for a few years, but for specialist organizations dealing with large amounts
of network traffic, it might well be worth upgrading sooner. Adding Big TCP support
into eBPF and Cilium today means it’s available for those massive-scale users, even if
it’s not something that can be enabled by most of us for a while.
Since eBPF allows kernel code to be adjusted dynamically, it’s reasonable to expect it
to be used to address problems “in the field.” In Chapter 9 you read about using eBPF
to mitigate kernel vulnerabilities; work is also underway to use eBPF to help support
hardware devices such as human interface devices like mice, keyboards, and game
controllers. This builds on existing support for decoding the protocols used by infra‐
red controllers that I mentioned in Chapter 7.

                                                                  Linux eBPF Evolution   |   207
eBPF Is a Platform, Not a Feature
Coming up to a decade ago, the hot new technology was containers, and it seemed as
though everyone was talking about what they were and what advantages they would
bring. We’re at a similar stage with eBPF today, with lots of conference talks and blog
posts—several of which I’ve referred to in this book—extolling the benefits of eBPF.
Today, containers are part of daily life for many developers, whether they’re running
code locally using Docker or other container runtimes, or deploying code to Kuber‐
netes environments. Will eBPF become part of everyone’s regular toolkit too?
The answer, I believe, is no—or at least, not directly. Most users won’t write eBPF pro‐
grams directly or manipulate them manually with utilities like bpftool. But they’ll
interact regularly with tools built using eBPF, whether that’s for performance meas‐
urement, debugging, networking, security, tracing, or a whole host of other capabili‐
ties yet to be implemented using eBPF. Users might not be aware that they’re using
eBPF, much as they might not know that when they use containers, they’re using ker‐
nel features like namespaces and cgroups.
Today, projects and vendors with knowledge of eBPF highlight their use of it because
it’s so powerful and implies many advantages. As eBPF-based projects and products
gain traction and market share, eBPF is becoming the de facto default technology
platform for infrastructure tooling.
Knowledge of eBPF programming is—and will continue to be—a sought-after but
relatively rare skill, just as kernel development today is much less common than
developing, say, business applications or games. If you enjoy diving into the lower
levels of systems and want to build essential infrastructure tooling, eBPF skills will
serve you well. I hope this book has been of some assistance on your eBPF journey!

                                              Further Reading
  Throughout this book I have provided references to specific articles and documenta‐
  tion pages. Here is a list of some additional resources to help you on your eBPF
  journey:

      • The eBPF community site ebpf.io
      • The BPF and XDP reference in the Cilium documentation
      • Linux kernel documentation on BPF
      • Brendan Gregg’s website on using eBPF for performance and observability
      • Andrii Nakryiko’s website, particularly for more information on CO-RE and
        libbpf
      • Lwn.net, a wonderful resource for updates to the Linux kernel, including the BPF
        subsystem

208   |   Chapter 11: The Future Evolution of eBPF
    • Elixir.bootlin.com, where you can browse the Linux source code
    • eCHO, a weekly livestream covering topics from across the eBPF and Cilium
      community (in which this author is a regular presenter)

Conclusion
Congratulations on reaching the end of this book!
I hope that reading Learning eBPF has given you insight into the power of eBPF. Per‐
haps it has inspired you to write eBPF code yourself or experiment with some of the
tools I’ve discussed. If you’ve decided to do some eBPF programming, I hope the
book has given you some confidence about how to get started. And if you have been
completing the exercises as you worked through the book, bravo!
If you’re excited about eBPF there are plenty of ways to get involved in the commu‐
nity. The best starting point is the website ebpf.io. This will point you to the latest
news, projects, events, and happenings, and also to the eBPF Slack channel where
you’re likely to find someone with the expertise to answer any questions you might
have.
I welcome your feedback, comments, and any corrections to this text. You can pro‐
vide your input through the GitHub repository that accompanies this book: git‐
hub.com/lizrice/learning-ebpf. I’d also be happy to hear your comments directly. You
can find me as @lizrice in many places across the internet.

                                                                       Conclusion   |   209
