                      Introduction

           We came up with the idea for this book
           when, having published a series of articles
         and blog posts about rootkits and bootkits,
     we realized the topic wasn’t getting nearly as
much attention as it deserved. We felt there was a
bigger picture, and we wanted a book that tried to
make sense of it all—one that generalized the medley of nifty tricks,
operating system architectural observations, and design patterns used by
attacker and defender innovations. We looked for such a book and found
none, so we set out to write the one we wanted to read.
    It took us four and a half years, longer than we planned and, regret-
tably, much longer than we could count on for the prospective readers and
supporters of the early access editions to stay with us. If you are one of these
early access supporters and are still reading this book, we’re humbled by
your continued devotion!
                         During this time, we observed the coevolution of offense and defense.
                     In particular, we saw Microsoft Windows defenses dead-ending several
                     major branches of rootkit and bootkit designs. You’ll find that story in the
                     pages of this book.
                         We also saw the emergence of new classes of malware that target the
                     BIOS and the chipset firmware, beyond the reach of current Windows
                     defensive software. We’ll explain how this coevolution developed and
                     where we expect its next steps to take us.
                         Another theme of this book is the development of the reverse engi-
                     neering techniques targeting the early stages of the OS boot process.
                     Traditionally, the earlier in the long chain of the PC boot process a piece
                     of code came into play, the less observable it was. This lack of observability
                     has long been confused with security. Yet, as we dig into the forensics of
                     bootkits and BIOS implants subverting low-level operating system tech­
                     nologies such as Secure Boot, we see that security by obscurity fares no
                     better here than in other areas of computer science. After a short time
                     (which is only getting shorter on the internet time scale), the security-by-
                     obscurity approach comes to favor the attackers more than the defenders.
                     This idea has not been sufficiently covered in other books on the subject,
                     so we try to fill this gap.

     Why Read This Book?
                     We write for a very broad circle of information security researchers inter-
                     ested in how advanced persistent malware threats bypass OS-level security.
                     We focus on how these advanced threats can be observed, reverse engi-
                     neered, and effectively analyzed. Each part of the book reflects a new stage
                     of the evolutionary development of advanced threats, from their emergence
                     as narrow proofs of concept, to their subsequent spread among threat
                     actors, and finally to their adoption into the sneakier arsenal of targeted
                     attacks.
                          However, we aim to reach a wider audience than just PC malware ana-
                     lysts. In particular, we hope that embedded systems developers and cloud
                     security specialists will find this book equally useful, considering that
                     the threat of rootkits and other implants looms large in their respective
                     ecosystems.

     What’s in the Book?
                     We start with an exploration of rootkits in Part 1, where we introduce the
                     internals of the Windows kernel that historically served as the rootkits’ play-
                     ground. Then in Part 2, we shift focus toward the OS boot process and the
                     bootkits that developed after Windows started hardening its kernel mode.
                     We dissect the stages of the boot process from the attacker’s perspective,

xxx   Introduction
paying particular attention to the new UEFI firmware schemes and their vul-
nerabilities. Finally, in Part 3, we focus on the forensics of both the classic
OS rootkit attacks and newer bootkit attacks on the BIOS and firmware.

Part 1: Rootkits
This part focuses on the classic OS-level rootkits during their heyday. These
historic rootkit examples provide valuable insights into how attackers see
the operating system internals and find ways to reliably compose their
implants into them, using the OS’s own structure.
    Chapter 1: What’s in a Rootkit: The TDL3 Case Study We start
    exploring how rootkits work by telling the story of one of the most
    interesting rootkits of its time, based on our own encounters with its
    diverse variants and our analysis of these threats.
    Chapter 2: Festi Rootkit: The Most Advanced Spam and DDoS Bot
    Here we analyze the remarkable Festi rootkit, which used the most
    advanced stealth techniques of its time to deliver spam and DDoS
    attacks. These techniques included bringing along its own custom
    kernel-level TCP/IP stack.
    Chapter 3: Observing Rootkit Infections This chapter takes our
    journey into the depths of the operating system kernel, highlighting
    the tricks attackers used to fight for control of the kernel’s deeper
    layers, such as intercepting system events and calls.

Part 2: Bootkits
The second part shifts focus to the evolution of bootkits, the conditions
that spurred that evolution, and the techniques for reverse engineering
these threats. We’ll see how bootkits developed to implant themselves into
the BIOS and exploit UEFI firmware vulnerabilities.
    Chapter 4: Evolution of the Bootkit This chapter takes a deep dive
    into the (co)evolutionary forces that brought bootkits into being and
    guided their development. We’ll look at some of the first bootkits dis-
    covered, like the notorious Elk Cloner.
    Chapter 5: Operating System Boot Process Essentials Here we cover
    the internals of the Windows boot process and how they’ve changed
    over time. We’ll dig into specifics like the Master Boot Record, parti-
    tion tables, configuration data, and the bootmgr module.
    Chapter 6: Boot Process Security This chapter takes you on a
    guided tour of Windows boot process defense technologies, such as
    Early Launch Anti-Malware (ELAM) modules, the Kernel-Mode Code
    Signing Policy and its vulnerabilities, and newer virtualization-based
    security.

                                                                Introduction   xxxi
                       Chapter 7: Bootkit Infection Techniques In this chapter, we dissect
                       the methods of infecting boot sectors and look at how these methods
                       had to evolve over time. We’ll use some familiar bootkits as examples:
                       TDL4, Gapz, and Rovnix.
                       Chapter 8: Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro This chapter
                       covers the methods and instruments for static analysis of bootkit infec-
                       tions. We’ll guide you through the analysis of the TDL4 bootkit as an
                       example, and we’ll provide materials for you to use in your own analysis,
                       including a disk image to download.
                       Chapter 9: Bootkit Dynamic Analysis: Emulation and Virtualization
                       Here we shift focus to dynamic analysis methods, using the Bochs
                       emulator and VMware’s built-in GDB debugger. Again, we’ll take
                       you through the steps of dynamically analyzing the MBR and VBR
                       bootkits.
                       Chapter 10: An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques:
                       Olmasco This chapter traces the evolution of the stealth techniques
                       used to take bootkits into the lower levels of the boot process. We’ll use
                       Olmasco as an example, looking at its infection and persistence tech-
                       niques, the malware functionality, and payload injection.
                       Chapter 11: IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp Here we take a
                       look under the hood of two of the most complex bootkits, Rovnix
                       and Carberp, which targeted electronic banking. These were the
                       first bootkits to target the IPL and evade contemporary defense soft-
                       ware. We’ll use VMware and IDA Pro to analyze them.
                       Chapter 12: Gapz: Advanced VBR Infection We’ll demystify the
                       pinnacle of the bootkit stealth evolution: the mysterious Gapz rootkit,
                       which used the most advanced techniques of its time to target the VBR.
                       Chapter 13: Rise of MBR Ransomware In this chapter, we look at
                       how bootkits rebounded in ransomware threats.
                       Chapter 14: UEFI Boot vs. the MBR/VBR Boot Process Here we
                       explore the boot process of UEFI BIOS designs—essential information
                       for discovering the newest malware evolutions.
                       Chapter 15: Contemporary UEFI Bootkits This chapter covers our
                       original research into the various BIOS implants, both proofs of con-
                       cept and those deployed in the wild. We’ll discuss methods for infecting
                       and persisting on the UEFI BIOS and look at UEFI malware found in
                       the wild, like Computrace.
                       Chapter 16: UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities Here we take an in-depth
                       look at different classes of modern BIOS vulnerabilities that enable the
                       introduction of BIOS implants. This is a deep exploration of UEFI vul-
                       nerabilities and exploits, including case studies.

xxxii   Introduction
       Part 3: Defense and Forensic Techniques
       The final part of the book addresses the forensics of bootkits, rootkits, and
       other BIOS threats.
           Chapter 17: How UEFI Secure Boot Works This chapter takes a deep
           dive into the workings of the Secure Boot technology and its evolution,
           vulnerabilities, and effectiveness.
           Chapter 18: Approaches to Analyzing Hidden Filesystems This chap-
           ter provides an overview of the hidden filesystems used by malware and
           methods of detecting them. We’ll parse a hidden filesystem image and
           introduce a tool we devised: the HiddenFsReader.
           Chapter 19: BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and
           Analysis Approaches This final chapter discusses approaches to
           detecting the most advanced state-of-the-art threats. We look at hard-
           ware, firmware, and software approaches, using various open source
           tools, like UEFITool and Chipsec.

How to Read This Book
       All the specimens of threats discussed in the book, as well as other sup-
       porting materials, can be found at the book’s website, https://nostarch.com/
       rootkits/. This site also points to the tools used in the bootkits’ analysis, such
       as the source code of the IDA Pro plug-ins that we used in our original
       research.

                                                                         Introduction   xxxiii
