                                 1
             W h at ’s i n a R o o t k i t:
             T h e T DL 3 C a s e S t u dy

            In this chapter, we’ll introduce rootkits with
            TDL3. This Windows rootkit provides a good
           example of advanced control and data flow–
        hijacking techniques that leverage lower layers
of the OS architecture. We’ll look at how TDL3 infects
a system and how it subverts specific OS interfaces and
mechanisms in order to survive and remain undetected.
     TDL3 uses an infection mechanism that directly loads its code into the
Windows kernel, so it has been rendered ineffective by the kernel integrity
measures Microsoft introduced on the 64-bit Windows systems. However,
the techniques TDL3 uses for interposing code within the kernel are still
valuable as an example of how the kernel’s execution can be hooked reli-
ably and effectively once such integrity mechanisms have been bypassed.
As is the case with many rootkits, TDL3’s hooking of the kernel code paths
relies on key patterns of the kernel’s own architecture. In a sense, a rootkit’s
                hooks may be a better guide to the kernel’s actual structure than the official
                documentation, and certainly they’re the best guide to understanding the
                undocumented system structures and algorithms.
                    Indeed, TDL3 has been succeeded by TDL4, which shares much of the
                evasion and antiforensic functionality of TDL3 but has turned to bootkit tech-
                niques to circumvent the Windows Kernel-Mode Code Signing mechanism in
                64-bit systems (we will describe these techniques in Chapter 7).
                    Throughout this chapter, we’ll point out specific OS interfaces and
                mechanisms that TDL3 subverts. We’ll explain how TDL3 and similar
                rootkits are designed and how they work, and then in Part 2, we’ll discuss
                the methods and tools with which they can be discovered, observed, and
                analyzed.

     History of TDL3 Distribution in the Wild
                First discovered in 2010,1 the TDL3 rootkit was one of the most sophisti-
                cated examples of malware developed up to that time. Its stealth mecha-
                nisms posed a challenge to the entire antivirus industry (as did its bootkit
                successor, TDL4, which became the first widespread bootkit for the x64
                platform).

        Note    This family of malware is also known as TDSS, Olmarik, or Alureon. This profusion
                of names for the same family is not uncommon, since antivirus vendors tend to come
                up with different names in their reports. It’s also common for research teams to assign
                different names to different components of a common attack, especially during the
                early stages of analysis.

                     TDL3 was distributed through a Pay-Per-Install (PPI) business model
                via the affiliates DogmaMillions and GangstaBucks (both of which have
                since been taken down). The PPI scheme, popular among cybercrime
                groups, is similar to schemes commonly used for distributing browser tool-
                bars. Toolbar distributors track their use by creating special builds with
                an embedded unique identifier (UID) for each package or bundle made
                available for download via different distribution channels. This allows the
                developer to calculate the number of installations (number of users) associ-
                ated with a UID and therefore to determine the revenue generated by each
                distribution channel. Likewise, distributor information was embedded into
                the TDL3 rootkit executable, and special servers calculated the number of
                installations associated with—and charged to—a distributor.
                     The cybercrime groups’ associates received a unique login and password,
                which identified the number of installations per resource. Each affiliate also
                had a personal manager who could be consulted in the event of any technical
                problems.
                     To reduce the risk of detection by antivirus software, the affiliates
                repacked the distributed malware frequently and used sophisticated

                1. http://static1.esetstatic.com/us/resources/white-papers/TDL3-Analysis.pdf

4   Chapter 1
        defensive techniques to detect the use of debuggers and virtual machines,
        confounding analysis by malware researchers.2 Partners were also forbidden
        to use resources like VirusTotal to check if their current versions could be
        detected by security software, and they were even threatened with fines for
        doing so. This was because samples submitted to VirusTotal were likely to
        attract the attention of, and thus analysis from, security research labs, effec-
        tively shortening the malware’s useful life. If the malware’s distributors were
        concerned about the product’s stealthiness, they were referred to malware
        developer–run services that were similar to VirusTotal but could guarantee
        that submitted samples would be kept out of the hands of security software
        vendors.

Infection Routine
        Once a TDL3 infector has been downloaded onto a user’s system through
        one of its distribution channels, it begins the infection process. In order to
        survive a system reboot, TDL3 infects one of the boot-start drivers essential
        to loading the OS by injecting malicious code into that driver’s binary. These
        boot-start drivers are loaded with the kernel image at an early stage of the
        OS initialization process. As a result, when an infected machine is booted,
        the modified driver is loaded and the malicious code takes control of the
        startup process.
             So, when run in the kernel-mode address space, the infection routine
        searches through the list of boot-start drivers that support core operating
        system components and randomly picks one as an infection target. Each
        entry in the list is described by the undocumented KLDR_DATA_TABLE_ENTRY
        structure, shown in Listing 1-1, referenced by the DriverSection field in the
        DRIVER_OBJECT structure. Every loaded kernel-mode driver has a correspond-
        ing DRIVER_OBJECT structure.

        typedef struct _KLDR_DATA_TABLE_ENTRY {
           LIST_ENTRY InLoadOrderLinks;
           LIST_ENTRY InMemoryOrderLinks;
           LIST_ENTRY InInitializationOrderLinks;
           PVOID ExceptionTable;
           ULONG ExceptionTableSize;
           PVOID GpValue;
           PNON_PAGED_DEBUG_INFO NonPagedDebugInfo;
           PVOID ImageBase;			
           PVOID EntryPoint;			
           ULONG SizeOfImage;
           UNICODE_STRING FullImageName;
           UNICODE_STRING BaseImageName;

        2. Rodrigo Rubira Branco, Gabriel Negreira Barbosa, and Pedro Drimel Neto, “Scientific
        but Not Academic Overview of Malware Anti-Debugging, Anti-Disassembly and Anti-VM
        Technologies” (paper presented at the Black Hat USA 2012 conference, July 21–26, Las Vegas,
        Nevada), https://media.blackhat.com/bh-us-12/Briefings/Branco/BH_US_12_Branco_Scientific
        _Academic_WP.pdf.

                                                               What’s in a Rootkit: The TDL3 Case Study    5
                   ULONG Flags;
                   USHORT LoadCount;
                   USHORT Reserved1;
                   PVOID SectionPointer;
                   ULONG CheckSum;
                   PVOID LoadedImports;
                   PVOID PatchInformation;
                } KLDR_DATA_TABLE_ENTRY, *PKLDR_DATA_TABLE_ENTRY;

Listing 1-1: Layout of the KLDR_DATA_TABLE_ENTRY structure referenced by the DriverSection
                field

                     Once it chooses a target driver, the TDL3 infector modifies the driver’s
                image in the memory by overwriting the first few hundred bytes of its
                resource section, .rsrc, with a malicious loader. That loader is quite simple:
                it merely loads the rest of the malware code it needs from the hard drive at
                boot time.
                     The overwritten original bytes of the .rsrc section—which are still needed
                for the driver to function correctly—are stored in a file named rsrc.dat within
                the hidden filesystem maintained by the malware. (Note that the infection
                doesn’t change the size of the driver file being infected.) Once it has made
                this modification, TDL3 changes the entry point field in the driver’s Portable
                Executable (PE) header so that it points to the malicious loader. Thus, the
                entry point address of a driver infected by TDL3 points to the resource sec-
                tion, which is not legitimate under normal conditions. Figure 1-1 shows the
                boot-start driver before and after infection, demonstrating how the driver
                image is infected, with the Header label referring to the PE header along
                with the section table.

                    Before infection                             After infection

                        Header                                      Header
                                            Entry
                        Sections            point                   Sections

                         .text                                        .text             Entry
                                                                                        point
                         .data                                       .data

                          .rsrc                                       .rsrc

                     Resource data                                TDL3 loader

Figure 1-1: Modifications to a kernel-mode boot-start driver upon infection of
                the system

                    This pattern of infecting the executables in the PE format—the pri-
                mary binary format of Windows executables and dynamic link libraries
                (DLLs)—is typical of virus infectors, but not so common for rootkits. Both
                the PE header and the section table are indispensable to any PE file. The

6   Chapter 1
        PE header contains crucial information about the location of the code and
        data, system metadata, stack size, and so on, while the section table contains
        information about the sections of the executable and their location.
             To complete the infection process, the malware overwrites the .NET
        metadata directory entry of the PE header with the same values contained in
        the security data directory entry. This step was probably designed to thwart
        static analysis of the infected images, because it may induce an error dur-
        ing parsing of the PE header by common malware analysis tools. Indeed,
        attempts to load such images caused IDA Pro version 5.6 to crash—a bug
        that has since been corrected. According to Microsoft’s PE/COFF specifi-
        cation, the .NET metadata directory contains data used by the Common
        Language Runtime (CLR) to load and run .NET applications. However, this
        directory entry is not relevant for kernel-mode boot drivers, since they are all
        native binaries and contain no system-managed code. For this reason, this
        directory entry isn’t checked by the OS loader, enabling an infected driver to
        load successfully even if its content is invalid.
             Note that this TDL3 infection technique is limited: it works only on
        32-bit platforms because of Microsoft’s Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy,
        which enforces mandatory code integrity checks on 64-bit systems. Since
        the driver’s content is changed while the system is being infected, its digital
        signature is no longer valid, thereby preventing the OS from loading the
        driver on 64-bit systems. The malware’s developers responded with TDL4. We
        will discuss both the policy and its circumvention in detail in Chapter 6.

Controlling the Flow of Data
        To fulfill their mission of stealth, kernel rootkits must modify the control
        flow or the data flow (or both) of the kernel’s system calls, wherever the
        OS’s original control or data flow would reveal the presence of any of the
        malware’s components at rest (for example, files) or any of its running tasks
        or artifacts (such as kernel data structures). To do so, rootkits typically inject
        their code somewhere on the execution path of the system call implementa-
        tion; the placement of these code hooks is one of the most instructive aspects
        of rootkits.

        Bring Your Own Linker
        Hooking is essentially linking. Modern rootkits bring their own linkers to
        link their code with the system, a design pattern we call Bring Your Own
        Linker. In order to embed these “linkers” stealthily, the TDL3 follows a few
        common malware design principles.
            First, the target must remain robust despite the injected extra code,
        as the attacker has nothing to gain and a lot to lose from crashing the
        targeted software. From a software engineering point of view, hooking is a
        form of software composition and requires a careful approach. The attacker

                                                          What’s in a Rootkit: The TDL3 Case Study    7
                must make sure that the system reaches the new code only in a predictable
                state so the code can correctly process, to avoid any crashing or abnormal
                behavior that would draw a user’s attention. It might seem like the place-
                ment of hooks is limited only by the rootkit author’s imagination, but in
                reality, the author must stick to stable software boundaries and interfaces
                they understand really well. It is not surprising, then, that hooking tends
                to target the same structures that are used for the system’s native dynamic
                linking functionality, whether publicly documented or not. Tables of call-
                backs, methods, and other function pointers that link abstraction layers
                or software modules are the safest places for hooks; hooking function pre-
                ambles also work well.
                     Secondly, the hook placement should not be too obvious. Although
                early rootkits hooked the kernel’s top-level system call table, this technique
                quickly became obsolete because it was so conspicuous. In fact, when used by
                the Sony rootkit in 2005,3 this placement was already considered behind the
                times and raised many eyebrows as a result. As rootkits grew more sophisti-
                cated, their hooks migrated lower down the stack, from the main system call
                dispatch tables to the OS subsystems that presented uniform API layers for
                diverging implementations, such as the Virtual File System (VFS), and then
                down to specific drivers’ methods and callbacks. TDL3 is a particularly good
                example of this migration.

                How TDL3’s Kernel-Mode Hooks Work
                In order to stay under the radar, TDL3 employed a rather sophisticated
                hooking technique never before seen in the wild: it intercepted the read
                and write I/O requests sent to the hard drive at the level of the storage
                port/miniport driver (a hardware storage media driver found at the very
                bottom of the storage driver stack). Port drivers are system modules that
                provide a programming interface for miniport drivers, which are supplied
                by the vendors of the corresponding storage devices. Figure 1-2 shows the
                architecture of the storage device driver stack in Microsoft Windows.
                    The processing of an I/O request packet (IRP) structure addressed to
                some object located on a storage device starts at the filesystem driver’s level.
                The corresponding filesystem driver determines the specific device where
                the object is stored (like the disk partition and the disk extent, a contiguous
                storage area initially reserved for a filesystem) and issues another IRP to a
                class driver’s device object. The latter, in turn, translates the I/O request
                into a corresponding miniport device object.

                3. https://blogs.technet.microsoft.com/markrussinovich/2005/10/31/sony-rootkits-and-digital-rights
                -management-gone-too-far/

8   Chapter 1
                Filesystem drivers
        (ntfs.sys, fastfat.sys, and so on)

             Storage class drivers
             (disk.sys, and so on)

              Storage port drivers
     (scsiport.sys, storport.sys, and so on)

   SCSI      Storport       ATA           IDE
  miniport   miniport      miniport     miniport

               Targeted by TDL3

Figure 1-2: Storage device driver stack
architecture in Microsoft Windows

     According to the Windows Driver Kit (WDK) documentation, storage
port drivers provide an interface between a hardware-independent class
driver and an HBA-specific (host-based architecture) miniport driver. Once
that interface is available, TDL3 sets up kernel-mode hooks at the lowest
possible hardware-independent level in the storage device driver stack,
thus bypassing any monitoring tools or protections operating at the level
of the filesystem or storage class driver. Such hooks can be detected only
by tools that are aware of the normal composition of these tables for a
particular set of devices or of a known good configuration of a particular
machine.
     In order to achieve this hooking technique, TDL3 first obtains a pointer
to the miniport driver object of the corresponding device object. Specifically,
the hooking code tries to open a handle for \??\PhysicalDriveXX (where XX
corresponds to the number of the hard drive), but that string is actually a
symbolic link pointing to the device object \Device\HardDisk0\DR0, which is
created by a storage class driver. Moving down the device stack from \Device\
HardDisk0\DR0, we find the miniport storage device object at the very bot-
tom. Once the miniport storage device object is found, it’s straightforward
to get a pointer to its driver object by following the DriverObject field in the
documented DEVICE_OBJECT structure. At this point, the malware has all the
information it needs to hook the storage driver stack.
     Next, TDL3 creates a new malicious driver object and overwrites the
DriverObject field in the miniport driver object with the pointer to a newly
created field, as shown in Figure 1-3. This allows the malware to intercept
read/write requests to the underlying hard drive, since the addresses of
all the handlers are specified in the related driver object structure: the
MajorFunction array in the DRIVER_OBJECT structure.

                                                   What’s in a Rootkit: The TDL3 Case Study    9
                            DriverObject   Miniport
                                           device
                                            object

                     TDL3 driver object               Miniport driver object

                        IRP major                          IRP major
                     handler pointers                   handler pointers
                        malicious                           original

Figure 1-3: Hooking storage miniport driver object

                     The malicious major handlers shown in Figure 1-3 intercept IRP_MJ
                 _INTERNAL_CONTROL and IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL for the following Input/Output
                 Control (IOCTL) code in order to monitor and modify read/write requests
                 to the hard drive, storing the infected driver and the image of the hidden
                 filesystem implemented by the malware:

                 •     IOCTL_ATA_PASS_THROUGH_DIRECT
                 •     IOCTL_ATA_PASS_THROUGH

                      TDL3 prevents hard drive sectors containing protected data from being
                 read by the Windows tools or accidentally overwritten by the Windows file-
                 system, thus protecting both the stealth and the integrity of the rootkit.
                 When a read operation is encountered, TDL3 zeros out the return buffer
                 on completion of the I/O operation, and it skips the whole read operation
                 in the event of a write data request. TDL3’s hooking technique allows it to
                 bypass some kernel patch detection techniques; that is, TDL3’s modifica-
                 tions do not touch any of the frequently protected and monitored areas,
                 including system modules, the System Service Descriptor Table (SSDT), the
                 Global Descriptor Table (GDT), or the Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT).
                 Its successor, TDL4, takes the same approach to bypassing kernel-mode
                 patch protection PatchGuard available on 64-bit Windows operating sys-
                 tems, as it inherits a great deal of kernel-mode functionality from TDL3,
                 including these hooks into the storage miniport driver.

     The Hidden Filesystem
                 TDL3 was the first malware system to store its configuration files and pay-
                 load in a hidden encrypted storage area on the target system, instead of
                 relying on the filesystem service provided by the operating system. Today,
                 TDL3’s approach has been adopted and adapted by other complex threats
                 such as the Rovnix Bootkit, ZeroAccess, Avatar, and Gapz.
                      This hidden storage technique significantly hampers forensic analysis
                 because the malicious data is stored in an encrypted container located

10   Chapter 1
somewhere on the hard drive, but outside the area reserved by the OS’s
own native filesystem. At the same time, the malware is able to access the
contents of the hidden filesystem using conventional Win32 APIs like
CreateFile, ReadFile, WriteFile, and CloseHandle. This facilitates malware pay-
load development by allowing the malware developers to use the standard
Windows interfaces for reading and writing the payloads from the storage
area without having to develop and maintain any custom interfaces. This
design decision is significant because, together with the use of standard
interfaces for hooking, it improves the overall reliability of the rootkit; from
a software engineering point of view, this is a good and proper example of
code reuse! Microsoft’s own CEO’s formula for success was “Developers,
developers, developers, developers!”—in other words, treating existing
developer skills as valuable capital. TDL3 chose to similarly leverage the
existing Windows programming skills of developers who had turned to the
dark side, perhaps both to ease the transition and to increase the reliability
of the malcode.
     TDL3 allocates its image of the hidden filesystem on the hard disk, in
sectors unoccupied by the OS’s own filesystem. The image grows from the
end of the disk toward the start of the disk, which means that it may eventu-
ally overwrite the user’s filesystem data if it grows large enough. The image
is divided into blocks of 1,024 bytes each. The first block (at the end of the
hard drive) contains a file table whose entries describe files contained
within the filesystem and include the following information:

•   A filename limited to 16 characters, including the terminating null
•   The size of the file
•   The actual file offset, which we calculate by subtracting the starting off-
    set of a file, multiplied by 1,024, from the offset of the beginning of the
    filesystem
•   The time the filesystem was created

    The contents of the filesystem are encrypted with a custom (and mostly
ad hoc) encryption algorithm on a per-block basis. Different versions of the
rootkit have used different algorithms. For instance, some modifications used
an RC4 cipher using the logical block address (LBA) of the first sector that
corresponds to each block as a key. However, another modification encrypted
data using an XOR operation with a fixed key: 0x54 incremented each XOR
operation, resulting in weak enough encryption that a specific pattern corre-
sponding to an encrypted block containing zeros was easy to spot.
    From user mode, the payload accesses the hidden storage by opening
a handle for a device object named \Device\XXXXXXXX\YYYYYYYY where
XXXXXXXX and YYYYYYYY are randomly generated hexadecimal num-
bers. Note that the codepath to access this storage relies on many standard
Windows components—hopefully already debugged by Microsoft and
therefore reliable. The name of the device object is generated each time
the system boots and then passed as a parameter to the payload modules.
The rootkit is responsible for maintaining and handling I/O requests to this

                                               What’s in a Rootkit: The TDL3 Case Study    11
                 filesystem. For instance, when a payload module performs an I/O operation
                 with a file stored in the hidden storage area, the OS transfers this request to
                 the rootkit and executes its entry point functions to handle the request.
                      In this design pattern, TDL3 illustrates the general trend followed by
                 rootkits. Rather than providing brand-new code for all of its operations, bur-
                 dening the third-party malware developers with learning the peculiarities of
                 that code, a rootkit piggybacks on the existing and familiar Windows func-
                 tionality—so long as its piggybacking tricks and their underlying Windows
                 interfaces are not common knowledge. Specific infection methods evolve
                 with changes in mass-deployed defensive measures, but this approach has
                 persisted, as it follows the common code reliability principles shared by both
                 malware and benign software development.

     Conclusion: TDL3 Meets Its Nemesis
                 As we have seen, TDL3 is a sophisticated rootkit that pioneered several
                 techniques for operating covertly and persistently on an infected system.
                 Its kernel-mode hooks and hidden storage systems have not gone unnoticed
                 by other malware developers and thus have subsequently appeared in other
                 complex threats. The only limitation to its infection routine is that it’s able
                 to target only 32-bit systems.
                      When TDL3 first began to spread, it did the job the developers intended,
                 but as the number of 64-bit systems increased, demand grew for the ability
                 to infect x64 systems. To achieve this, malware developers had to figure out
                 how to defeat the 64-bit Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy in order to load
                 malicious code into kernel-mode address space. As we’ll discuss in Chapter 7,
                 TDL3’s authors chose bootkit technology to evade signature enforcement.

12   Chapter 1
