                                 3
O b s e r v i n g Roo t k i t I n f e c t i o n s

            How do we check whether a potentially
           infected system harbors a rootkit? After all,
          the whole purpose of a rootkit is to prevent
       administrators from examining the true state of
a system, so finding evidence of the infection can be a
battle of wits—or, rather, a contest to understand the
system’s internal structures. Analysts must initially distrust any information
they obtain from an infected system and strive to find deeper sources of
evidence that are trustworthy even in a compromised state.
     We know from the TDL3 and Festi rootkit examples that approaches for
detecting rootkits that depend on checking the kernel integrity at a number
of fixed locations are likely to fall short. Rootkits are constantly evolving, so
there’s a good chance that newer ones use techniques that are unknown to
defensive software. Indeed, during the golden age of rootkits in the early
2000s, rootkit developers introduced new tricks all the time, allowing their
rootkits to avoid detection for months until defenders could develop and
add new, stable detection methods to their software.
                      These delays in the development of an effective defense created a niche
                 for a new type of software tool, the dedicated antirootkit, which took liberties
                 with its detection algorithms (and, sometimes, with the system’s stability as
                 well) in order to discover rootkits faster. As these algorithms matured, they
                 became part of more traditional Host Intrusion Prevention System (HIPS)
                 products, with new “bleeding edge” heuristics.
                      Faced with these innovations on the defensive side, rootkit developers
                 responded by coming up with ways to actively disrupt the antirootkit
                 tools. System-level defense and offense coevolved through multiple cycles.
                 Throughout this coevolution, and largely owing to it, the defenders sig-
                 nificantly refined their understanding of the system’s composition, attack
                 surface, integrity, and protection profile. Here and elsewhere in com-
                 puter security, these words from Microsoft senior security researcher John
                 Lambert ring true: “If you shame attack research, you misjudge its contri-
                 bution. Offense and defense aren’t peers. Defense is offense’s child.”
                      To effectively catch rootkits, then, the defender must learn to think as
                 the rootkit’s creator does.

     Methods of Interception
                 The rootkit must intercept control at particular points in the operating sys-
                 tem to prevent the antirootkit tools from launching or initializing. These
                 points of interception are abundant, present in both standard OS mecha-
                 nisms and nondocumented ones. Some examples of interception methods
                 are: modifying the code in key functions, changing the pointers in various
                 data structures of the kernel and its drivers, and manipulating data with
                 techniques such as Direct Kernel Object Manipulation (DKOM).
                      To bring some order to this seemingly endless list, we’ll consider three
                 main OS mechanisms that rootkits can intercept to gain control over pro-
                 gram launch and initialization: system events, system calls, and the object
                 dispatcher.

                 Intercepting System Events
                 The first method of gaining control is to intercept system events via event
                 notification callbacks, which are the documented OS interfaces used to pro-
                 cess various types of system events. Legitimate drivers need to react to
                 the creation of new processes or data flows by loading executable binaries
                 and creating and modifying registry keys. To keep driver programmers
                 from creating brittle, undocumented hook solutions, Microsoft provides
                 standardized event notification mechanisms. Malware writers use those
                 same mechanisms to react to system events with their own code, nudging
                 aside the legitimate response.
                      As one example, the CmRegisterCallbackEx routine for kernel-mode drivers
                 registers a callback function to be executed every time someone performs an
                 operation on the system registry, such as creating, modifying, or deleting a
                 registry key. By abusing this functionality, malware can intercept all requests
                 to the system registry, inspect them, and then either block or allow them.

36   Chapter 3
This allows a rootkit to protect any registry key corresponding to its kernel-
mode driver by hiding it from security software and blocking any attempts to
remove it.

                  Regis te ring Ke rne l-Mode Dri v e rs
                           in the Sys te m Regis try
    In Windows, every kernel-mode driver has a dedicated entry in the system
    registry, located under HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\
    Services key. This entry specifies the name of the driver, the driver type, the
    location of the driver image on disk, and when the driver should be loaded
    (on demand, at boot time, at system initialization, and so forth). If this entry
    is removed, the OS won’t be able to load the kernel-mode driver. To maintain
    persistence on the target system, then, kernel-mode rootkits often protect their
    corresponding registry entry from being removed by security software.

     Another malicious system event interception abuses the kernel-mode
driver’s PsSetLoadImageNotifyRoutine routine. This routine registers the call-
back function ImageNotifyRoutine, which is executed whenever an executable
image is mapped into memory. The callback function receives information
on the image being loaded—namely, the name and base address of the
image, and the identifier of the process into whose address space the image
is being loaded.
     Rootkits frequently abuse the PsSetLoadImageNotifyRoutine routine to
inject a malicious payload into the user-mode address of target processes.
By registering the callback routine, rootkits will be notified whenever an
image load operation takes place and can examine the information passed to
ImageNotifyRoutine to determine whether the target process is of interest. For
instance, if a rootkit wants to inject the user-mode payload into web browsers
only, it can check whether the image being loaded corresponds to a browser
application and act accordingly.
     There are other interfaces provided by the kernel that expose similar
functionality, and we’ll discuss them in the following chapters.

Intercepting System Calls
The second method of infection involves intercepting another key OS
mechanism: system calls, which are the primary means by which userland
programs interact with the kernel. Since practically any userland API call
generates one or more corresponding system calls, a rootkit capable of
dispatching system calls gains full control over the system.
     As an example, we’ll study the method of intercepting filesystem calls,
which is particularly important for rootkits that must always hide their own
files to prevent unintended access to them. When security software or a user
scans a filesystem for suspicious or malicious files, the system issues a system

                                                                Observing Rootkit Infections    37
                 call to tell a filesystem driver to query files and directories. By intercepting
                 such system calls, a rootkit can manipulate the return data and exclude
                 information on its malicious files from the query results (as we saw in “The
                 Method for Hiding the Malicious Driver on Disk” on page 22).
                      To understand how to counteract these abuses and protect filesystem
                 calls from rootkits, first we need to briefly survey the structure of the file
                 subsystem. It’s a perfect example of how OS kernel internals are divided into
                 many specialized layers and follow many conventions for interactions between
                 these layers—concepts that are opaque even to most systems developers, but
                 not to rootkit writers.

                 The File Subsystem
                 The Windows file subsystem is closely integrated with its I/O subsystem.
                 These subsystems are modular and hierarchical, and separate drivers are
                 responsible for the functionality of each of their layers. There are three
                 main types of drivers.
                      Storage device drivers are low-level drivers that interact with the controllers
                 of specific devices such as ports, buses, and drives. Most of these drivers are
                 plug and play (PnP), loaded and controlled by the PnP manager.
                      Storage volume drivers are mid-level drivers that control the volume abstrac-
                 tions on top of storage devices’ partitions. To interact with the lower layers of
                 the disk subsystem, these drivers create a physical device object (PDO) to repre-
                 sent each partition. When a filesystem is mounted on a partition, the filesys-
                 tem driver creates a volume device object (VDO), which represents that partition
                 to the higher-level filesystem drivers, explained next.
                      Filesystem drivers implement particular filesystems, such as FAT32, NTFS,
                 CDFS, and so on, and also create a pair of objects: a VDO and a control
                 device object (CDO), which represents a given filesystem (as opposed to the
                 underlying partition). These CDO devices have names such as \Device\Ntfs.

        No t e   To learn more about the different types of drivers, refer to the Windows documenta-
                 tion (https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/ifs/
                 storage-device-stacks--storage-volumes--and-file-system-stacks/).

                     Figure 3-1 presents a simplified version of this hierarchy of device
                 objects using the SCSI disk device as an example.
                     At the storage device driver layer, we can see the SCSI adapter and
                 disk device objects. These device objects are created and managed by
                 three different drivers: the PCI bus driver, which enumerates (discovers)
                 storage adapters available on the PCI bus; the SCSI port/miniport driver,
                 which initializes and controls the enumerated SCSI storage adapter; and
                 the disk class driver, which controls a disk device attached to the SCSI
                 storage adapter.

38   Chapter 3
      Volume device                   Managed by              Filesystem control
       object (VDO)                 filesystem driver        device object (CDO)

                                                               Filesystem driver layer

  Disk partition 1 device
       object (PDO)

                                   Managed by disk
                                     class driver

  Disk partition 0 device
     object (raw disk)

                                                          Storage volume driver layer

                                   Managed by disk
    Disk device object           class driver and SCSI
                                  port/miniport driver

                                   Managed by SCSI
   SCSI adapter device
                                  port/miniport driver
         object
                                  and PCI bus driver

                                                          Storage device driver layer

Figure 3-1: An example of a storage device driver stack

     At the storage volume driver layer, we can see partition 0 and parti-
tion 1, which are also created by the disk class driver. Partition 0 represents
the entire raw disk and always exists, whether or not the disk is partitioned.
Partition 1 represents the first partition on the disk device. Our example
has only one partition, so we show only partition 0 and partition 1.
     Partition 1 must be exposed to users so they can store and access files
stored on the disk device. To expose partition 1, the filesystem driver creates
a VDO at the top of the storage stack filesystem driver layer. Note that there
may also be optional storage filter device objects attached on top of the VDO
or between the device objects in the device stack, which we’ve omitted in the
figure for simplicity’s sake. We can also see a filesystem CDO on the top right
of the figure that the OS uses to control the filesystem driver.
     This figure demonstrates how the complexity of the storage driver stack
provides opportunities for rootkits to intercept filesystem operations and
alter or hide the data.

                                                           Observing Rootkit Infections    39
                 Intercepting the File Operations
                 It’s much easier for a rootkit to intercept file operations at the top level (that
                 is, the level of the filesystem driver) than at lower levels. That way, the root-
                 kit sees all such operations at the application programmer’s level, without
                 having to find and parse filesystem structures invisible to the programmer,
                 which correspond to input/output request packets (IRPs) passed to the lower-
                 layer drivers.
                      If the rootkit intercepts operations at the lower layers instead, it must
                 reimplement parts of the Windows filesystems, which is a complex and
                 error-prone task. That doesn’t mean there are no lower-level driver inter-
                 cepts, however: a sector-by-sector map of the disk is still relatively easy to
                 obtain, and blocking or diverting sector operations even at the miniport
                 driver level is feasible, as TDL3 showed.
                      Regardless of the level at which a rootkit intercepts storage I/O, there
                 are three main methods of interception:

                 1.   Attaching a filtering driver to the target device’s driver stack
                 2.   Replacing pointers to IRP or FastIO processing functions in the driver’s
                      descriptor structure
                 3.   Replacing the code of these IRP or FastIO driver functions.

                                                        Fa s tIO

                      To perform input/output operations, IRPs traverse the entire storage device
                      stack, from the very top device object all the way to the bottom. FastIO is
                      an optional method designed for performing rapid synchronous input/output
                      operations on cached files. In FastIO operations, data is transferred directly
                      between user-mode buffers and the system cache, bypassing the filesystem and
                      storage driver stack. This makes I/O operations on cached files much faster.

                      In Chapter 2, we discussed the Festi rootkit, which used interception
                 method 1: Festi attached a malicious filter device object on top of the stor-
                 age driver stack at the filesystem driver layer.
                      Later in the book, we’ll discuss the TDL4 (Chapter 7), Olmasco
                 (Chapter 10), and Rovnix (Chapter 11) bootkits, which all employ
                 method 2: they intercept disk input/output operations at the lowest pos-
                 sible level, the storage device driver layer. The Gapz bootkit we’ll look
                 at in Chapter 12 uses method 3, also at the storage device driver layer.
                 You can refer to these chapters to learn more about the implementation
                 details of each method.
                      This brief review of the Windows filesystem shows that, owing to the
                 complexity of this system, a rootkit has a rich selection of targets in this
                 stack of drivers. The rootkit may intercept control at any layer of this stack,

40   Chapter 3
or even at several layers at once. An antirootkit program needs to deal with
all these possibilities—for example, by arranging its own intercepts or by
checking whether the registered callbacks look legitimate. This is obviously
a difficult task, but defenders must, at the very least, understand the dis-
patch chain of the respective drivers.

Intercepting the Object Dispatcher
The third category of intercepts we’ll discuss in this chapter targets the
Windows object dispatcher methods. The object dispatcher is the subsystem
that manages the OS resources, which are all represented as kernel objects
in the Windows NT architecture branch underlying all modern Windows
releases. The implementation details of the object dispatcher and related
data structures may differ between versions of Windows. This section is
most relevant for Windows versions prior to Windows 7, but the general
approach is applicable to other versions as well.
     One way a rootkit might take control of the object dispatcher is by
intercepting the Ob* functions of the Windows kernel that make up the
dispatcher. Rootkits rarely do this, however, for the same reason that they
rarely target the top-level system call table entries: such hooks would be too
obvious and detectable. In practice, rootkits use more sophisticated tricks
that target the kernel, as we’ll describe.
     Each kernel object is essentially a kernel-mode memory struct that
can be roughly divided into two parts: a header with dispatcher metadata
and the object body, filled in as needed by the subsystem that creates and
uses the object. The header is laid out as the OBJECT_HEADER struct, which
contains a pointer to the object’s type descriptor, OBJECT_TYPE. The latter is
also a struct, and it’s a primary attribute of the object. As befits a modern
type system, the struct representing a type is also an object whose body
contains the appropriate type information. This design implements object
inheritance via the metadata stored in the header.
     For a typical programmer, however, none of these type system intrica-
cies matter much. Most objects are handled via system services, which refer
to each object by its descriptor (HANDLE) while hiding the inner logic of
object dispatch and management.
     That said, there are some fields in the object’s type descriptor OBJECT_TYPE
that are interesting to a rootkit, such as pointers to routines for handling
certain events (for example, opening, closing, and deleting objects). By hook-
ing these routines, rootkits can intercept control and manipulate or alter
object data.
     Still, all types present in the system can be enumerated in the dispatcher
namespace as objects in the ObjectTypes directory. A rootkit can target this
information in two ways to achieve interception: by directly replacing the
pointer to the handler functions to point to the rootkit itself or by replacing
the type pointer in the header of an object.
     Since Windows debuggers use and trust this metadata to examine kernel
objects, rootkit interceptions that exploit this very same type of system meta-
data are difficult to detect.

                                                         Observing Rootkit Infections    41
                     It’s even harder to accurately detect rootkits that hijack the type meta-
                 data of existing objects. The resulting interception is more granular and thus
                 more subtle. Figure 3-2 shows an example of such a rootkit interception.

                  /Device/Harddisk0/DR0           Legitimate OBJECT_TYPE
                          object                                                      Legitimate
                                                      OpenProcedure             OpenProcedure handler
                        OBJECT_HEADER

                         ObjectType

                        Object body

                                                                                         Before inception

                                                                                             After inception

                  /Device/Harddisk0/DR0           Legitimate OBJECT_TYPE
                          object                                                      Legitimate
                                                      OpenProcedure             OpenProcedure handler
                        OBJECT_HEADER

                         ObjectType
                                                                                          

                                                  Malicious OBJECT_TYPE
                        Object body                                                   Malicious
                                                      OpenProcedure             OpenProcedure handler

Figure 3-2: Hooking the OpenProcedure handler via ObjectType manipulation

                       At the top of Figure 3-2, we can see the state of the object before it has
                 been intercepted by a rootkit: the object’s header and type descriptor are
                 pristine and not modified. At the bottom of the figure, we can see the state
                 of the object once the rootkit has modified its type descriptor. The root-
                 kit gets a pointer to an object representing a storage device, say \Device\
                 Harddisk0\DR0. It then creates its own copy of the OBJECT_TYPE structure
                 for this device v. Inside the copy, it changes the function pointer to the
                 handler of interest (in our example, it’s the OpenProcedure handler) so that
                 it’s pointing to the rootkit’s own handler function instead w. The pointer
                 to this “evil twin” structure then replaces the type pointer in the original
                 device’s descriptor u. Now the infected disk’s behavior, as described by
                 its metadata, is almost identical to the behavior of an uncompromised
                 disk object—except for the handler that has been replaced, for this object
                 instance only.

42   Chapter 3
             Note that the legitimate structures that describe all other disk objects
        of the same kind remain pristine. The changed metadata is present only in
        one copy, which is pointed to by just the targeted object. To find and recog-
        nize this discrepancy, a detection algorithm must enumerate the type fields
        of all disk object instances. Finding such discrepancies systematically is a
        daunting task requiring a full understanding of how the object subsystem
        abstractions are implemented.

Restoring the System Kernel
        Defense mechanisms may be tempted to try neutralizing a rootkit globally—
        in other words, automatically restoring the compromised system’s integrity
        via an algorithm that would check the contents of various internal dispatch
        tables and metadata structures, as well as the functions pointed to from these
        structures. With this approach, you would begin by restoring or verifying
        the System Service Descriptor Table (SSDT)—the code at the start of several
        of the kernel’s standard system call functions—and then proceed to checking
        and restoring all kernel data structures suspected of being modified. Yet, as
        you’ll surely understand by now, this restoration strategy is fraught with many
        dangers and is not at all guaranteed to be effective.
             Finding or calculating “clean” values of pointers to system call functions
        and their lower-layer callbacks, which are necessary for recovering the correct
        system call dispatch, is no easy task. Neither is locating clean copies of system
        files, from which the modified segments of kernel code could be restored.
             But even if we assumed these tasks were possible, not every kernel modi-
        fication we locate would actually be malicious. Many stand-alone legitimate
        programs—such as the antirootkit checkers discussed earlier, as well as
        more traditional firewalls, antiviruses, and HIPS—install their own benign
        hooks to intercept the kernel control flow. It may be hard to tell an antivi-
        rus’s hooks from those of a rootkit; in fact, their methods of control flow
        modification may be indistinguishable from each other. That means legiti-
        mate antimalware programs can be mistaken for the very things they protect
        against and be disabled. The same goes for digital rights management (DRM)
        software agents, which are so difficult to distinguish from rootkits that
        Sony’s 2005 DRM agent became known as the “Sony rootkit.”
             Another challenge of detecting and neutralizing rootkits is making
        sure the recovery algorithm is safe. Since kernel data structures are in con-
        stant use, any nonsynchronized writes to them—for example, when a data
        structure being modified is read before it’s properly rewritten—can result
        in a kernel crash.
             Furthermore, the rootkit may attempt to recover its hooks at any time,
        adding more potential instability.
             All things considered, automating the restoration of the kernel’s integ-
        rity works better as a reactive measure against known threats than as a gen-
        eral solution to obtaining trustworthy information about the kernel.
             It’s also not enough to detect and restore the kernel functions’ dispatch
        chains once. The rootkit may continue to inspect any modifications of the

                                                                 Observing Rootkit Infections    43
                 kernel code and the data that it relies on for its interceptions and attempt to
                 continually restore them. Indeed, some rootkits also monitor their files and
                 registry keys and restore them if they’re removed by defensive software. The
                 defender is forced to play a modern-day version of the classic 1984 program-
                 ming game Core Wars, in which programs battle for control of a computer’s
                 memory.
                      To borrow a quote from another classic, the movie War Games, “the only
                 winning move is not to play.” Recognizing this, the OS industry developed
                 OS integrity solutions that started at boot time to preempt rootkit attackers.
                 As a result, defenders no longer had to police a myriad of pointer tables and
                 tantalizing OS code snippets, such as handler function preambles.
                      True to the nature of defense-offense coevolution, their efforts prompted
                 attackers to research ways of hijacking the boot process. They came up with
                 the bootkit, which is our main focus in subsequent chapters.
                      If your Windows hacking journey started after Windows XP SP1, you
                 may prefer to skip to the next chapter while we indulge in gratuitous OS
                 debugging nostalgia. But, if tales of graybeards hold a certain fascination
                 for you, read on.

     The Great Rootkits Arms Race: A Nostalgic Note
                 The early 2000s was the golden age for rootkits: defensive software was clearly
                 losing the arms race, able to react to tricks found in new rootkits but not pre-
                 vent them. That’s because, at that time, the only tool available to rootkit ana-
                 lysts was the kernel debugger on any single instance of the OS.
                      Although limited, that kernel debugger, called the NuMega SoftIce
                 debugger, had the power to freeze and reliably examine the operating
                 system state, something even current tools know it is a challenge to do.
                 Before Windows XP Service Pack 2, SoftIce was the gold standard for
                 kernel debuggers. A hotkey combination allowed analysts to totally freeze
                 the kernel, drop down to a local debugger console (shown in Figure 3-3),
                 and search for the presence of a rootkit throughout the completely frozen
                 OS memory—a view that kernel rootkits could not alter.
                      Recognizing the threat SoftIce posed, rootkit authors quickly devel-
                 oped methods for detecting its presence on the system, but these tricks did
                 not hold analysts back for long. With the SoftIce console, defenders held a
                 root of trust that the attackers could not subvert, turning the tables on the
                 attackers. Many analysts who started their careers using SoftIce’s debugger
                 functionality lament the loss of the ability to freeze-frame the state of the
                 entire OS and drop into a debugger console that showed the ground truth
                 of the entire memory state.
                      Once they detected a rootkit, analysts could use a combination of static
                 and dynamic analysis to locate the relevant places in the rootkit’s code, neu-
                 tralize any of the rootkit’s checks for SoftIce, and then step through the root-
                 kit code to get the details of its operation.

44   Chapter 3
Figure 3-3: The SoftIce local debugger console

                        Alas, SoftIce is gone; Microsoft bought its producer in part to strengthen
                   Microsoft’s own kernel debugger, WinDbg. Today, WinDbg remains the most
                   potent tool for analyzing anomalies in a running Windows kernel. It can
                   even do so remotely, except when it comes to malicious interference with the
                   debugger itself. However, the OS-independent monitor console functionality
                   of SoftIce is gone.
                        The loss of the console did not necessarily play into the attackers’ hands.
                   Although a rootkit can theoretically interfere not only with defensive software
                   but also with a remote debugger, such interference is likely to be conspicuous
                   enough to trigger detection. For stealthy, targeted attack rootkits, being so
                   conspicuous leads to mission failure. Some of the higher-end malware that’s
                   been discovered indeed contained functions to detect a remote debugger, but
                   these checks were overly visible and easily bypassed by analysts.
                        The attacker’s advantage truly started ebbing only when Microsoft
                   began increasing the complexity of rootkit development with particular
                   defensive measures, which we’ll discuss later in this book. These days, HIPS
                   use the Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) approach, which focuses on
                   collecting as much information as possible about a system, uploading that
                   information to a central server, and then applying anomaly detection algo-
                   rithms, including those intended to catch actions unlikely to be initiated by
                   the known human users of the system and thus indicative of compromise.
                   The apparent need to collect and use this kind of information to detect a
                   potential rootkit shows how hard it is to tell the benign from the malicious
                   in a single OS kernel image.

                                                                           Observing Rootkit Infections    45
     Conclusion
                 The arms race continues as both sides keep coevolving and developing, but
                 it has now moved into the new domain of the boot process. The following
                 chapters describe the new technologies that were meant to secure the integ-
                 rity of the OS kernel and to cut attackers’ access to its plethora of targets,
                 and the attackers’ responses, which compromised the earlier stages of the
                 new hardened boot process and exposed the internal conventions and weak-
                 nesses of its design.

46   Chapter 3
