       E volution of the Bootkit
                                 4
            This chapter introduces you to the bootkit,
            a malicious program that infects the early
          stages of the system startup process, before
        the operating system is fully loaded. Bootkits
have made an impressive comeback after their use
diminished due to changes in the PC boot process.
Modern bootkits use variations on old stealth and
persistence approaches from these early bootkits to
remain active on a target system for as long as possible
without the system user’s knowledge.
    In this chapter, we take a look at the earliest bootkits; trace the fluctuat-
ing popularity of bootkits, including their spectacular comeback in recent
years; and discuss modern boot-infecting malware.
     The First Bootkits
                 The history of bootkit infections dates back to before the IBM PC hit the
                 shelves. The title of “first bootkit” is usually bestowed upon Creeper, a
                 self-replicating program discovered around 1971. Creeper ran under the
                 TENEX networked operating system on VAX PDP-10s. The first known
                 antivirus was a program called Reaper designed to remove Creeper infec-
                 tions. In this section, we’ll look at early examples of bootkits from Creeper
                 onward.

                 Boot Sector Infectors
                 Boot sector infectors (BSIs) were among the earliest bootkits. They were first
                 discovered in the days of MS-DOS, the nongraphical operating system that
                 preceded Windows, when the PC BIOS’s default behavior was to attempt to
                 boot from whatever disk it found in the floppy drive. As their name suggests,
                 these malicious programs infected the boot sectors of floppy diskettes; the
                 boot sectors were located in the first physical sector of the disk.
                      At bootup, the BIOS would look for a bootable diskette in drive A and
                 run whatever code it found in the boot sector. If an infected diskette was
                 left in the drive, it would infect the system with a BSI even if the disk wasn’t
                 bootable.
                      Although some BSIs infected both the diskette and the operating system
                 files, most BSIs were pure, meaning they were hardware specific, with no OS
                 component. Pure BSIs relied solely on BIOS-provided interrupts to com-
                 municate with the hardware and infect disk drives. This meant an infected
                 floppy would attempt to infect IBM-compatible PCs regardless of the OS
                 being run.

                 Elk Cloner and Load Runner
                 BSI viral software first targeted the Apple II microcomputer, whose operat-
                 ing system was usually entirely contained within the diskettes. Credit for the
                 first virus to infect the Apple II goes to Rich Skrenta, whose Elk Cloner virus
                 (1982–1983)1 used an infection method, employed by BSIs, though it pre-
                 ceded PC boot sector viruses by several years.
                      Elk Cloner essentially injected itself onto the loaded Apple OS in order
                 to modify it. The virus then resided in RAM and infected other floppies by
                 intercepting disk accesses and overwriting their system boot sectors with its
                 code. At every 50th bootup, it displayed the following message (sometimes
                 generously described as a poem):

                 Elk Cloner:
                 The program with a personality

                     It will get on all your disks

                 1. David Harley, Robert Slade, and Urs E. Gattikerd, Viruses Revealed (New York: McGraw-Hill/
                 Osborne, 2001).

50   Chapter 4
              It will infiltrate your chips
                Yes it's Cloner!

            It will stick to you like glue
              It will modify ram too
                Send in the Cloner!

             The next known malware to affect Apple II was Load Runner, first seen
        in 1989. Load Runner would trap the Apple reset command triggered by
        the key combination control- command -reset and take it as a cue to write
        itself to the current diskette, allowing it to survive a reset. This was one of
        the earliest methods of malware persistence, and it foreshadowed more
        sophisticated attempts to remain on a system undetected.

        The Brain Virus
        The year 1986 saw the appearance of the first PC virus, Brain. The original
        version of Brain affected only 360KB diskettes. A fairly bulky BSI, Brain
        infected the very first boot sector of a diskette with its loader. The virus
        stored its main body and the original boot sector in the available sectors on
        the diskette. Brain marked these sectors (that is, sectors with the original
        boot code and the main body) “bad” so that the OS wouldn’t overwrite the
        space.
             Some of Brain’s methods have also been adopted in modern bootkits.
        For one, Brain stored its code in a hidden area, which modern bootkits typi-
        cally do. Second, it marked the infected sectors as bad to protect the code
        from the housekeeping done by the OS. Third, it used stealth: if the virus
        was active when an infected sector was accessed, it would hook the disk
        interrupt handler to ensure that the system displayed the legitimate boot
        code sector instead. We’ll explore each of these bootkit features in more
        detail over the next few chapters.

The Evolution of Bootkits
        In this section, we’ll look at how the use of BSIs declined as operating
        systems evolved. Then we’ll examine how Microsoft’s Kernel-Mode Code
        Signing Policy rendered previous methods ineffective, prompting attackers
        to create new infection methods, and how the rise of a security standard
        called Secure Boot presented new obstacles for modern bootkits.

        The End of the BSI Era
        As operating systems became more sophisticated, pure BSIs began to
        confront some challenges. Newer versions of operating systems replaced
        the BIOS-provided interrupts used to communicate with disks that had
        OS-specific drivers. As a result, once the OS was booted, the BSIs could

                                                                   Evolution of the Bootkit   51
                    no longer access BIOS interrupts and so could not infect other disks in the
                    system. An attempt to execute a BIOS interrupt on such systems could lead
                    to unpredictable behavior.
                         As more systems implemented a BIOS that could boot from hard drives
                    rather than disks, infected floppies became less effective, and the rate of
                    BSI infection began to decline. The introduction and increasing popularity
                    of Microsoft Windows, along with the rapid decline of floppy disk use, dealt
                    the death blow to old-school BSIs.

                    The Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy
                    Bootkit technology had to undergo major revision with the introduction of
                    Microsoft’s Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy in Windows Vista and later
                    64-bit versions of Windows, which turned the tables on attackers by incorpo-
                    rating a new requirement for kernel-mode drivers. From Vista onward, every
                    system required a valid digital signature in order to execute; unsigned mali-
                    cious kernel-mode drivers simply wouldn’t load. Finding themselves unable
                    to inject their code into the kernel once the OS was fully loaded, attackers
                    had to look for ways to bypass integrity checks in modern computer systems.
                         We can divide all known tricks for bypassing Microsoft’s digital signa-
                    ture checks into four groups, as shown in Figure 4-1.

                                     Bypassing integrity check techniques

      Windows built-in         Exploiting vulnerable        System boot process     System firmware
       functionality              kernel module                 vulnerability         modification

                                   Microsoft OS              MBR (Master Boot
        Testsigning on                                                             Disable secure boot
                                  kernel modules            Record) modification

           Disable                  Third-party              VBR (Volume Boot       Firmware image
       integrity checks            kernel driver            Record) modification      modification

Figure 4-1: Techniques for bypassing the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy

                         The first group operates entirely within user mode and relies on built-in
                    Microsoft Windows methods for legitimately disabling the signing policy in
                    order to debug and test drivers. The OS provides an interface for temporar-
                    ily disabling driver image authentication or enabling test signing by using a
                    custom certificate to verify the digital signature of the drivers.
                         The second group attempts to exploit a vulnerability in the system kernel
                    or a legitimate third-party driver with a valid digital signature, which allows
                    the malware to penetrate into kernel mode.
                         The third group targets the OS bootloader in order to modify the OS
                    kernel and disable the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy. The newer boot-
                    kits take this approach. They execute before any OS component is loaded
                    so they can tamper with the OS kernel to disable security checks. We’ll dis-
                    cuss this method in detail in the next chapter.

52   Chapter 4
           The fourth group aims to compromise system firmware. As with the third
       group, its goal is to execute on the target system before the OS kernel does
       in order to disable security checks. The only major difference is that these
       attacks target firmware rather than bootloader components.
           In practice, the third method—compromising the boot process—is the
       most common, because it allows for a more persistent attack. As a result,
       attackers returned to their old BSI tricks to create modern bootkits. The
       need to bypass integrity checks in modern computer systems has heavily
       influenced bootkit development.

       The Rise of Secure Boot
       Today, computers increasingly ship with functional Secure Boot protection.
       Secure Boot is a security standard designed to ensure the integrity of the
       components involved in the boot process. We’ll look at it more closely in
       Chapter 17. Faced with Secure Boot, the malware landscape had to change
       again; instead of targeting the boot process, more modern malware attempts
       to target system firmware.
            Just as Microsoft’s Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy eradicated kernel-
       mode rootkits and initiated a new era of bootkits, Secure Boot is currently
       creating obstacles for modern bootkits. We see modern malware attacking
       the BIOS more often. We’ll discuss this type of threat in Chapter 15.

Modern Bootkits
       With bootkits, as in other fields of computer security, proofs of concept (PoCs)
       and real malware samples tend to evolve together. A PoC in this circum-
       stance is malware developed by security researchers for the purpose of
       proving that threats are real (as opposed to the malware developed by
       cybercriminals, whose goals are nefarious).
           The first modern bootkit is generally considered to be eEye’s PoC
       BootRoot, presented at the 2005 Black Hat conference in Las Vegas. The
       BootRoot code, written by Derek Soeder and Ryan Permeh, was a Network
       Driver Interface Specification (NDIS) backdoor. It demonstrated for the first
       time that the original bootkit concept could be used as a model for attack-
       ing modern operating systems.
           But while the eEye presentation was an important step toward the
       development of bootkit malware, it took two years before a new malicious
       sample with bootkit functionality was detected in the wild. That distinction
       went to Mebroot, in 2007. One of the most sophisticated threats at the time,
       Mebroot posed a serious challenge to antivirus companies because it used
       new stealth techniques to survive after reboot.
           The detection of Mebroot coincided with the release of two important
       PoC bootkits, Vbootkit and Stoned, at the Black Hat conference that same
       year. The Vbootkit code showed that it was possible to attack Microsoft’s
       Windows Vista kernel by modifying the boot sector. (The authors of

                                                                   Evolution of the Bootkit   53
                           Vbootkit released its code as an open source project.) The Stoned bootkit,
                           which also attacked the Vista kernel, was named after the very successful
                           Stoned BSI created decades earlier.
                                The release of both PoCs was instrumental in showing the security indus-
                           try what sort of bootkits to look out for. Had the researchers hesitated to
                           publish their results, malware authors would have succeeded in preempting
                           a system’s ability to detect the new bootkit malware. On the other hand, as it
                           often happens, malware authors reused approaches from PoCs presented by
                           security researchers, and new in-the-wild malware emerged shortly after the
                           PoC presentation. Figure 4-2 and Table 4-1 illustrate this co-evolution.
    Proof of concept

                                                                                                                                      )  it
                                                                                                                                      otk
    In the wild

                                                                                            )
                                                                                         sed

                                                                                                                                    bo
                                                                                       ba

                                                                                                                                 id
                                                                                                                              dro
                                                                                   L4-
                                                               L4)

                                                                                (TD

                                                                                                                            (An
                                                            (TD
                                                 v2

                                                                             mi
                                ix

                                                                            sco
                      ot

                                              ot

                                                                                                                              t
                                                            rik

                                                                                                                            oo
                                 t
                              bra
                   bro

                                           bro

                                                                         bro
                                                                           x

                                                                                                     pz
                                                          ma

                                                                       ma
                                                                        vni

                                                                                                                          dB
                 Me

                             Me

                                          Me

                                                                     Me

                                                                                                   Ga
                                                                     Ro
                                                        Ol

                                                                     Ol

                                                                                                                        Ol
2005     2007          2008       2009           2010       2011                           2012         2013     2014       2015
       eEy

                    vBo

                                         Vb

                                         Sto

                                                                   Sto
                                                                         Vb

                                                                                Evi

                                                                                       De

                                                                                                  VG

                                                                                                               Dre
                                                                                        ep
                                            oo

                                                                           oo

                                                                                  lC
                                             ned

                                                                     ned

                                                                                                  Ab

                                                                                                                am
        eB

                      otk

                                                                                          Bo
                                               tkit

                                                                            tkit

                                                                                    ore
                       it

                                                                                                                 Bo
         oo

                                                                                                   oo
                                                  bo

                                                                       bo

                                                                                            ot
                                                    x6

                                                                               x6

                                                                                                                     ot
             tRo

                                                                                                       tkit
                                                     otk

                                                                         otk
                                                       4

                                                                                4
              ot

                                                      it

                                                                           it x
                                                                             64

Figure 4-2: Bootkit resurrection timeline

Table 4-1: Evolution of Proof-of-Concept Bootkits vs. Real-World Bootkit Threats
 Proof-of-concept bootkit evolution                                      Bootkit threat evolution
 eEye BootRoot (2005)                                                    Mebroot (2007)
          1
 The first MBR-based bootkit for Microsoft                               The first well-known modern MBR-based bootkit (we’ll
 Windows operating systems                                               cover MBR-based bootkits in detail in Chapter 7) for
                                                                         Microsoft Windows operating systems in the wild
 Vbootkit (2007)                                                         Mebratix (2008)
 The first bootkit to abuse Microsoft Windows Vista                      The other malware family based on MBR infection
 Vbootkit 2 x64 (2009)                                                   Mebroot v2 (2009)
 The first bootkit to bypass the digital signature                       The evolved version of Mebroot malware
 checks on Microsoft Windows 7
 Stoned (2009)                                                           Olmarik (TDL4) (2010/11)
 Another example of MBR-based bootkit infection                          The first 64-bit bootkit in the wild
 Stoned x64 (2011)                                                       Olmasco (TDL4 modification) (2011)
 MBR-based bootkit supporting the infection of                           The first VBR-based bootkit infection
 64-bit operating systems
             3
 Evil Core (2011)                                                        Rovnix (2011)
 A concept bootkit that used SMP (symmetric multi-                       An evolved VBR-based infection with polymorphic
 processing) for booting into protected mode                             code

54   Chapter 4
 Proof-of-concept bootkit evolution                               Bootkit threat evolution
             4
 DeepBoot (2011)                                                  Mebromi (2011)
 A bootkit that used interesting tricks to switch from            The first exploration of the concept of BIOS kits seen
 real mode to protected mode                                      in the wild
       5
 VGA (2012)                                                       Gapz 6 (2012)
 A VGA-based bootkit concept                                      The next evolution of VBR infection
 DreamBoot 7 (2013)                                               OldBoot 8 (2014)
 The first public concept of a UEFI bootkit                       The first bootkit for the Android OS in the wild

1. When we refer to a bootkit as being “the first” of anything, note that we mean the first to our knowledge.
2. Nitin Kumar and Vitin Kumar, “VBootkit 2.0—Attacking Windows 7 via Boot Sectors,” HiTB 2009, http://conference.hitb​
.org/hitbsecconf2009dubai/materials/D2T2%20-%20Vipin%20and%20Nitin%20Kumar%20-%20vbootkit%202.0.pdf.
3. Wolfgang Ettlinger and Stefan Viehböck, “Evil Core Bootkit,” NinjaCon 2011, http://downloads.ninjacon.net/downloads/
proceedings/2011/Ettlinger_Viehboeck-Evil_Core_Bootkit.pdf.
4. Nicolás A. Economou and Andrés Lopez Luksenberg, “DeepBoot,” Ekoparty 2011, http://www.ekoparty.org//
archive/2011/ekoparty2011_Economou-Luksenberg_Deep_Boot.pdf.
5. Diego Juarez and Nicolás A. Economou,“VGA Persistent Rootkit,” Ekoparty 2012, https://www.secureauth.com/labs/
publications/vga-persistent-rootkit/.
6. Eugene Rodionov and Aleksandr Matrosov, “Mind the Gapz: The Most Complex Bootkit Ever Analyzed?” spring 2013,
http://www.welivesecurity.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/gapz-bootkit-whitepaper.pdf.
7. Sébastien Kaczmarek, “UEFI and Dreamboot,” HiTB 2013, https://conference.hitb.org/hitbsecconf2013ams/materials/
D2T1%20-%20Sebastien%20Kaczmarek%20-%20Dreamboot%20UEFI%20Bootkit.pdf.
8. Zihang Xiao, Qing Dong, Hao Zhang, and Xuxian Jiang, “Oldboot: The First Bootkit on Android,” http://blogs.360​
.cn/360mobile/2014/01/17/oldboot-the-first-bootkit-on-android/.

                             We’ll go over the techniques used by these bootkits in later chapters.

     Conclusion
                       This chapter has discussed the history and evolution of boot compromises,
                       giving you a general sense of bootkit technology. In Chapter 5, we’ll go
                       deeper into the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy and explore ways to
                       bypass this technology via bootkit infection, focusing on the TDSS rootkit.
                       The evolution of TDSS (also known as TDL3) and the TDL4 bootkit neatly
                       exemplifies the shift from kernel-mode rootkits to bootkits as a way for mal-
                       ware to persist undetected for longer on a compromised system.

                                                                                                         Evolution of the Bootkit   55
