                                             5
                   O p e r a t i n g S y s t e m B oo t
                      P r o c e ss Ess e n t i a l s

                     This chapter introduces you to the most
                    important bootkit-related aspects of the
                   Microsoft Windows boot process. Because
                the goal of the bootkit is to hide on a target
         system at a very low level, it needs to tamper with the
         OS boot components. So, before we can dive into how
         bootkits are built and how they behave, you’ll need to
         understand how the boot process works.
No t e   The information in this chapter applies to Microsoft Windows Vista and later ver-
         sions; the boot process for earlier versions of Windows differs, as explained in “The
         bootmgr Module and Boot Configuration Data” on page 64.

             The boot process is one of the most important yet least understood
         phases of operating system operation. Although the general concept is
         universally familiar, few programmers—including systems programmers—
         understand it in detail, and most lack the tools to do so. This makes the
                 boot process fertile ground for attackers to leverage the knowledge they’ve
                 gleaned from reverse engineering and experimentation, while program-
                 mers must often rely on documentation that’s incomplete or outdated.
                      From a security point of view, the boot process is responsible for start-
                 ing the system and bringing it to a trustworthy state. The logical facilities
                 that defensive code uses to check the state of a system are also created
                 during this process, so the earlier an attacker manages to compromise a
                 system, the easier it is to hide from a defender’s checks.
                      In this chapter, we review the basics of the boot process in Windows
                 systems running on machines with legacy firmware. The boot process for
                 machines running UEFI firmware, introduced in Windows 7 x64 SP1, is
                 significantly different from legacy-based machines, so we’ll discuss that
                 process separately in Chapter 14.
                      Throughout this chapter, we approach the boot process from the
                 attacker’s point of view. Although nothing prevents attackers from target-
                 ing a specific chipset or peripheral—and indeed some do—these kinds of
                 attacks do not scale well and are hard to develop reliably. It’s in the attacker’s
                 best interest, therefore, to target interfaces that are relatively generic, yet
                 not so generic that defensive programmers could easily understand and
                 analyze the attacks.
                      As always, offensive research pushes the envelope, digging deeper into
                 the system as advances become public and transparent. The organization
                 of this chapter underscores this point: we’ll begin with a general overview
                 but progress to undocumented (at the time of this writing) data structures
                 and a logic flow that can be gleaned only from disassembling the system—
                 exactly the route that both bootkit researchers and malware creators follow.

     High-Level Overview of the Windows Boot Process
                 Figure 5-1 shows the general flow of the modern boot process. Almost any
                 part of the process can be attacked by a bootkit, but the most common tar-
                 gets are the Basic Input/Output System (BIOS) initialization, the Master
                 Boot Record (MBR), and the operating system bootloader.

                                    CPU in real mode                         CPU in protected mode

                        BIOS                                Boot          Full kernel      First user-
                                         MBR
                   initialization                          loader        initialization   mode process

                                                        Early kernel
                                                        initialization

                                               BIOS services                              Kernel services

                                                          Hardware

Figure 5-1: The flow of the system boot process

58   Chapter 5
 No t e   Secure Boot technology, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 17, aims to protect the modern
          boot process, including its complex and versatile UEFI parts.

               As the boot process progresses, the execution environment becomes
          more complex, offering the defender richer and more familiar program-
          ming models. However, it’s the lower-level code that creates and supports
          these abstracted models, so by targeting that code, attackers can manipu-
          late the models to intercept the flow of the boot process and interfere with
          the higher-level system state. In this way, more abstract and powerful mod-
          els can be crippled, which is exactly the point of a bootkit.

The Legacy Boot Process
          To understand a technology, it is helpful to review its previous iterations.
          Here’s a basic summary of the boot process as it was normally executed in
          the heyday of boot sector viruses (1980s–2000s), such as Brain (discussed
          in Chapter 4):

          1.  Power on (a cold boot)
          2.  Power supply self-test
          3.  ROM BIOS execution
          4.  ROM BIOS test of hardware
          5.  Video test
          6.  Memory test
          7.  Power-On Self-Test (POST), a full hardware check (this step can be
              skipped when the boot process is a warm or soft boot—that is, a boot
              from a state that isn’t completely off)
          8. Test for the MBR at the first sector of the default boot drive, as speci-
              fied in the BIOS setup
          9. MBR execution
          10. Operating system file initialization
          11. Base device driver initializations
          12. Device status check
          13. Configuration file reading
          14. Command shell loading
          15. Shell’s startup command file execution

              Notice that the early boot process begins by testing and initializing the
          hardware. This is often still the case, though many hardware and firmware
          technologies have moved on since Brain and its immediate successors. The
          boot processes described later in this book differ from earlier iterations in
          terminology and complexity, but the overall principles are similar.

                                                             Operating System Boot Process Essentials   59
     The Windows Boot Process                                                BIOS boot code
                 Figure 5-2 shows a high-level picture of the
                 Windows boot process and the components
                 involved, applicable to Windows versions Vista            Master Boot Record
                 and higher. Each block in the figure repre-
                 sents modules that are executed and given
                 control during the boot process, in order               Volume Boot Record and
                 from top to bottom. As you can see, it’s quite           Initial Program Loader
                 similar to the iterations of the legacy boot pro-
                 cess. However, as the components of modern
                 Windows operating systems have increased in                    bootmgr
                 complexity, so too have the modules involved
                 in the boot process.
                      Over the next few sections, we’ll refer                  winload.exe
                 to this figure as we walk through this boot
                 process in more detail. As Figure 5-2 shows,
                 when a computer is first powered on, the BIOS              Kernel image and
                 boot code receives control. This is the start of           boot-start drivers
                 the boot process as the software sees it; other
                 logic is involved at the hardware/firmware           Figure 5-2: A high-level view
                 level (for example, during chipset initializa-       of the Windows boot process
                 tion) but is not visible to software during the
                 boot process.

                 BIOS and the Preboot Environment
                 The BIOS performs basic system initialization and a POST to ensure that
                 the critical system hardware is working properly. The BIOS also provides
                 a specialized environment that includes the basic services needed to com-
                 municate with system devices. This simplified I/O interface first becomes
                 available in the preboot environment, and is later replaced by different
                 operating system abstractions for the majority of Windows uses. The most
                 interesting of these services in terms of bootkit analysis is the disk service,
                 which exposes a number of entry points used to perform disk I/O opera-
                 tions. The disk service is accessible through a special handler known as the
                 interrupt 13h handler, or simply INT 13h. Bootkits will often target the disk
                 service by tampering with its INT 13h; they do this in an effort to disable or
                 circumvent OS protections by modifying operating system and boot com-
                 ponents that are read from the hard drive during system startup.
                      Next, the BIOS looks for the bootable disk drive, which hosts the
                 instance of the operating system to be loaded. This may be a hard drive,
                 a USB drive, or a CD drive. Once the bootable device has been identified,
                 the BIOS boot code loads the MBR, as Figure 5-2 shows.

                 The Master Boot Record
                 The MBR is a data structure containing information on hard drive parti-
                 tions and the boot code. Its main task is to determine the active partition

60   Chapter 5
of the bootable hard drive, which contains the instance of the OS to load.
Once it has identified the active partition, the MBR reads and executes its
boot code. Listing 5-1 shows the structure of the MBR.

typedef struct _MASTER_BOOT_RECORD{
 BYTE bootCode[0x1BE]; // space to hold actual boot code
 MBR_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY partitionTable[4];
  USHORT mbrSignature; // set to 0xAA55 to indicate PC MBR format
} MASTER_BOOT_RECORD, *PMASTER_BOOT_RECORD;

Listing 5-1: The structure of the MBR

     As you can see, the MBR boot code  is restricted to just 446 bytes
(0x1BE in hexadecimal, a familiar value to reverse engineers of boot
code), so it can implement only basic functionality. Next, the MBR parses
the partition table, shown at , in order to locate the active partition;
reads the Volume Boot Record (VBR) in its first sector; and transfers con-
trol to it.

Partition Table
The partition table in the MBR is an array of four elements, each of which
is described by the MBR_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY structure shown in Listing 5-2.

typedef struct _MBR_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY {
 BYTE status;             // active? 0=no, 128=yes
   BYTE chsFirst[3];       // starting sector number
 BYTE type;               // OS type indicator code
   BYTE chsLast[3];        // ending sector number
 DWORD lbaStart;          // first sector relative to start of disk
   DWORD size;             // number of sectors in partition
} MBR_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY, *PMBR_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY;

Listing 5-2: The structure of the partition table entry

    The first byte  of the MBR_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY, the status field, signifies
whether the partition is active. Only one partition at any time may be marked
as active, a status indicated with a value of 128 (0x80 in hexadecimal).
    The type field  lists the partition type. The most common types are:

•    EXTENDED MBR partition type
•    FAT12 filesystem
•    FAT16 filesystem
•    FAT32 filesystem
•    IFS (Installable File System used for the installation process)
•    LDM (Logical Disk Manager for Microsoft Windows NT)
•    NTFS (the primary Windows filesystem)

                                                          Operating System Boot Process Essentials   61
                     A type of 0 means unused. The fields lbaStart and size  define the loca-
                 tion of the partition on disk, expressed in sectors. The lbaStart field con-
                 tains the offset of the partition from the beginning of the hard drive, and
                 the size field contains the size of the partition.

                 Microsoft Windows Drive Layout
                 Figure 5-3 shows the typical bootable
                 hard drive layout of a Microsoft                         MBR code
                 Windows system with two partitions.
                     The Bootmgr partition contains            Partition table entry #1 (inactive)
                 the bootmgr module and some other               Partition table entry #2 (OS)
                 OS boot components, while the OS                Partition table entry #3 (free)
                 partition contains a volume that hosts                    MBR data
                 the OS and user data. The bootmgr
                 module’s main purpose is to deter-                    Bootmgr partition
                 mine which particular instance of the
                 OS to load. If multiple operating sys-
                 tems are installed on the computer,
                 bootmgr displays a dialog prompting                     OS partition
                 the user to choose one. The bootmgr
                 module also provides parameters
                 that determine how the OS is loaded
Figure 5-3: The typical bootable hard
                 (whether it should be in safe mode,
                                                               drive layout
                 using the last-known good configura-
                 tion, with driver signature enforce-
                 ment disabled, and so on).

                 The Volume Boot Record and Initial Program Loader
                 The hard drive may contain several partitions hosting multiple instances
                 of different operating systems, but only one partition should normally be
                 marked as active. The MBR does not contain the code to parse the particu-
                 lar filesystem used on the active partition, so it reads and executes the first
                 sector of the partition, the VBR, shown in the third layer of Figure 5-2.
                      The VBR contains partition layout information, which specifies the
                 type of filesystem in use and its parameters, and code that reads the Initial
                 Program Loader (IPL) module from the active partition. The IPL module
                 implements filesystem-parsing functionality in order to be able to read files
                 from the partition’s filesystem.
                      Listing 5-3 shows the layout of the VBR, which is composed of
                 BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS and BOOTSTRAP_CODE structures. The layout of the
                 BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK (BPB) structure is specific to the volume’s filesystem.
                 The BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS and VOLUME_BOOT_RECORD structures correspond to
                 the NTFS volume.

                 typedef struct _BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS {
                    WORD SectorSize;
                    BYTE SectorsPerCluster;

62   Chapter 5
   WORD ReservedSectors;
   BYTE Reserved[5];
   BYTE MediaId;
   BYTE Reserved2[2];
   WORD SectorsPerTrack;
   WORD NumberOfHeads;
 DWORD HiddenSectors;
   BYTE Reserved3[8];
   QWORD NumberOfSectors;
   QWORD MFTStartingCluster;
   QWORD MFTMirrorStartingCluster;
   BYTE ClusterPerFileRecord;
   BYTE Reserved4[3];
   BYTE ClusterPerIndexBuffer;
   BYTE Reserved5[3];
   QWORD NTFSSerial;
   BYTE Reserved6[4];
} BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS, *PBIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS;
typedef struct _BOOTSTRAP_CODE{
    BYTE    bootCode[420];                // boot sector machine code
    WORD    bootSectorSignature;          // 0x55AA
} BOOTSTRAP_CODE, *PBOOTSTRAP_CODE;
typedef struct _VOLUME_BOOT_RECORD{
  WORD     jmp;
    BYTE    nop;
    DWORD   OEM_Name
    DWORD   OEM_ID; // NTFS
    BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS BPB;
    BOOTSTRAP_CODE BootStrap;
} VOLUME_BOOT_RECORD, *PVOLUME_BOOT_RECORD;

Listing 5-3: VBR layout

    Notice that the VBR starts with a jmp instruction , which transfers
control of the system to the VBR code. The VBR code in turn reads and
executes the IPL from the partition, the location of which is specified by
the HiddenSectors field . The IPL reports its offset (in sectors) from the
beginning of the hard drive. The layout of the VBR is summarized in
Figure 5-4.

0x000                                                                        0x200
     0x003                0x054               0x19C                  0x1FE

                 BIOS
                                                                        0x55
     jmp      parameter            VBR code           Text strings
                                                                        0xAA
              block (BPB)

           Transfer control

Figure 5-4: The structure of the VBR

                                                  Operating System Boot Process Essentials   63
                    As you can see, the VBR essentially consists of the following
                 components:

                 •   The VBR code responsible for loading the IPL
                 •   The BIOS parameter block (a data structure that stores the volume
                     parameters)
                 •   Text strings displayed to a user if an error occurs
                 •   0xAA55, a 2-byte signature of the VBR

                      The IPL usually occupies 15 consecutive sectors of 512 bytes each and
                 is located right after the VBR. It implements just enough code to parse the
                 partition’s filesystem and continue loading the bootmgr module. The IPL
                 and VBR are used together because the VBR can occupy only one sector
                 and cannot implement sufficient functionality to parse the volume’s filesys-
                 tem with so little space available to it.

                 The bootmgr Module and Boot Configuration Data
                 The IPL reads and loads the OS boot manager’s bootmgr module from the
                 filesystem, shown in the fourth layer of Figure 5-2. Once the IPL runs,
                 bootmgr takes over the boot process.
                      The bootmgr module reads from the Boot Configuration Data (BCD),
                 which contains several important system parameters, including those that
                 affect security policies such as the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy, cov-
                 ered in Chapter 6. Bootkits often attempt to bypass bootmgr’s implementa-
                 tion of code integrity verification.

                                     Origins of the bootmgr Module

                     The bootmgr module was introduced in Windows Vista to replace the ntldr
                     bootloader found in previous NT-derived versions of Windows. Microsoft’s
                     idea was to create an additional layer of abstraction in the boot chain in order
                     to isolate the preboot environment from the OS kernel layer. Isolation of the
                     boot modules from the OS kernel brought improvements in boot management
                     and security to Windows, making it easier to enforce security policies imposed
                     on the kernel-mode modules (such as the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy).
                     The legacy ntldr was split into two modules: bootmgr and winload.exe (or
                     winresume.exe if the OS is loaded from the hibernation). Each module imple-
                     ments distinct functionality.

                     The bootmgr module manages the boot process until the user chooses
                 a boot option (as shown in Figure 5-5 for Windows 10). The program
                 winload.exe (or winresume.exe) loads the kernel, boot-start drivers, and
                 some system registry data once the user makes a choice.

64   Chapter 5
Figure 5-5: The bootmgr boot menu in Windows 10

Real Mode vs. Protected Mode
When a computer is first powered on, the CPU operates in real mode, a
legacy execution mode that uses a 16-bit memory model in which each
byte in RAM is addressed by a pointer consisting of two words (2 bytes):
segment_start:segment_offset. This mode corresponds to the segment memory
model, where the address space is divided into segments. The address of
every target byte is described by the address of the segment and the offset
of the target byte within the segment. Here, segment_start specifies the tar-
get segment, and segment_offset is the offset of the referenced byte in the
target segment.
     The real-mode addressing scheme allows the use of only a small amount
of the available system RAM. Specifically, the real (physical) address in the
memory is computed as the largest address, represented as ffff:ffff, which is
only 1,114,095 bytes (65,535 × 16 + 65,535), meaning the address space in real
mode is limited to around 1 MB—obviously not sufficient for modern oper-
ating systems and applications. To circumvent this limitation and get access
to all available memory, bootmgr and winload.exe switch the processor into
protected mode (called long mode on 64-bit systems) once bootmgr takes over.
     The bootmgr module consists of 16-bit real-mode code and a com-
pressed PE image, which, when uncompressed, is executed in protected
mode. The 16-bit code extracts and uncompresses the PE from the bootmgr
image, switches the processor into protected mode, and passes control to
the uncompressed module.

                                                  Operating System Boot Process Essentials   65
        No t e    Bootkits must properly handle the processor execution mode switch in order to main-
                  tain control of the boot code execution. After the switch, the whole memory layout is
                  changed, and parts of the code previously located at one contiguous set of memory
                  addresses may be moved to different memory segments. Bootkits must implement
                  rather sophisticated functionality to get around this and keep control of the boot
                  process.

                  BCD Boot Variables
                  Once the bootmgr initializes protected mode, the uncompressed image
                  receives control and loads boot configuration information from the
                  BCD. When stored on the hard drive, the BCD has the same layout as a
                  registry hive. (To browse its contents, use regedit and navigate to the key
                  HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\BCD000000.)

        No t e    To read from the hard drive, bootmgr, operating in protected mode, uses the INT
                  13h disk service, which is intended to be run in real mode. To do so, bootmgr
                  saves the execution context of the processor in temporary variables, temporarily
                  switches to real mode, executes the INT 13h handler, and then returns to protected
                  mode, restoring the saved context.

                       The BCD store contains all the information bootmgr needs in order to
                  load the OS, including the path to the partition containing the OS instance
                  to load, available boot applications, code integrity options, and parameters
                  instructing the OS to load in preinstallation mode, safe mode, and so on.
                       Table 5-1 shows the parameters in the BCD of greatest interest to boot-
                  kit authors.

Table 5-1: BCD Boot Variables
 Variable name                                  Description                Parameter    Parameter ID
                                                                           type
 BcdLibraryBoolean_DisableIntegrityCheck        Disables kernel-mode       Boolean      0x16000048
                                                code integrity checks
 BcdOSLoaderBoolean_WinPEMode                   Tells the kernel to load   Boolean      0x26000022
                                                in preinstallation mode,
                                                disabling kernel-mode
                                                code integrity checks as
                                                a byproduct
 BcdLibraryBoolean_AllowPrereleaseSignatures    Enables test signing       Boolean      0x1600004
                                                (TESTSIGNING)

                      The variable BcdLibraryBoolean_DisableIntegrityCheck is used to disable
                  integrity checks and allow the loading of unsigned kernel-mode drivers.
                  This option is ignored in Windows 7 and higher and cannot be set if
                  Secure Boot (discussed in Chapter 17) is enabled.

66   Chapter 5
      The variable BcdOSLoaderBoolean_WinPEMode indicates that the system
should be started in Windows Preinstallation Environment Mode, which is
essentially a minimal Win32 operating system with limited services that is
primarily used to prepare a computer for Windows installation. This mode
also disables kernel integrity checks, including the Kernel-Mode Code
Signing Policy mandatory on 64-bit systems.
      The variable BcdLibraryBoolean_AllowPrereleaseSignatures uses test code-
signing certificates to load kernel-mode drivers for testing purposes. These
certificates can be generated through tools included in the Windows Driver
Kit. (The Necurs rootkit uses this process to install a malicious kernel-mode
driver onto a system, signed with a custom certificate.)
      After retrieving boot options, the bootmgr performs self-integrity verifica-
tion. If the check fails, the bootmgr stops booting the system and displays an
error message. However, the bootmgr doesn’t perform the self-integrity check
if either BcdLibraryBoolean_DisableIntegrityCheck or BcdOSLoaderBoolean_WinPEMode
is set to TRUE in the BCD. Thus, if either variable is TRUE, the bootmgr won’t
notice if it has been tampered with by malicious code.
      Once all the necessary BCD parameters have been loaded and self-
integrity verification has been passed, the bootmgr chooses the boot applica-
tion to load. When loading the OS afresh from the hard drive, the bootmgr
chooses winload.exe; when resuming from hibernation, the bootmgr chooses
winresume.exe. These respective PE modules are responsible for loading
and initializing OS kernel modules. The bootmgr checks the integrity of
the boot application in the same way, again skipping verification if either
BcdLibraryBoolean_DisableIntegrityCheck or BcdOSLoaderBoolean_WinPEMode is TRUE.
      In the final step of the boot process, once the user has chosen a par-
ticular instance of the OS to load, the bootmgr loads winload.exe. Once all
modules are properly initialized, winload.exe (layer 5 in Figure 5-2) passes
control to the OS kernel, which continues the boot process (layer 6). Like
bootmgr, winload.exe checks the integrity of all modules it is responsible for.
Many bootkits attempt to circumvent these checks in order to inject a mali-
cious module into the operating system kernel-mode address space.
      When winload.exe receives control of the operating system boot, it
enables paging in protected mode and then loads the OS kernel image
and its dependencies, including these modules:
    bootvid.dll A library for video VGA support at boot time
    ci.dll The code integrity library
    clfs.dll The common logging filesystem driver
    hal.dll The hardware abstraction layer library
    kdcom.dll The kernel debugger protocol communications library
    pshed.dll The platform-specific hardware error driver
    In addition to these modules, winload.exe loads boot-start drivers,
including storage device drivers, Early Launch Anti-Malware (ELAM)
modules (explained in Chapter 6), and the system registry hive.

                                                 Operating System Boot Process Essentials   67
        No t e   In order to read all the components from the hard drive, winload.exe uses the inter-
                 face provided by bootmgr. This interface relies on the BIOS INT 13h disk service.
                 Therefore, if the INT 13h handler is hooked by a bootkit, the malware can spoof all
                 data read by winload.exe.

                     When loading the executables, winload.exe verifies their integrity
                 according to the system’s code integrity policy. Once all modules are
                 loaded, winload.exe transfers control to the OS kernel image to initialize
                 them, as discussed in the following chapters.

     Conclusion
                 In this chapter, you learned about the MBR and VBR in the early boot stages,
                 as well as important boot components such as bootmgr and winload.exe, from
                 the point of view of bootkit threats.
                     As you’ve seen, transferring control between the phases of the boot
                 process is not as simple as jumping directly to the next stage. Instead,
                 several components that are related through various data structures—
                 such as the MBR partition table, the VBR BIOS parameter block, and
                 the BCD—determine execution flow in the preboot environment. This
                 nontrivial relationship is one reason why bootkits are so complex and why
                 they make so many modifications to boot components in order to transfer
                 control from the original boot code to their own (and occasionally back
                 and forth, to carry out essential tasks).
                     In the next chapter, we look at boot process security, focusing on the
                 ELAM and the Microsoft Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy, which defeated
                 the methods of early rootkits.

68   Chapter 5
