                      7
Bootkit Infection Techniques

             Having explored the Windows boot pro-
            cess, let’s now discuss bootkit infection
           techniques that target modules involved
       in system startup. These techniques are split
into two groups according to the boot components
they target: MBR infection techniques and VBR/
Initial Program Loader (IPL) infection techniques.
We’ll look at the TDL4 bootkit to demonstrate MBR
infection, and then at the Rovnix and Gapz boot-
kits to demonstrate two different VBR infection
techniques.
     MBR Infection Techniques
                 Approaches based on MBR modifications are the most common infection
                 techniques used by bootkits to attack the Windows boot process. Most MBR
                 infection techniques directly modify either the MBR code or MBR data
                 (such as the partition table) or, in some cases, both.
                      MBR code modification changes only the MBR boot code, leaving
                 the partition table untouched. This is the most straightforward infection
                 method. It involves overwriting the system MBR code with malicious code
                 while saving the original content of the MBR in some way, such as by stor-
                 ing it in a hidden location on the hard drive.
                      Conversely, the MBR data modification method involves altering the
                 MBR partition table, without changing the MBR boot code. This method
                 is more advanced because the contents of the partition table differ from
                 system to system, making it difficult for analysts to find a pattern that will
                 definitively identify the infection.
                      Finally, hybrid methods that combine these two techniques are also
                 possible and have been used in the wild.
                      Next, we’ll look in more detail at the two MBR infection techniques.

                 MBR Code Modification: The TDL4 Infection Technique
                 To illustrate the MBR code-modification infection technique, we’ll take an
                 in-depth look at the first real-world bootkit to target the Microsoft Windows
                 64-bit platform: TDL4. TDL4 reuses the notoriously advanced evasion
                 and anti-forensic techniques of its rootkit predecessor, TDL3 (discussed
                 in Chapter 1), but has the added ability to bypass the Kernel-Mode Code
                 Signing Policy (discussed in Chapter 6) and infect 64-bit Windows systems.
                     On 32-bit systems, the TDL3 rootkit was able to persist through a system
                 reboot by modifying a boot-start kernel-mode driver. However, the manda-
                 tory signature checks introduced in 64-bit systems prevented the infected
                 driver from being loaded, rendering TDL3 ineffective.
                     In an effort to bypass 64-bit Microsoft Windows, the developers of TDL3
                 moved the infection point to earlier in the boot process, implementing a
                 bootkit as a means of persistence. Thus, the TDL3 rootkit evolved into the
                 TDL4 bootkit.

                 Infecting the System
                 TDL4 infects the system by overwriting the MBR of the bootable hard
                 drive with a malicious MBR (which, as we discussed, is executed before the
                 Windows kernel image), so it’s able to tamper with the kernel image and
                 disable integrity checks. (Other MBR-based bootkits are described in
                 detail in Chapter 10.)
                      Like TDL3, TDL4 creates a hidden storage area at the end of the hard
                 drive, into which it writes the original MBR and some modules of its own,
                 as listed in Table 7-1. TDL4 stores the original MBR so that it can be loaded
                 later, once infection has taken place, and the system will seemingly boot as

84   Chapter 7
normal. The mbr, ldr16, ldr32, and ldr64 modules are used by the bootkit at
boot time to sidestep Windows integrity checks and to ultimately load the
unsigned malicious drivers.

Table 7-1: Modules Written to TDL4’s Hidden Storage upon Infecting the System

Module name       Description
mbr               Original contents of the infected hard drive boot sector
ldr16             16-bit real-mode loader code
ldr32             Fake kdcom.dll library for x86 systems
ldr64             Fake kdcom.dll library for x64 systems
drv32             The main bootkit driver for x86 systems
drv64             The main bootkit driver for x64 systems
cmd.dll           Payload to inject into 32-bit processes
cmd64.dll         Payload to inject into 64-bit processes
cfg.ini           Configuration information
bckfg.tmp         Encrypted list of command and control (C&C) URLs

    TDL4 writes data onto the hard drive by sending I/O control code
IOCTL_SCSI_PASS_THROUGH_DIRECT requests directly to the disk miniport driver—
the lowest driver in the hard drive driver stack. This enables TDL4 to bypass
the standard filter kernel drivers and any defensive measures they might
include. TDL4 sends these control code requests using the DeviceIoControl
API, passing as a first parameter the handle opened for the symbolic link \??\
PhysicalDriveXX, where XX is the number of the hard drive being infected.
     Opening this handle with write access requires administrative privileges,
so TDL4 exploits the MS10-092 vulnerability in the Windows Task Scheduler
service (first seen in Stuxnet) to elevate its privileges. In a nutshell, this vul-
nerability allows an attacker to perform an unauthorized elevation of privi-
leges for a particular task. To gain administrative privileges, then, TDL4
registers a task for Windows Task Scheduler to execute with its current privi-
leges. The malware modifies the scheduled task XML file to run as Local
System account, which includes administrative privileges and ensures that
the checksum of the modified XML file is the same as before. As a result,
this tricks the Task Scheduler into running the task as Local System instead
of the normal user, allowing TDL4 to successfully infect the system.
     By writing data in this way, the malware is able to bypass defensive tools
implemented at the filesystem level because the I/O Request Packet (IRP),
a data structure describing an I/O operation, goes directly to a disk-class
driver handler.
     Once all of its components are installed, TDL4 forces the system to
reboot by executing the NtRaiseHardError native API (shown in Listing 7-1).

NTSYSAPI
NTSTATUS
NTAPI

                                                              Bootkit Infection Techniques   85
                 NtRaiseHardError(
                       IN NTSTATUS ErrorStatus,
                       IN ULONG NumberOfParameters,
                       IN PUNICODE_STRING UnicodeStringParameterMask OPTIONAL,
                       IN PVOID *Parameters,
                     IN HARDERROR_RESPONSE_OPTION ResponseOption,
                       OUT PHARDERROR_RESPONSE Response
                 );

Listing 7-1: Prototype of the NtRaiseHardError routine

                     The code passes OptionShutdownSystem  as its fifth parameter, which puts
                 the system into a Blue Screen of Death (BSoD). The BSoD automatically reboots
                 the system and ensures that the rootkit modules are loaded at the next boot
                 without alerting the user to the infection (the system appears to have simply
                 crashed).

                 Bypassing Security in the Boot Process of a TDL4-Infected System
                 Figure 7-1 shows the boot process on a machine infected with TDL4. This
                 diagram represents a high-level view of the steps the malware takes to evade
                 code integrity checks and load its components onto the system.

                                                                         
                                                                               Continue kernel
                      Load infected MBR.
                                                                                initialization.

                                    Infected MBR is
                                                                                          Load drv32 or drv64.
                                 loaded and executed.
                                                                         
                       Load ldr16 from                                    Call KdDebuggerInitialize1
                      hidden filesystem.                                        from kdcom.dll.

                                    ldr16 is loaded                                       Spoof kdcom.dll with
                                     and executed.                                          ldr32 or ldr64.
                                                                         
                 Hook BIOS INT 13h handler                                Load ntoskrnl.exe, hal.dll,
                  and restore original MBR.                                 kdcom.dll, bootvid.dll.

                                 Original MBR code is
                                                                                         Distort /MININT option.
                                 loaded and executed.
                                                                         
                          Load VBR.                                           Load winload.exe.

                                      VBR is loaded                                       Substitute EmsEnabled
                                      and executed.                                        option with WinPE.
                                                                         
                        Load bootmgr.                                             Read BCD.
                                                 bootmgr is loaded
                                                and receives control.

Figure 7-1: TDL4 bootkit boot process workflow

86   Chapter 7
      After the BSoD and subsequent system restart, the BIOS reads the
infected MBR into memory and executes it, loading the first part of the boot-
kit ( in Figure 7-1). Next, the infected MBR locates the bootkit’s filesystem
at the end of the bootable hard drive and loads and executes a module called
ldr16. The ldr16 module contains the code responsible for hooking the BIOS’s
13h interrupt handler (disk service), reloading the original MBR ( and 
in Figure 7-1), and passing execution to it. This way, booting can continue as
normal, but now with the hooked 13h interrupt handler. The original MBR is
stored in the mbr module in the hidden filesystem (see Table 7-1).
      The BIOS interrupt 13h service provides an interface for performing
disk I/O operations in the preboot environment. This is crucial, because
at the very beginning of the boot process the storage device drivers have
not yet been loaded in the OS, and the standard boot components (namely,
bootmgr, winload.exe, and winresume.exe) rely on the 13h service to read sys-
tem components from the hard drive.
      Once control has been transferred to the original MBR, the boot
process proceeds as usual, loading the VBR and bootmgr ( and  in
Figure 7-1), but the bootkit residing in memory now controls all I/O
operations to and from the hard drive.
      The most interesting part of ldr16 lies in the routine that implements the
hook for the 13h disk services interrupt handler. The code that reads data
from the hard drive during boot relies on the BIOS 13h interrupt handler,
which is now being intercepted by the bootkit, meaning the bootkit can coun-
terfeit any data read from the hard drive during the boot process. The bootkit
takes advantage of this ability by replacing the kdcom.dll library with ldr32 or
ldr64 | (depending on the operating system) drawn from the hidden file­
system, substituting its content in the memory buffer during the read opera-
tion. As we’ll see soon, replacing kdcom.dll with a malicious dynamic-link library
(DLL) allows the bootkit to load its own driver and disable the kernel-mode
debugging facilities at the same time.

                                R ace to the Bot tom

    In hijacking the BIOS’s disk interrupt handler, TDL4 mirrors the strategy of root-
    kits, which tend to migrate down the stack of service interfaces. As a general
    rule of thumb, the deeper infiltrator wins. For this reason, some defensive soft-
    ware occasionally ends up fighting other defensive software for control of the
    lower layers of the stack! This race to hook the lower layers of the Windows
    system, using techniques indistinguishable from rootkit techniques, has led to
    issues with system stability. A thorough analysis of these issues was published
                                   1
    in two articles in Uninformed.

    1. skape, “What Were They Thinking? Annoyances Caused by Unsafe Assumptions,”
    Uninformed 1 (May 2005), http://www.uninformed.org/?v=1&a=5&t=pdf; Skywing, “What
    Were They Thinking? Anti-Virus Software Gone Wrong,” Uninformed 4 (June 2006), http://
    www.uninformed.org/?v=4&a=4&t=pdf.

                                                                     Bootkit Infection Techniques   87
                     To conform to the requirements of the interface used to communicate
                 between the Windows kernel and the serial debugger, the modules ldr32
                 and ldr64 (depending on the operating system) export the same symbols as
                 the original kdcom.dll library (as shown in Listing 7-2).

                 Name                      Address                  Ordinal
                 KdD0Transition            000007FF70451014         1
                 KdD3Transition            000007FF70451014         2
                 KdDebuggerInitialize0     000007FF70451020         3
                 KdDebuggerInitialize1     000007FF70451104         4
                 KdReceivePacket           000007FF70451228         5
                 KdReserved0               000007FF70451008         6
                 KdRestore                 000007FF70451158         7
                 KdSave                    000007FF70451144         8
                 KdSendPacket              000007FF70451608         9

Listing 7-2: Export address table of ldr32/ldr64

                      Most of the functions exported from the malicious version of kdcom.dll
                 do nothing but return 0, except for the KdDebuggerInitialize1 function, which
                 is called by the Windows kernel image during the kernel initialization (at 
                 in Figure 7-1). This function contains code that loads the bootkit’s driver
                 on the system. It calls to PsSetCreateThreadNotifyRoutine to register a callback
                 CreateThreadNotifyRoutine whenever a thread is created or destroyed; when
                 the callback is triggered, it creates a malicious DRIVER_OBJECT to hook onto
                 system events and waits until the driver stack for the hard disk device has
                 been built up in the course of the boot process.
                      Once the disk-class driver is loaded, the bootkit can access data stored
                 on the hard drive, so it loads its kernel-mode driver from the drv32 or drv64
                 module it replaced the kdcom.dll library with, stored in the hidden file­system,
                 and calls the driver’s entry point.

                 Disabling the Code Integrity Checks
                 In order to replace the original version of kdcom.dll with the malicious DLL
                 on Windows Vista and later versions, the malware needs to disable the
                 kernel-mode code integrity checks, as discussed previously (to avoid detec-
                 tion, it only temporarily disables the checks). If the checks are not disabled,
                 winload.exe will report an error and refuse to continue the boot process.
                     The bootkit turns off code integrity checks by telling winload.exe to
                 load the kernel in preinstallation mode (see “The Legacy Code Integrity
                 Weakness” on page 74), which doesn’t have the checks enabled. The
                 winload.exe module does this by replacing the BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
                 element (encoded as 16000020 in the Boot Configuration Data, or BCD)
                 with BcdOSLoaderBoolean_WinPEMode (encoded as 26000022 in BCD; see  in
                 Figure 7-1) when bootmgr reads the BCD from the hard drive, using the
                 same methods TDL4 used to spoof kdcom.dll. (BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled is
                 an inheritable object that indicates whether global emergency management

88   Chapter 7
                   services redirection should be enabled and is set to TRUE by default.)
                   Listing 7-3 shows the assembly code implemented in ldr16 that spoofs
                   the BcdLibraryBoolean​_EmsEnabled option uv.

seg000:02E4   cmp        dword ptr es:[bx], '0061'         ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:02EC   jnz        short loc_30A                     ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:02EE   cmp        dword ptr es:[bx+4], '0200'       ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:02F7   jnz        short loc_30A                     ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:02F9  mov        dword ptr es:[bx], '0062'         ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:0301  mov        dword ptr es:[bx+4], '2200'       ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:030A   cmp        dword ptr es:[bx], 1666Ch         ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:0312   jnz        short loc_328                     ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:0314   cmp        dword ptr es:[bx+8], '0061'       ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:031D   jnz        short loc_328                     ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:031F  mov        dword ptr es:[bx+8], '0062'       ; spoofing BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled
seg000:0328   cmp        dword ptr es:[bx], 'NIM/'         ; spoofing /MININT
seg000:0330   jnz        short loc_33A                     ; spoofing /MININT
seg000:0332  mov        dword ptr es:[bx], 'M/NI'         ; spoofing /MININT

Listing 7-3: Part of the ldr16 code responsible for spoofing the BcdLibraryBoolean_EmsEnabled and /MININT
options

                        Next, the bootkit turns on preinstallation mode long enough to load the
                   malicious version of kdcom.dll. Once it is loaded, the malware disables prein-
                   stallation mode as if were never enabled in order to remove any traces from
                   the system. Note that attackers can disable preinstallation mode only while it
                   is on—by corrupting the /MININT string option in the winload.exe image while
                   reading the image from the hard drive  (see  in Figure 7-1). During ini-
                   tialization, the kernel receives a list of parameters from winload.exe to enable
                   specific options and specify characteristics of the boot environment, such as
                   the number of processors in the system, whether to boot in preinstallation
                   mode, and whether to display a progress indicator at boot time. Parameters
                   described by string literals are stored in winload.exe.
                        The winload.exe image uses the /MININT option to notify the kernel that
                   preinstallation mode is enabled, and as a result of the malware’s manipula-
                   tions, the kernel receives an invalid /MININT option and continues initializa-
                   tion as if preinstallation mode weren’t enabled. This is the final step in the
                   bootkit-infected boot process (see  in Figure 7-1). A malicious kernel-
                   mode driver is successfully loaded into the operating system, bypassing
                   code integrity checks.

                   Encrypting the Malicious MBR Code
                   Listing 7-4 shows a part of the malicious MBR code in the TDL4 bootkit.
                   Notice that the malicious code is encrypted (beginning at ) in order to
                   avoid detection by static analysis, which uses static signatures.

                   seg000:0000          xor      ax, ax
                   seg000:0002          mov      ss, ax

                                                                                   Bootkit Infection Techniques   89
                 seg000:0004          mov   sp, 7C00h
                 seg000:0007          mov   es, ax
                 seg000:0009          mov   ds, ax
                 seg000:000B          sti
                 seg000:000C          pusha
                 seg000:000D         mov   cx, 0CFh        ;size of decrypted data
                 seg000:0010          mov   bp, 7C19h       ;offset to encrypted data
                 seg000:0013
                 seg000:0013 decrypt_routine:
                 seg000:0013     ror       byte ptr [bp+0], cl
                 seg000:0016          inc   bp
                 seg000:0017          loop  decrypt_routine
                 seg000:0017 ; -------------------------------------------------------------
                 seg000:0019    db 44h                     ;beginning of encrypted data
                 seg000:001A     db 85h
                 seg000:001C     db 0C7h
                 seg000:001D     db 1Ch
                 seg000:001E     db 0B8h
                 seg000:001F     db 26h
                 seg000:0020     db 04h
                 seg000:0021     --snip--

Listing 7-4: TDL4 code for decrypting malicious MBR

                     The registers cx and bp  are initialized with the size and offset of
                 the encrypted code, respectively. The value of the cx register is used as a
                 counter in the loop  that runs the bitwise logical operation ror (rotate-
                 right instruction) to decrypt the code (marked by  and pointed by the
                 bp register). Once decrypted, the code will hook the INT 13h handler to
                 patch other OS modules in order to disable OS code integrity verification
                 and load malicious drivers.

                 MBR Partition Table Modification
                 One variant of TDL4, known as Olmasco, demonstrates another approach
                 to MBR infection: modifying the partition table rather than the MBR code.
                 Olmasco first creates an unallocated partition at the end of the bootable
                 hard drive, then creates a hidden partition in the same place by modifying
                 a free partition table entry, #2, in the MBR partition table (see Figure 7-2).
                      This route of infection is possible because the MBR contains a partition
                 table with entries beginning at offset 0x1BE consisting of four 16-byte entries,
                 each describing a corresponding partition (the array of MBR_PARTITION_TABLE​
                 _ENTRY is shown back in Listing 5-2) on the hard drive. Thus, the hard drive
                 can have no more than four primary partitions, with only one marked as
                 active. The operating system boots from the active partition. Olmasco over-
                 writes an empty entry in the partition table with the parameters for its own
                 malicious partition, marks the partition active, and initializes the VBR of
                 the newly created partition. (Chapter 10 provides more detail on Olmasco’s
                 mechanism of infection.)

90   Chapter 7
       Partition #1
       Partition #2
       Partition #3
       Partition #4
code
MBR

                                                               Filesystem data

                                                                                         Before infecting
                                                                                           After infecting
       partition #2
       Partition #1

       Partition #3
       Partition #4
         Infected
code
MBR

                                                  Filesystem data                Malicious partition

Figure 7-2: MBR partition table modification by Olmasco

    VBR/IPL Infection Techniques
                      Sometimes security software checks only for unauthorized modifications on
                      the MBR, leaving the VBR and IPL uninspected. VBR/IPL infectors, like the
                      first VBR bootkits, take advantage of this to improve their chances of remain-
                      ing undetected.
                           All known VBR infection techniques fall into one of two groups:
                      IPL modifications (like the Rovnix bootkit) and BIOS parameter block
                      (BPB) modifications (like the Gapz bootkit).

                      IPL Modifications: Rovnix
                      Consider the IPL modification infection technique of the Rovnix bootkit.
                      Instead of overwriting the MBR sector, Rovnix modifies the IPL on the
                      bootable hard drive’s active partition and the NTFS bootstrap code. As
                      shown in Figure 7-3, Rovnix reads the 15 sectors following the VBR (which
                      contain the IPL), compresses them, prepends the malicious bootstrap code,
                      and writes the modified code back to those 15 sectors. Thus, on the next
                      system startup, the malicious bootstrap code receives control.
                           When the malicious bootstrap code is executed, it hooks the INT 13h
                      handler in order to patch bootmgr, winload.exe, and the kernel so that it can
                      gain control once the bootloader components are loaded. Finally, Rovnix
                      decompresses the original IPL code and returns control to it.
                           The Rovnix bootkit follows the operating system’s execution flow
                      from boot through processor execution mode switching until the kernel
                      is loaded. Further, by using the debugging registers DR0 through DR7 (an
                      essential part of the x86 and x64 architectures), Rovnix retains control
                      during kernel initialization and loads its own malicious driver, bypassing
                      the kernel-mode code integrity check. These debugging registers allow the
                      malware to set hooks on the system code without actually patching it, thus
                      maintaining the integrity of the code being hooked.

                                                                                   Bootkit Infection Techniques   91
  MBR       VBR        Initial Program Loader                         Filesystem data

                                                                                              Before infecting
                                   Compressed                                                  After infecting
                                      data

                                                                                                 Malicious
                     Malicious                                                    Hidden
  MBR       VBR                            IPL           Filesystem data                         unsigned
                      code                                                        partition
                                                                                                  driver

                       NTFS bootstrap code
                          (15 sectors)

Figure 7-3: IPL modifications by Rovnix

                        The Rovnix boot code works closely with the operating system’s boot
                   loader components and relies heavily on their platform-debugging facili-
                   ties and binary representation. (We’ll discuss Rovnix in more detail in
                   Chapter 11.)

                   VBR Infection: Gapz
                   The Gapz bootkit infects the VBR of the active partition rather than the
                   IPL. Gapz is a remarkably stealthy bootkit because it infects only a few
                   bytes of the original VBR, modifying the HiddenSectors field (see Listing
                   5-3 on page 63) and leaving all other data and code in the VBR and
                   IPL untouched.
                        In the case of Gapz, the most interesting block for analysis is the BPB
                   (BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK), particularly its HiddenSectors field. The value in this
                   field specifies the number of sectors stored on the NTFS volume that pre-
                   cedes the IPL, as shown in Figure 7-4.

                                                       NTFS volume

                                     0x200 0x1E00

                      MBR                 VBR    IPL         NTFS filesystem

                           Number of
                        “hidden sectors”

Figure 7-4: The location of IPL

                       Gapz overwrites the HiddenSectors field with the value for the offset in
                   sectors of the malicious bootkit code stored on the hard drive, as shown
                   in Figure 7-5. When the VBR code runs again, it loads and executes the

92   Chapter 7
        bootkit code instead of the legitimate IPL. The Gapz bootkit image is
        written either before the first partition or after the last one on the hard
        drive. (We’ll discuss Gapz in more detail in Chapter 12.)
                                         Hard drive

                                         NTFS volume

                        0x200 0x1E00

                        Infected                NTFS filesystem        Bootkit
          MBR                      IPL
                          VBR

                 Modified value of number of “hidden sectors”

Figure 7-5: The Gapz VBR infection

Conclusion
        In this chapter, you learned about the MBR and VBR bootkit infection tech-
        niques. We followed the evolution of the advanced TDL3 rootkit into the
        modern TDL4 bootkit, and you saw how TDL4 takes control of the system
        boot, infecting the MBR by replacing it with malicious code. As you’ve seen,
        the integrity protections in Microsoft 64-bit operating systems (in particu-
        lar, the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy) initiated a new race in bootkit
        development to target x64 platforms. TDL4 was the first example of a boot-
        kit in the wild to successfully overcome this obstacle, using certain design
        features that have since been adopted by other bootkits. We also looked
        at VBR infection techniques, illustrated by the Rovnix and Gapz bootkits,
        which are the respective subjects of Chapters 11 and 12.

                                                                  Bootkit Infection Techniques   93
