                                8
   S t a t i c A n a ly s i s o f a B o o t k i t
                Using IDA Pro

            This chapter introduces the basic concepts
            of bootkit static analysis with IDA Pro. There
          are several ways to approach reversing boot-
      kits, and covering all the existing approaches
would require a book of its own. We focus on the IDA
Pro disassembler, because it provides unique features
that enable the static analysis of bootkits.
     Statically analyzing bootkits is radically different from reverse engi-
neering in most conventional application environments, because crucial
parts of a bootkit execute in a preboot environment. For example, a typical
Windows application relies on standard Windows libraries and is expected
to call standard library functions known to reverse-engineering tools like
Hex-Rays IDA Pro. We can deduce a lot about an application by the func-
tions it calls; the same is true about Linux applications versus POSIX system
calls. But the preboot environment lacks these hints, so the tools for preboot
                 analysis need additional features to compensate for this missing informa-
                 tion. Fortunately, these features are available in IDA Pro, and this chapter
                 explains how to use them.
                      As discussed in Chapter 7, a bootkit consists of several closely con-
                 nected modules: the Master Boot Record (MBR) or Volume Boot Record
                 (VBR) infector, a malicious boot loader, and kernel-mode drivers, among
                 others. We’ll restrict the discussion in this chapter to the analysis of a boot-
                 kit MBR and a legitimate operating system VBR, which you can use as a
                 model for reversing any code that executes in the preboot environment.
                 You can download the MBR and VBR you’ll use here from the book’s down-
                 loadable resources. At the end of the chapter, we discuss how to deal with
                 other bootkit components, such as the malicious boot loader and kernel-
                 mode drivers. If you haven’t already worked through Chapter 7, you should
                 do so now.
                      First, we’ll show you how to get started with bootkit analysis; you’ll
                 learn which options to use in IDA Pro in order to load the code into the
                 disassembler, the API used in the preboot environment, how control
                 is transferred between different modules, and which IDA features may
                 simplify their reversal. Then you’ll learn how to develop a custom loader
                 for IDA Pro in order to automate your reversing tasks. Finally, we pro-
                 vide a set of exercises designed to help you further explore bootkit static
                 analysis. You can download the materials for this chapter from https://
                 nostarch​.com/rootkits/.

     Analyzing the Bootkit MBR
                 First, we’ll analyze a bootkit MBR in the IDA Pro disassembler. The MBR
                 we use in this chapter is similar to the one the TDL4 bootkit creates (see
                 Chapter 7). The TDL4 MBR is a good example because it implements tra-
                 ditional bootkit functionality, but its code is easy to disassemble and under-
                 stand. We based the VBR example in this chapter on legitimate code from
                 an actual Microsoft Windows volume.

                 Loading and Decrypting the MBR
                 In the following sections, you’ll load the MBR into IDA Pro and analyze the
                 MBR code at its entry point. Then, you’ll decrypt the code and examine
                 how the MBR manages memory.

                 Loading the MBR into IDA Pro
                 The first step in the static analysis of the bootkit MBR is to load the MBR
                 code into IDA. Because the MBR isn’t a conventional executable and has
                 no dedicated loader, you need to load it as a binary module. IDA Pro will
                 simply load the MBR into its memory as a single contiguous segment just as
                 the BIOS does, without performing any extra processing. You only need to
                 provide the starting memory address for this segment.

96   Chapter 8
    Load the binary file by opening it via IDA Pro. When IDA Pro first
loads the MBR, it displays a message offering various options, as shown in
Figure 8-1.

 

Figure 8-1: The IDA Pro dialog displayed when loading the MBR

    You can accept the defaults for most of the parameters, but you need
to enter a value into the Loading offset field , which specifies where in
memory to load the module. This value should always be 0x7C00—the
fixed address where the MBR is loaded by the BIOS boot code. Once you’ve
entered this offset, click OK. IDA Pro loads the module, then gives you the
option to disassemble the module either in 16-bit or 32-bit mode, as shown
in Figure 8-2.

Figure 8-2: IDA Pro dialog asking you which
disassembly mode to choose

                                                   Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   97
                        For this example, choose No. This directs IDA to disassemble the MBR
                    as 16-bit real-mode code, which is the way the actual CPU decodes it at the
                    very beginning of the boot process.
                        Because IDA Pro stores the results of disassembly in a database file with
                    the extension idb, we’ll refer to the results of its disassembly as a database
                    from now on. IDA uses this database to collect all of the code annotations
                    you provide through your GUI actions and IDA scripts. You can think of the
                    database as the implicit argument to all IDA script functions, which rep-
                    resents the current state of your hard-won reverse-engineering knowledge
                    about the binary on which IDA can act.
                        If you don’t have any experience with databases, don’t worry: IDA’s
                    interfaces are designed so that you don’t need to know the database inter-
                    nals. Understanding how IDA represents what it learns about code, however,
                    does help a lot.

                    Analyzing the MBR’s Entry Point
                    When loaded by the BIOS at boot, the MBR—now modified by the infecting
                    bootkit—is executed from its first byte. We specified its loading address to
                    IDA’s disassembler as 0:7C00h, which is where the BIOS loads it. Listing 8-1
                    shows the first few bytes of the loaded MBR image.

seg000:7C00 ; Segment type: Pure code
seg000:7C00 seg000          segment byte public 'CODE' use16
seg000:7C00                 assume cs:seg000
seg000:7C00                 ;org 7C00h
seg000:7C00                 assume es:nothing, ss:nothing, ds:nothing, fs:nothing, gs:nothing
seg000:7C00                 xor     ax, ax
seg000:7C02              u mov      ss, ax
seg000:7C04                 mov     sp, 7C00h
seg000:7C07                 mov     es, ax
seg000:7C09                 mov     ds, ax
seg000:7C0B                 sti
seg000:7C0C                 pusha
seg000:7C0D                 mov     cx, 0CFh
seg000:7C10                 mov     bp, 7C19h
seg000:7C13
seg000:7C13 loc_7C13:                               ; CODE XREF: seg000:7C17
seg000:7C13              v ror      byte ptr [bp+0], cl
seg000:7C16                 inc     bp
seg000:7C17                 loop    loc_7C13
seg000:7C17 ; ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
seg000:7C19 encrypted_code db 44h, 85h, 1Dh, 0C7h, 1Ch, 0B8h, 26h, 4, 8, 68h, 62h
seg000:7C19              w db 40h, 0Eh, 83h, 0Ch, 0A3h, 0B1h, 1Fh, 96h, 84h, 0F5h

Listing 8-1: Entry point of the MBR

                         Early on we see the initialization stub  that sets up the stack seg-
                    ment selector ss, stack pointer sp, and segment selector registers es and
                    ds in order to access memory and execute subroutines. Following the

98   Chapter 8
         initialization stub is a decryption routine , which deciphers the rest of
         the MBR  by rotating the bits—byte by byte—with an ror instruction,
         then passes control to the decrypted code. The size of the encrypted blob
         is given in the cx register, and the bp register points to the blob. This ad
         hoc encryption is intended to hamper static analysis and avoid detection by
         security software. It also presents us with our first obstacle, because we now
         need to extract the actual code to proceed with the analysis.

         Decrypting the MBR Code
         To continue our analysis of an encrypted MBR, we need to decrypt the
         code. Thanks to the IDA scripting engine, you can easily accomplish this
         task with the Python script in Listing 8-2.

        import idaapi
         # beginning of the encrypted code and its size in memory
         start_ea = 0x7C19
         encr_size = 0xCF

        for ix in xrange(encr_size):
         byte_to_decr = idaapi.get_byte(start_ea + ix)
           to_rotate = (0xCF - ix) % 8
           byte_decr = (byte_to_decr >> to_rotate) | (byte_to_decr << (8 - to_rotate))
         idaapi.patch_byte(start_ea + ix, byte_decr)

Listing 8-2: Python script to decrypt the MBR code

             First, we import the idaapi package , which contains the IDA API
         library. Then we loop through and decrypt the encrypted bytes . To
         fetch a byte from the disassembly segment, we use the get_byte API ,
         which takes the address of the byte to read as its only parameter. Once it’s
         decrypted, we write the byte back to the disassembly region  using the
         patch_byte API, which takes the address of the byte to modify and the value
         to write there. You can execute the script by choosing File4Script from the
         IDA menu or by pressing alt-F7.

Note     This script doesn’t modify the actual image of the MBR but rather its representation
         in IDA—that is, IDA’s idea of what the loaded code will look when it’s ready to run.
         Before making any modifications to the disassembled code, you should create a backup
         of the current version of the IDA database. That way, if the script modifying the MBR
         code contains bugs and distorts the code, you’ll be able to easily recover its most recent
         version.

         Analyzing Memory Management in Real Mode
         Having decrypted the code, let’s proceed with analyzing it. If you look
         through the decrypted code, you’ll find the instructions shown in
Listing 8-3. These instructions initialize the malicious code by storing
         the MBR input parameters and memory allocation.

                                                               Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   99
                  seg000:7C19                 u mov                                   ds:drive_no, dl
                  seg000:7C1D                 v sub                                   word ptr ds:413h, 10h
                  seg000:7C22                   mov                                   ax, ds:413h
                  seg000:7C25                   shl                                   ax, 6
                  seg000:7C28                 w mov                                   ds:buffer_segm, ax

Listing 8-3: Memory allocation in the preboot environment

                       The assembly instruction that stores the contents of the dl register into
                  memory is at an offset from the ds segment . From our experience analyz-
                  ing this kind of code, we can guess that the dl register contains the number
                  of the hard drive from which the MBR is being executed; annotate this off-
                  set as a variable called drive_no. IDA Pro records this annotation in the data-
                  base and shows it in the listing. When performing I/O operations, you can
                  use this integer index to distinguish between different disks available to the
                  system. You’ll use this variable in the BIOS disk service in the next section.
                       Similarly, Listing 8-3 shows the annotation buffer_segm w for the offset
                  where the code allocates a buffer. IDA Pro helpfully propagates these anno-
                  tations to other code that uses the same variables.
                       At v, we see a memory allocation. In the preboot environment, there is
                  no memory manager in the sense of modern operating systems, such as the
                  OS logic backing malloc() calls. Instead, the BIOS maintains the number of
                  kilobytes of available memory in a word—a 16-bit value in x86 architecture—
                  located at the address 0:413h. In order to allocate X KB of memory, we sub-
                  tract X from the total size of available memory, a value stored in the word at
                  0:413h, as shown in Figure 8-3.

                          Allocated buffer
                                                                                       New available memory
                                                  Total available memory

                         Available memory
                                                                           (0:413h)

                                                                                                              (0:413h)

                          after allocation

Figure 8-3: Memory management in a preboot environment

                      In Listing 8-3, the code allocates a buffer of 10Kb by subtracting 10h
                  from the total amount available. The actual address is stored in the variable
                  buffer_segm w. The MBR then uses the allocated buffer to store read data
                  from the hard drive.

100   Chapter 8
Analyzing the BIOS Disk Service
Another unique aspect of the preboot environment is the BIOS disk service,
an API used to communicate with a hard drive. This API is particularly
interesting in the context of bootkit analysis for two reasons. First, bootkits
use it to read data from the hard drive, so it’s important to be familiar with
the API’s most frequently used commands in order to understand boot-
kit code. Also, this API is itself a frequent target of bootkits. In the most
common scenario, a bootkit hooks the API to patch legitimate modules
that are read from the hard drive by other code during the boot process.
      The BIOS disk service is accessible via an INT 13h instruction. In order
to perform I/O operations, software passes I/O parameters through the
processor registers and executes the INT 13h instruction, which transfers
control to the appropriate handler. The I/O operation code, or identifier, is
passed in the ah register—the higher-order part of the ax register. The regis-
ter dl is used to pass the index of the disk in question. The processor’s carry
flag (CF) is used to indicate whether an error has occurred during execu-
tion of the service: if CF is set to 1, an error has occurred and the detailed
error code is returned in the ah register. This BIOS convention for passing
arguments to a function predates the modern OS system call conventions;
if it seems convoluted to you, remember that this is where the idea of uni-
form system call interfaces originated.
      This INT 13h interrupt is an entry point to the BIOS disk service, and
it allows software in the preboot environment to perform basic I/O opera-
tions on disk devices, like hard drives, floppy drives, and CD-ROMs, as
shown in Table 8-1.

Table 8-1: The INT 13h Commands

Operation code Operation description
2h               Read sectors into memory
3h               Write disk sectors
8h               Get drive parameters
41h              Extensions installation check
42h              Extended read
43h              Extended write
48h              Extended get drive parameters

    The operations in Table 8-1 are split into two groups: the first group
(with codes 41h, 42h, 43h, and 48h) comprises the extended operations,
and the second group (with codes 2h, 3h, and 8h) consists of the legacy
operations.
    The only difference between the groups is that the extended opera-
tions can use an addressing scheme based on logical block addressing (LBA),
whereas the legacy operations rely solely on a legacy Cylinder Head Sector
(CHS) –based addressing scheme. In the case of the LBA-based scheme,

                                                 Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   101
                  sectors are enumerated linearly on the disk, beginning with index 0,
                  whereas in the CHS-based scheme, each sector is addressed using the
                  tuple (c,h,s), where c is the cylinder number, h is the head number, and
                  s is the number of the sector. Although bootkits may use either group,
                  almost all modern hardware supports the LBA-based addressing scheme.

                  Obtaining Drive Parameters to Locate Hidden Storage
                  As you continue looking at the MBR code that follows the 10KB memory
                  allocation, you should see the execution of an INT 13h instruction, as
                  shown in Listing 8-4.

                  seg000:7C2B                  u mov       ah, 48h
                  seg000:7C2D                  v mov       si, 7CF9h
                  seg000:7C30                    mov       ds:drive_param.bResultSize, 1Eh
                  seg000:7C36                    int       13h         ; DISK - IBM/MS Extension
                                                                     w ; GET DRIVE PARAMETERS
                                                                       ; (DL - drive, DS:SI - buffer)

Listing 8-4: Obtaining drive parameters via the BIOS disk service

                       The small size of the MBR (512 bytes) restricts the functionality of the
                  code that can be implemented within it. For this reason, the bootkit loads
                  additional code to execute, called a malicious boot loader, which is placed in
                  hidden storage at the end of the hard drive. To obtain the coordinates of
                  the hidden storage on the disk, the MBR code uses the extended “get drive
                  parameters” operation (operation code 48h in Table 8-1), which returns
                  information about the hard drive’s size and geometry. This information
                  allows the bootkit to compute the offset at which the additional code is
                  located on the hard drive.
                       In Listing 8-4, you can see an automatically generated comment from
                  IDA Pro for the instruction INT 13h . During code analysis, IDA Pro iden-
                  tifies parameters passed to the BIOS disk service handler call and generates
                  a comment with the name of the requested disk I/O operation and the reg-
                  ister names used to pass parameters to the BIOS handler. This MBR code
                  executes INT 13h with parameter 48h u. Upon execution, this routine fills
                  a special structure called EXTENDED_GET_PARAMS that provides the drive param-
                  eters. The address of this structure is stored in the si register v.

                  Examining EXTENDED_GET_PARAMS
                  The EXTENDED_GET_PARAMS routing is provided in Listing 8-5.

                  typedef struct _EXTENDED_GET_PARAMS {
                     WORD bResultSize;             // Size of the result
                     WORD InfoFlags;               // Information flags
                     DWORD CylNumber;              // Number of physical cylinders on drive
                     DWORD HeadNumber;             // Number of physical heads on drive
                     DWORD SectorsPerTrack;        // Number of sectors per track
                   QWORD TotalSectors;            // Total number of sectors on drive

102   Chapter 8
                 WORD BytesPerSector;           // Bytes per sector
                } EXTENDED_GET_PARAMS, *PEXTENDED_GET_PARAMS;

Listing 8-5: The EXTENDED_GET_PARAMS structure layout

                     The only fields the bootkit actually looks at in the returned structure
                are the number of sectors on the hard drive  and the size of the disk sec-
                tor in bytes . The bootkit computes the total size of the hard drive in bytes
                by multiplying these two values, then uses the result to locate the hidden
                storage at the end of the drive.

                Reading Malicious Boot Loader Sectors
                Once the bootkit has obtained the hard drive parameters and calculated
                the offset of the hidden storage, the bootkit MBR code reads this hidden
                data from the disk with the extended read operation of the BIOS disk ser-
                vice. This data is the next-stage malicious boot loader intended to bypass
                OS security checks and load a malicious kernel-mode driver. Listing 8-6
                shows the code that reads it into RAM.

                seg000:7C4C read_loop:                                          ; CODE XREF: seg000:7C5D j
                seg000:7C4C                  u call    read_sector
                seg000:7C4F                    mov     si, 7D1Dh
                seg000:7C52                    mov     cx, ds:word_7D1B
                seg000:7C56                    rep movsb
                seg000:7C58                    mov     ax, ds:word_7D19
                seg000:7C5B                    test    ax, ax
                seg000:7C5D                    jnz     short read_loop
                seg000:7C5F                    popa
                seg000:7C60                  v jmp     far boot_loader

Listing 8-6: Code for loading an additional malicious boot loader from the disk

                    In the read_loop, this code repeatedly reads sectors from the hard drive
                using the routine read_sector  and stores them in the previously allocated
                memory buffer. Then the code transfers control to this malicious boot
                loader by executing a jmp far instruction .
                    Looking at the code of the read_sector routine, in Listing 8-7 you can
                see the usage of INT 13h with the parameter 42h, which corresponds to the
                extended read operation.

seg000:7C65 read_sector     proc near
seg000:7C65                 pusha
seg000:7C66               u mov     ds:disk_address_packet.PacketSize, 10h
seg000:7C6B               v mov     byte ptr ds:disk_address_packet.SectorsToTransfer, 1
seg000:7C70                 push    cs
seg000:7C71                 pop     word ptr ds:disk_address_packet.TargetBuffer+2
seg000:7C75               w mov     word ptr ds:disk_address_packet.TargetBuffer, 7D17h
seg000:7C7B                 push    large [dword ptr ds:drive_param.TotalSectors_l]
seg000:7C80               x pop     large [ds:disk_address_packet.StartLBA_l]
seg000:7C85                 push    large [dword ptr ds:drive_param.TotalSectors_h]

                                                                        Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   103
seg000:7C8A                   y pop          large [ds:disk_address_packet.StartLBA_h]
seg000:7C8F                     inc          eax
seg000:7C91                     sub          ds:disk_address_packet.StartLBA_l, eax
seg000:7C96                     sbb          ds:disk_address_packet.StartLBA_h, 0
seg000:7C9C                     mov          ah, 42h
seg000:7C9E                   z mov          si, 7CE9h
seg000:7CA1                     mov          dl, ds:drive_no
seg000:7CA5                   { int          13h             ; DISK - IBM/MS Extension
                                                             ; EXTENDED READ
                                                             ; (DL - drive, DS:SI - disk address packet)
seg000:7CA7                      popa
seg000:7CA8                      retn
seg000:7CA8 read_sector          endp

Listing 8-7: Reading sectors from the disk

                        Before executing INT 13h , the bootkit code initializes the DISK​
                    _ADDRESS_PACKET structure with the proper parameters, including the size
                    of the structure , the number of sectors to transfer , the address of the
                    buffer to store the result , and the addresses of the sectors to read 
                    . This structure’s address is provided to the INT 13h handler via the ds
                    and si registers . Note the manual annotation of the structure’s offsets;
                    IDA picks them up and propagates them. The BIOS disk service uses DISK​
                    _ADDRESS_PACKET to uniquely identify which sectors to read from the hard
                    drive. The complete layout of the structure of DISK_ADDRESS_PACKET, with
                    comments, is provided in Listing 8-8.

                    typedef struct _DISK_ADDRESS_PACKET {
                       BYTE PacketSize;                 // Size of the structure
                       BYTE Reserved;
                       WORD SectorsToTransfer;          // Number of sectors to read/write
                       DWORD TargetBuffer;              // segment:offset of the data buffer
                       QWORD StartLBA;                  // LBA address of the starting sector
                    } DISK_ADDRESS_PACKET, *PDISK_ADDRESS_PACKET;

Listing 8-8: The DISK_ADDRESS_PACKET structure layout

                        Once the boot loader is read into the memory buffer, the bootkit
                    executes it.
                        At this point, we have finished our the analysis of the MBR code and
                    we’ll proceed to dissecting another essential part of the MBR: the partition
                    table. You can download the complete version of the disassembled and com-
                    mented malicious MBR at https://nostarch.com/rootkits/.

                    Analyzing the Infected MBR’s Partition Table
                    The MBR partition table is a common target of bootkits because the data
                    it contains—although limited—plays a crucial part in the boot process’s
                    logic. Introduced in Chapter 5, the partition table is located at the offset

104   Chapter 8
0x1BE in the MBR and consists of four entries, each 0x10 bytes in size. It
lists the partitions available on the hard drive, describes their type and
location, and specifies where the MBR code should transfer control when
it’s done. Usually, the sole purpose of legitimate MBR code is to scan this
table for the active partition—that is, the partition marked with the appro-
priate bit flag and containing the VBR—and load it. You might be able to
intercept this execution flow at the very early boot stage by simply manip-
ulating the information contained in the table, without modifying the
MBR code itself; the Olmasco bootkit, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 10,
implements this method.
      This illustrates an important principle of bootkit and rootkit design:
if you can manipulate some data surreptitiously enough to bend the con-
trol flow, then that approach is preferred to patching the code. This saves
the malware programmer the effort of testing new, altered code—a good
example of code reuse promoting reliability!
      Complex data structures like an MBR or VBR notoriously afford
attackers many opportunities to treat them as a kind of bytecode and
to treat the native code that consumes the data as a virtual machine pro-
grammed through the input data. The language-theoretic security (LangSec,
http://langsec.org/) approach explains why this is the case.
      Being able to read and understand the MBR’s partition table is essen-
tial for spotting this kind of early bootkit interception. Take a look at the
partition table in Figure 8-4, where each 16/10h-byte line is a partition
table entry.

                                            

Figure 8-4: Partition table of the MBR

     As you can see, the table has two entries—the top two lines—which
implies there are only two partitions on the disk. The first partition entry
starts at the address 0x7DBE; its very first byte  shows that this partition is
active, so the MBR code should load and execute its VBR, which is the first
sector of that partition. The byte at offset 0x7DC2  describes the type of
the partition—that is, the particular filesystem type that should be expected
there by the OS, by the bootloader itself, or by other low-level disk access
code. In this case, 0x07 corresponds to Microsoft’s NTFS. (For more infor-
mation on partition types, see “The Windows Boot Process” on page 60.)
     Next, the DWORD at 0x7DC5  in the partition table entry indicates
that the partition starts at offset 0x800 from the beginning of the hard drive;
this offset is counted in sectors. The last DWORD  of the entry specifies the
partition’s size in sectors (0x32000). Table 8-2 details the particular example
in Figure 8-4. In the Beginning offset and Partition size columns, the actual
values are provided in sectors, with bytes in parentheses.

                                               Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   105
Table 8-2: MBR Partition Table Contents

                   Partition   Is active   Type          Beginning offset,   Partition size,
                   index                                 sectors (bytes)     sectors (bytes)
                   0           True        NTFS (0x07)   0x800               0x32000
                                                         (0x100000)          (0x6400000)
                   1           False       NTFS (0x07)   0x32800             0x4FCD000
                                                         (0x6500000)         (0x9F9A00000)
                   2           N/A         N/A           N/A                 N/A
                   3           N/A         N/A           N/A                 N/A

                       The reconstructed partition table indicates where you should look next
                  in your analysis of the boot sequence. Namely, it tells you where the VBR
                  is. The coordinates of the VBR are stored in the Beginning offset column
                  of the primary partition entry. In this case, the VBR is located at an offset
                  0x100000 bytes from the beginning of the hard drive, which is the place to
                  look in order to continue your analysis.

     VBR Analysis Techniques
                  In this section, we’ll consider VBR static analysis approaches using IDA and
                  focus on an essential VBR concept called BIOS parameter block (BPB), which
                  plays an important role in the boot process and bootkit infection. The VBR
                  is also a common target of bootkits, as we explained briefly in Chapter 7. In
                  Chapter 12, we’ll discuss the Gapz bootkit, which infects the VBR in order
                  to persist on the infected system, in more detail. The Rovnix bookit, dis-
                  cussed in Chapter 11, also makes use of the VBR to infect a system.
                       You should load the VBR into the disassembler in essentially the same
                  way you loaded the MBR, since it’s also executed in real mode. Load the
                  VBR file, vbr_sample_ch8.bin, from the samples directory for Chapter 8 as a
                  binary module at 0:7C00h and in 16-bit disassembly mode.

                  Analyzing the IPL
                  The main purpose of the VBR is to locate the Initial Program Loader
                  (IPL) and to read it into RAM. The location of the IPL on the hard drive
                  is specified in the BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS structure, which we discussed
                  in Chapter 5. Stored directly in the VBR, BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS con-
                  tains a number of fields that define the geometry of the NTFS volume,
                  such as the number of bytes per sector, the number of sectors per cluster,
                  and the location of the master file table.
                       The HiddenSectors field, which stores the number of sectors from the
                  beginning of the hard drive to the beginning of the NTFS volume, defines
                  the actual location of the IPL. The VBR assumes that the NTFS volume
                  begins with the VBR, immediately followed by the IPL. So the VBR code

106   Chapter 8
loads the IPL by fetching the contents of the HiddenSectors field, increment-
ing the fetched value by 1, and then reading 0x2000 bytes—which corre-
sponds to 16 sectors—from the calculated offset. Once the IPL is loaded
from disk, the VBR code transfers control to it.
    Listing 8-9 shows a part of the BIOS parameter block structure in our
example.

seg000:000B bpb          dw 200h       ; SectorSize
seg000:000D              db 8          ; SectorsPerCluster
seg000:001E              db 3 dup(0)   ; reserved
seg000:0011              dw 0          ; RootDirectoryIndex
seg000:0013              dw 0          ; NumberOfSectorsFAT
seg000:0015              db 0F8h       ; MediaId
seg000:0016              db 2 dup(0)   ; Reserved2
seg000:0018              dw 3Fh        ; SectorsPerTrack
seg000:001A              dw 0FFh       ; NumberOfHeads
seg000:001C              dd 800h       ; HiddenSectors

Listing 8-9: The BIOS parameter block of the VBR

    The value of HiddenSectors  is 0x800, which corresponds to the begin-
ning offset of the active partition on the disk in Table 8-2. This shows that
the IPL is located at offset 0x801 from the beginning of the disk. Bootkits
use this information to intercept control during the boot process. The Gapz
bootkit, for example, modifies the contents of the HiddenSectors field so that,
instead of a legitimate IPL, the VBR code reads and executes the malicious
IPL. Rovnix, on the other hand, uses another strategy: it modifies the legiti-
mate IPL’s code. Both manipulations intercept control at the early boot of
the system.

Evaluating Other Bootkit Components
Once the IPL receives control, it loads bootmgr, which is stored in the file­
system of the volume. After this, other bootkit components, such as mali-
cious boot loaders and kernel-mode drivers, may kick in. A full analysis of
these modules is beyond the scope of this chapter, but we’ll briefly outline
some approaches.

Malicious Boot Loaders
Malicious boot loaders constitute an important part of bootkits. Their main
purposes are to survive through the CPU’s execution mode switching, bypass
OS security checks (such as driver signature enforcement), and load mali-
cious kernel-mode drivers. They implement functionality that cannot fit in
the MBR and the VBR due to their size limitations, and they’re stored sepa-
rately on the hard drive. Bootkits store their boot loaders in hidden storage
areas located either at the end of the hard drive, where there is usually some
unused disk space, or in free disk space between partitions, if there is any.

                                                    Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   107
                      A malicious boot loader may contain different code to be executed in
                  different processor execution modes:
                      16-bit real mode Interrupt 13h hooking functionality
                      32-bit protected mode Bypass OS security checks for 32-bit OS version
                      64-bit protected mode (long mode) Bypass OS security checks for
                      64-bit OS version
                      But the IDA Pro disassembler can’t keep code disassembled in different
                  modes in a single IDA database, so you’ll need to maintain different ver-
                  sions of the IDA Pro database for different execution modes.

                  Kernel-Mode Drivers
                  In most cases, the kernel-mode drivers that bootkits load are valid PE
                  images. They implement rootkit functionality that allows malware to avoid
                  detection by security software and provides covert communication chan-
                  nels, among other things. Modern bootkits usually contain two versions of
                  the kernel-mode driver, compiled for the x86 and x64 platforms. You may
                  analyze these modules using conventional approaches for static analysis of
                  executable images. IDA Pro does a decent job of loading such executables,
                  and it provides a lot of supplemental tools and information for their analy-
                  sis. However, we’ll discuss how to instead use IDA Pro’s features to automate
                  the analysis of bootkits by preprocessing them as IDA loads them.

     Advanced IDA Pro Usage: Writing a Custom MBR Loader
                  One of the most striking features of the IDA Pro disassembler is the breadth
                  of its support for various file formats and processor architectures. To achieve
                  this, the functionality for loading particular types of executables is imple-
                  mented in special modules called loaders. By default, IDA Pro contains a
                  number of loaders, covering the most frequent types of executables, such
                  as PE (Windows), ELF (Linux), Mach-O (macOS), and firmware image
                  formats. You can obtain the list of available loaders by inspecting the con-
                  tents of your $IDADIR\loaders directory, where $IDADIR is the installation
                  directory of the disassembler. The files within this directory are the loaders,
                  and their names correspond to platforms and their binary formats. The file
                  extensions have the following meanings:
                      ldw Binary implementation of a loader for the 32-bit version of IDA Pro
                      l64 Binary implementation of a loader for the 64-bit version of IDA Pro
                      py Python implementation of a loader for both versions of IDA Pro
                       By default, no loader is available for MBR or VBR at the time of writing
                  this chapter, which is why you have to instruct IDA to load the MBR or VBR

108   Chapter 8
as a binary module. This section shows you how to write a custom Python-
based MBR loader for IDA Pro that loads MBR in the 16-bit disassembler
mode at the address 0x7C00 and parses the partition table.

Understanding loader.hpp
The place to start is the loader.hpp file, which is provided with the IDA Pro
SDK and contains a lot of useful information related to loading executables
in the disassembler. It defines structures and types to use, lists prototypes of
the callback routines, and describes the parameters they take. Here is the
list of the callbacks that should be implemented in a loader, according to
loader.hpp:
    accept_file   This routine checks whether the file being loaded is of a
    supported format.
    load_file This routine does the actual work of loading the file into the
    disassembler—that is, parsing the file format and mapping the file’s
    content into the newly created database.
    save_file This is an optional routine that, if implemented, produces
    an executable from the disassembly upon executing the File4Produce
    FileCreate EXE File command in the menu.
    move_segm This is an optional routine that, if implemented, is executed
    when a user moves a segment within the database. It is mostly used when
    there is relocation information in the image that the user should take
    into account when moving a segment. Due to the MBR’s lack of reloca-
    tions, we can skip this routine here, but we couldn’t if we were to write a
    loader for PE or ELF binaries.
    init_loader_options This is an optional routine that, if implemented,
    asks a user for additional parameters for loading a particular file type,
    once the user chooses a loader. We can skip this routine as well, because
    we have no special options to add.
    Now let’s take a look at the actual implementation of these routines in
our custom MBR loader.

Implementing accept_file
In the accept_file routine, shown in Listing 8-10, we check whether the file
in question is a Master Boot Record.

def accept_file(li, n):
   # check size of the file
   file_size = li.size()
   if file_size < 512:
     return 0

   # check MBR signature
   li.seek(510, os.SEEK_SET)

                                                Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   109
                       mbr_sign = li.read(2)
                       if mbr_sign[0] != '\x55' or mbr_sign[1] != '\xAA':
                         return 0

                    # all the checks are passed
                   return 'MBR'

Listing 8-10: The accept_file implementation

                       The MBR format is rather simple, so the following are the only indica-
                  tors we need to perform this check:
                        File size The file should be at least 512 bytes, which corresponds to
                        the minimum size of a hard drive sector.
                        MBR signature A valid MBR should end with the bytes 0xAA55.
                      If the conditions are met and the file is recognized as an MBR, the code
                  returns a string with the name of the loader ; if the file is not an MBR,
                  the code returns 0 u.

                  Implementing load_file
                  Once accept_file returns a nonzero value, IDA Pro attempts to load the file
                  by executing the load_file routine, which is implemented in your loader.
                  This routine needs to perform the following steps:

                  1.    Read the whole file into a buffer.
                  2.    Create and initialize a new memory segment, into which the script will
                        load the MBR contents.
                  3.    Set the very beginning of the MBR as an entry point for the disassembly.
                  4.    Parse the partition table contained in the MBR.

                        The load_file implementation is shown in Listing 8-11.

                  def load_file(li):
                      # Select the PC processor module
                    idaapi.set_processor_type("metapc", SETPROC_ALL|SETPROC_FATAL)

                     # read MBR into buffer
                    li.seek(0, os.SEEK_SET); buf = li.read(li.size())

                        mbr_start = 0x7C00      # beginning of the segment
                        mbr_size = len(buf)     # size of the segment
                        mbr_end = mbr_start + mbr_size

                     # Create the segment
                    seg = idaapi.segment_t()
                     seg.startEA = mbr_start
                     seg.endEA   = mbr_end
                     seg.bitness = 0 # 16-bit
                    idaapi.add_segm_ex(seg, "seg0", "CODE", 0)

110   Chapter 8
   # Copy the bytes
  idaapi.mem2base(buf, mbr_start, mbr_end)

    # add entry point
    idaapi.add_entry(mbr_start, mbr_start, "start", 1)

   # parse partition table
  struct_id = add_struct_def()
   struct_size = idaapi.get_struc_size(struct_id)
  idaapi.doStruct(start + 0x1BE, struct_size, struct_id)

Listing 8-11: The load_file implementation

     First, set the CPU type to metapc , which corresponds to the generic PC
family, instructing IDA to disassemble the binary as IBM PC opcodes. Then
read the MBR into a buffer  and create a memory segment by calling the
segment_t API . This call allocates an empty structure, seg, describing the
segment to create. Then, populate it with the actual byte values. Set the
starting address of the segment to 0x7C00, as you did in “Loading the MBR
into IDA Pro” on page 96, and set its size to the corresponding size of the
MBR. Also tell IDA that the new segment will be a 16-bit segment by setting
the bitness flag of the structure to 0; note that 1 corresponds to 32-bit seg-
ments and 2 corresponds to 64-bit segments. Then, by calling the add_segm_ex
API , add a new segment to the disassembly database. The add_segm_ex API
takes these parameters: a structure describing the segment to create; the
segment name (seg0); the segment class CODE; and flags, which is left at 0.
Following this call , copy the MBR contents into the newly created seg-
ment and add an entry point indicator.
     Next, add automatic parsing of the partition table present in the MBR
by calling the doStruct API  with these parameters: the address of the
beginning of the partition table, the table size in bytes, and the identi-
fier of the structure you want the table to be cast to. The add_struct_def
routine  implemented in our loader creates this structure. It imports
the structures defining the partition table, PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY, into the
database.

Creating the Partition Table Structure
Listing 8-12 defines the add_struct_def routine, which creates the PARTITION​
_TABLE_ENTRY structure.

def add_struct_def(li, neflags, format):
    # add structure PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY to IDA types
    sid_partition_entry = AddStrucEx(-1, "PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY", 0)
    # add fields to the structure
    AddStrucMember(sid_partition_entry, "status", 0, FF_BYTE, -1, 1)
    AddStrucMember(sid_partition_entry, "chsFirst", 1, FF_BYTE, -1, 3)
    AddStrucMember(sid_partition_entry, "type", 4, FF_BYTE, -1, 1)
    AddStrucMember(sid_partition_entry, "chsLast", 5, FF_BYTE, -1, 3)

                                              Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   111
                      AddStrucMember(sid_partition_entry, "lbaStart", 8, FF_DWRD, -1, 4)
                      AddStrucMember(sid_partition_entry, "size", 12, FF_DWRD, -1, 4)

                      # add structure PARTITION_TABLE to IDA types
                      sid_table = AddStrucEx(-1, "PARTITION_TABLE", 0)
                      AddStrucMember(sid_table, "partitions", 0, FF_STRU, sid, 64)

                      return sid_table

Listing 8-12: Importing data structures into the disassembly database

                      Once your loader module is finished, copy it into the $IDADIR\loaders
                  directory as an mbr.py file. When a user attempts to load an MBR into the
                  disassembler, the dialog in Figure 8-5 appears, confirming that your loader
                  has successfully recognized the MBR image. Clicking OK executes the load​
                  _file routine implemented in your loader in order to apply the previously
                  described customizations to the loaded file.

        Note      When you’re developing custom loaders for IDA Pro, bugs in the script implementa-
                  tion may cause IDA Pro to crash. If this happens, simply remove the loader script
                  from the loaders directory and restart the disassembler.

                      In this section, you’ve seen a small sample of the disassembler’s extension
                  development capabilities. For a more complete reference on IDA Pro exten-
                  sion development, refer to The IDA Pro Book (No Starch Press, 2011) by Chris
                  Eagle.

Figure 8-5: Choosing the custom MBR loader

112   Chapter 8
Conclusion
        In this chapter, we described a few simple steps for static analysis of the
        MBR and the VBR. You can easily extend the examples in this chapter to
        any code running in the preboot environment. You also saw that the IDA
        Pro disassembler provides a number of unique features that make it a
        handy tool for performing static analysis.
             On the other hand, static analysis has its limitations—mainly related
        to the inability to see the code at work and observe how it manipulates the
        data. In many cases, static analysis can’t provide answers to all the questions
        a reverse engineer may have. In such situations, it’s important to examine
        the actual execution of the code to better understand its functionality or to
        obtain some information that may have been missing in the static context,
        such as encryption keys. This brings us to dynamic analysis, the methods
        and tools for which we’ll discuss in the next chapter.

Exercises
        Complete the following exercises to get a better grasp of the material in
        this chapter. You’ll need to download a disk image from https://nostarch.com/
        rootkits/. The required tools for this exercise are the IDA Pro disassembler
        and a Python interpreter.

        1.   Extract the MBR from the image by reading its first 512 bytes and saving
             them in a file named mbr.mbr. Load the extracted MBR into the IDA Pro
             disassembler. Examine and describe the code at the entry point.
        2.   Identify code that decrypts the MBR. What kind of encryption is being
             used? Find the key used to decrypt the MBR.
        3.   Write a Python script to decrypt the rest of the MBR code and execute
             it. Use the code in Listing 8-2 as a reference.
        4.   To be able to load additional code from disk, the MBR code allocates a
             memory buffer. Where is the code allocating that buffer located? How
             many bytes of memory does the code allocate? Where is the pointer to
             the allocated buffer stored?
        5.   After the memory buffer is allocated, the MBR code attempts to load
             additional code from disk. At which offset in which sectors does the
             MBR code start reading these sectors? How many sectors does it read?
        6.   It appears that the data loaded from the disk is encrypted. Identify the
             MBR code that decrypts the read sectors. What is the address at which
             this MBR code will be loaded?
        7.   Extract the encrypted sectors from the disk image by reading the
             number of bytes identified in exercise 4 from the found offset in the
             file stage2.mbr.

                                                       Static Analysis of a Bootkit Using IDA Pro   113
                  8.  Implement a Python script for decrypting the extracted sectors and
                      execute it. Load the decrypted data into the disassembler (in the same
                      way as the MBR) and examine its output.
                  9. Identify the partition table in the MBR. How many partitions are there?
                      Which one is active? Where on the image are these partitions located?
                  10. Extract the VBR of the active partition from the image by reading its
                      first 512 bytes and saving it in a vbr.vbr file. Load the extracted VBR into
                      IDA Pro. Examine and describe the code at the entry point.
                  11. What is the value stored in the HiddenSectors field of the BIOS parameter
                      block in the VBR? At which offset is the IPL code located? Examine the
                      VBR code and determine the size of the IPL (that is, how many bytes of
                      the IPL are read).
                  12. Extract the IPL code from the disk image by reading and saving it
                      into an ipl.vbr file. Load the extracted IPL into IDA Pro. Find the loca-
                      tion of the entry point in the IPL. Examine and describe the code at
                      the entry point.
                  13. Develop a custom VBR loader for IDA Pro that automatically parses
                      the BIOS parameter block. Use the structure BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS
                      defined in Chapter 5.

114   Chapter 8
