                         10
     An E volution of MBR and
    V B R I n f e c t i o n Te c h n i q u e s :
                   O l ma s c o

            In response to the first wave of bootkits,
            security developers began work on anti­
          virus products that specifically checked the
       MBR code for modifications, forcing attackers
to look for other infection techniques. In early 2011,
the TDL4 family evolved into new malware with infec­
tion tricks that had never before been seen in the wild.
One example is Olmasco, a bootkit largely based on TDL4 but with a key
difference: Olmasco infects the partition table of the MBR rather than the
MBR code, allowing it to infect the system and bypass the Kernel-Mode
Code Signing Policy while avoiding detection by increasingly savvy anti­
malware software.
     Olmasco is also the first known bootkit to employ a combination of
MBR and VBR infection methods, though it still primarily targets the MBR,
setting it apart from VBR-infecting bootkits such as Rovnix and Carberp
(which we’ll discuss in Chapter 11).
                        Like its TDL predecessors, Olmasco uses the PPI business model for dis­
                   tribution, which should be familiar from our discussion of the TDL3 root­
                   kit in Chapter 1. The PPI model is similar to schemes used for distributing
                   toolbars for browsers, like Google’s toolbars, and uses embedded unique
                   identifiers (UIDs) to allow distributors to track the number of installations
                   and thus their revenue. Information about the distributor is embedded into
                   the executable, and special servers calculate the number of installations.
                   The distributor is paid a fixed amount of money per a specified number of
                   installations.1
                        In this chapter, we’ll look at three main aspects of Olmasco: the dropper
                   that infects the system; the bootkit component that infects the MBR partition
                   table; and the rootkit section that hooks the hard drive driver and delivers
                   the payload, leverages the hidden filesystem, and implements functionality to
                   redirect network communication.

     The Dropper
                   A dropper is a special malicious application that acts as the carrier of some
                   other malware stored as an encrypted payload. The dropper arrives at a
                   victim’s computer and unpacks and executes the payload—in our case, the
                   Olmasco infector—which in turn installs and executes the bootkit compo­
                   nents onto the system. Droppers usually also implement a number of antide­
                   bugging and antiemulation checks, executed before the payload is unpacked,
                   to evade automated malware analysis systems, as we’ll see a little later.

                                             Dropper v s. Dow nloa der

                        Another common type of malicious application used to deliver malware onto a
                        system is the downloader. A downloader, as its name suggests, downloads the
                        payload from a remote server rather than using the dropper method of carrying
                        the payload itself. In practice though, the term dropper is more common and is
                        frequently used as a synonym for downloader.

                   Dropper Resources
                   The dropper has a modular structure and stores most of the bootkit’s mali­
                   cious components in its resource section. Each component (for example, an
                   identifier value, bootloader component, or payload) is stored in a single
                   resource entry encrypted with RC4 (see “The RC4 Stream Cipher” on

                   1. For more detail on the PPI scheme used for bootkits of this type, see Andrey Rassokhin and
                   Dmitry Oleksyuk, “TDSS Botnet: Full Disclosure,” https://web.archive.org/web/20160316225836/
                   http://nobunkum.ru/analytics/en-tdss-botnet/.

134   Chapter 10
page 136 for more details). The size of the resource entry is used as a
decryption key. Table 10-1 lists the bootkit components in the dropper’s
resource section.

Table 10-1: Bootkit Components in the Olmasco Dropper

Resource name     Description
affid             Unique affiliate identifier.
subid             Subidentifier of affiliate. This is linked to the affiliate ID, and an
                  affiliate can have multiple subidentifiers.
boot              First part of the malicious bootloader. It is executed at the begin-
                  ning of the boot process.
cmd32             User-mode payload for 32-bit processes.
cmd64             User-mode payload for 64-bit processes.
dbg32             Third part of the malicious bootloader component (fake kdcom.dll
                  library) for 32-bit systems.
dbg64             Third part of the malicious bootloader component (fake kdcom.dll
                  library) for 64-bit systems.
drv32             Malicious kernel-mode driver for 32-bit systems.
drv64             Malicious kernel-mode driver for 64-bit systems.
ldr32             Second part of the malicious bootloader. It is executed by the boot
                  component on 32-bit systems.
ldr64             Second part of the malicious bootloader. It is executed by the boot
                  component on 64-bit systems.
main              Unknown.
build             Build number of the dropper.
name              Name of the dropper.
vbr               VBR of the malicious Olmasco partition on the hard drive.

     The identifiers affid and subid are used in the PPI scheme to calculate
the number of installations. The parameter affid is the unique identifier of
the affiliate (that is, the distributor). The parameter subid is a subidenti­
fier that distinguishes installations from different sources. For instance,
if an affiliate of the PPI program distributes the malware from two differ­
ent file-hosting services, the malware coming from these sources will have
the same affid but different subids. This way, the affiliate can compare the
number of installations for each subid and determine which source is more
profitable.
     We’ll discuss the bootkit components boot, vbr, dbg32, dbg64, drv32,
drv64, ldr32, and ldr64 shortly, but main, build, and name are described
only in the table.

                                      An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques: Olmasco   135
                                              The RC4 S tream Cipher

                        RC4 is a stream cipher developed in 1987 by Ron Rivest of RSA Security. RC4
                        takes a variable-length key and generates a stream of pseudorandom bytes
                        used to encrypt the plaintext. This cipher is increasingly popular among mal-
                        ware developers due to its compact and straightforward implementation. For
                        that reason, many rootkits and bootkits are implemented with RC4 to protect
                        the payload, communication with command-and-control (C&C) servers, and
                        configuration information.

                   Tracing Functionality for Future Development
                   The Olmasco dropper introduced error-reporting functionality to aid
                   developers in further development. After successfully executing each step
                   of infection (that is, each step in the bootkit installation algorithm), the
                   bootkit reports a “checkpoint” to the C&C servers. That means that if
                   installation fails, the developers can determine precisely at which step the
                   failure occurred. In the case of errors, the bootkit sends an additional com­
                   prehensive error message, giving developers sufficient information to deter­
                   mine the source of the fault.
                        The tracing information is sent via the HTTP GET method to a C&C
                   server whose domain name is hardcoded into the dropper. Listing 10-1
                   shows an Olmasco infector routine decompiled by Hex-Rays that generates
                   a query string to report the status information of the infection.

                   HINTERNET __cdecl ReportCheckPoint(int check_point_code){
                     char query_string[0x104];
                     memset(&query_string, 0, 0x104u);
                    _snprintf(
                       &query_string,
                       0x104u,
                       "/testadd.php?aid=%s&sid=%s&bid=%s&mode=%s%u%s%s",
                       *FILE_affid,
                       *FILE_subid,
                       &bid,
                       "check_point",
                       check_point_code,
                       &bid,
                       &bid);
                    return SendDataToServer(0, &query_string, "GET", 0, 0);
                   }

Listing 10-1: Sending tracing information to a C&C server

                        At , the malware executes a _snprintf routine to generate the query
                   string with the dropper’s parameters. At , it sends the request. The value
                   check_point_code corresponds to the ordinal number of the step in the instal­
                   lation algorithm that sent the message. For instance, 1 corresponds to the

136   Chapter 10
very first step in the algorithm, 2 to the second step, and so on. At the end
of a successful installation, the C&C server receives a sequence of numbers
like 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . N, where N is the final step. If a full installation is unsuc­
cessful, the C&C server will receive the sequence 1, 2, 3, . . . P, where P is
the step at which the algorithm failed. This allows the malware developers
to identify and fix the faulty step in the infection algorithm.

Antidebugging and Antiemulation Tricks
Olmasco also introduced some new tricks for bypassing sandbox analysis
and for protection against memory dumps. The dropper is compressed using
a custom packer that, once executed, unpacks the original decompressed
dropper and wipes out certain fields of its PE header in memory, such as the
address of the original entry point and the section table. Figure 10-1 shows a
PE header before and after this data deletion. On the left side the PE header
is partially destroyed, and on the right side it is unmodified.

Figure 10-1: Erasing PE header data

     This trick provides good protection against memory dumping in debug­
ging sessions or automated unpacking. Deleting the valid PE header makes
it difficult to determine the geometry of the PE file and dump it correctly,
because the dumping software won’t be able to find out the exact location
of code and data sections. Without this information, it can’t reconstruct the
PE image correctly and will fail.
     Olmasco also includes countermeasures for bot trackers based on virtual
machines. During installation, Olmasco detects whether the dropper is run­
ning in a virtual environment using the Windows Management Instrumentation
(WMI) IWbemServices interface and sends this information to a C&C server.
If a virtual environment is detected, the dropper halts execution and deletes
itself from the filesystem (as opposed to unpacking the malicious binary and
exposing it to analysis tools).

                                      An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques: Olmasco   137
        Note       The Microsoft WMI is a set of interfaces provided on Windows-based platforms for
                   data and operations management. One of its main purposes is to automate adminis-
                   trative tasks on remote computers. From the malware’s point of view, WMI provides
                   a rich set of Component Object Model (COM) objects that it can use to gather
                   comprehensive information on a system, such as platform information, running pro-
                   cesses, and security software in use.

                       The malware also uses WMI to gather the following information about
                   a targeted system:
                       Computer System name, username, domain name, user workgroup,
                       number of processors, and so on
                       Processor Number of cores, processor name, data width, and number
                       of logical processors
                       SCSI controller Name and manufacturer
                       IDE controller Name and manufacturer
                       Disk drive Name, model, and interface type
                       BIOS Name and manufacturer
                       OS Major and minor version, service pack number, and more
                       Malware operators can use this information to check the hardware con­
                   figuration of an infected system and determine whether it’s useful to them.
                   For instance, they can use the BIOS name and manufacturer to detect vir­
                   tual environments (such as VMware, VirtualBox, Bochs, or QEMU), which
                   are frequently used in automated malware analysis environments and,
                   therefore, of no interest to malware operators.
                       On the other hand, they can use the system name and domain name to
                   identify the company that owns the infected machine. Using this, they can
                   deploy a custom payload that specifically targets that company.

     The Bootkit Functionality
                   Once the sandbox checks are finished, the dropper proceeds to install the
                   bootkit component onto the system. The bootkit component of Olmasco
                   has been modified from the TDL4 bootkit (which, as Chapter 7 discussed,
                   overwrites the MBR and reserves space at the end of the bootable hard
                   drive for storing its malicious components), though Olmasco employs a
                   rather different approach for infecting the system.

                   Bootkit Infection Technique
                   First, Olmasco creates a partition at the end of the bootable hard drive.
                   Partition tables in Windows hard drives always contain some unpartitioned
                   (or unallocated) space at the end, and usually this space is enough to hold
                   a bootkit’s components—and sometimes more. The malware creates a mali­
                   cious partition by occupying the unpartitioned space and modifying a free
                   partition table entry in the partition table of the original, legitimate MBR

138   Chapter 10
                    to point to it. Strangely, this newly created malicious partition is limited to
                    50GB, no matter how much unpartitioned space is available. One possible
                    explanation for limiting the size of the partition is to avoid attracting the
                    attention of a user by taking up all the available unpartitioned space.
                        As we discussed in Chapter 5, the MBR partition table is at offset 0x1BE
                    from the start of the MBR and consists of four 16-byte entries, each describ­
                    ing a corresponding partition on the hard drive. There are at most four
                    primary partitions on the hard drive, and only one partition can be marked
                    as active, so there is only one partition that the bootkit can boot from. The
                    malware overwrites the first empty entry in the partition table with the
                    parameters of the malicious partition, marks it as active, and initializes the
                    VBR of the newly created partition, as shown in Listing 10-2.

First partition                            00212000         0C13DF07        00000800       00032000
Second partition (OS)                      0C14DF00         FFFFFE07        00032800       00FCC800
Third partition (Olmasco), Active          FFFFFE80         FFFFFE1B       00FFF000      00000FB0
Fourth partition (empty)                   00000000         00000000        00000000       00000000

Listing 10-2: Partition table after Olmasco infection

                        Here you can see the malicious partition’s starting address  and size in
                    sectors . If the Olmasco bootkit finds that there is no free entry in the parti­
                    tion table, it reports this to the C&C server and terminates. Figure 10-2 shows
                    what happens to the partition table after the system is infected with Olmasco.
         Before infection                                After infection
                                                                                                           Key
           MBR code                                        MBR code
                                                                                                 Empty partition entry

     Partition table entry #1                     Partition table entry #1
                                                                                                 Active partition entry
     Partition table entry #2                     Partition table entry #2
     Partition table entry #3                     Partition table entry #3                      Existing partition entry

     Partition table entry #4                     Partition table entry #4

            MBR data                                       MBR data

        bootmgr partition                               bootmgr partition

           OS partition                                   OS partition

       Unpartitioned space                            Olmasco partition

Figure 10-2: Layout of hard drive before and after an Olmasco infection

                                                               An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques: Olmasco   139
                        After infection, a previously empty partition table entry is connected to
                   the Olmasco partition and becomes the active partition entry. You can see
                   that the MBR code itself remains untouched; the only thing affected is the
                   MBR partition table. For additional stealth, the first sector of the Olmasco
                   partition table also looks very similar to the legitimate VBR, meaning secu­
                   rity software may be tricked into believing that Olmasco’s partition is a
                   legitimate partition on the hard disk.

                   Boot Process of the Infected System
                   Once a system is infected with Olmasco, it will boot accordingly. The boot
                   process of an infected machine is presented in Figure 10-3.

                                                                                          Continue kernel
                           Load MBR.
                                                                                           initialization.

                                         MBR is loaded                 ? Load drv32 or drv64.
                                         and executed.

                                                                                                  Call
                         Load VBR of
                                                                                      kdDebuggerInitialize1
                       malicious partition.
                                                                                      from loaded kdcom.dll.

                                    Infected VBR is loaded               Substitute kdcom.dll
                                         and executed.                  with dbg32 or dbg64.

                                                                                    Load ntoskrnl.exe, hal.dll,
                        Load boot from
                                                                                      kdcom.dll, bootvid.dll,
                      malicious system file.
                                                                                    and other boot-start drivers.

                                         boot is loaded                 Distort /MININT option.
                                         and executed.

                   Hook BIOS INT 13h handler
                                                                                        Load winload.exe.
                     and load original VBR.

                                       VBR of originally active        ? Substitute EmsEnabled
                                   partition is loaded and executed.      option with WinPe.

                                                 bootmgr is loaded and executed.
                         Load bootmgr.                                                         Read BCD.

Figure 10-3: Olmasco-infected system boot process

                      When the infected machine next boots, the malicious VBR v of the
                   Olmasco partition receives control, right after the MBR code is executed u
                   and before the OS bootloader components are loaded. This allows the

140   Chapter 10
        malware to gain control before the OS does. When a malicious VBR receives
        control, it reads the boot file from the root directory of Olmasco’s hidden file­
        system  and transfers control to it. This boot component plays the same role
        as the ldr16 module in previous versions of TDL4: it hooks the BIOS inter­
        rupt 13h handler  to patch the Boot Configuration Data (BCD)  and
        loads the VBR of the originally active partition.
             Conceptually, the boot processes of Olmasco and TDL4 are very simi­
        lar, and the components are the same except that Olmasco has different
        names for the hidden filesystem components, as listed in Table 10-2. The
        TDL4 boot process was covered in detail in Chapter 7.

Table 10-2: Boot Components of Olmasco vs. TDL4

         Olmasco                TDL4
         boot                   ldr16
         dbg32, dbg64           ldr32, ldr64

The Rootkit Functionality
        The bootkit’s job is done once it has loaded the malicious kernel-mode
        driver ( in Figure 10-4), which implements Olmasco’s rootkit functional­
        ity. The rootkit section of Olmasco is responsible for the following:

        •   Hooking the hard drive device object
        •   Injecting the payload from the hidden filesystem into processes
        •   Maintaining the hidden filesystem
        •   Implementing the Transport Driver Interface (TDI) to redirect network
            communication

        Hooking the Hard Drive Device Object and Injecting the Payload
        The first two elements in the list are essentially the same as in TDL4:
        Olmasco uses the same techniques to hook the hard drive device object
        and inject the payload from the hidden filesystem into processes. Hooking
        the hard drive device object helps prevent the contents of the original
        MBR from being restored by security software, allowing Olmasco to persist
        through reboot. Olmasco intercepts all the read/write requests to the hard
        drive and blocks those that attempt to modify the MBR or read the contents
        of the hidden filesystem.

        Maintaining the Hidden Filesystem
        The hidden filesystem is an important feature of complex threats such as
        rootkits and bootkits because it provides a covert channel for storing infor­
        mation on a victim’s computer. Traditional malware relies on the OS file­
        system (NTFS, FAT32, extX, and so forth) to store its components, but this
        makes it vulnerable to forensic analysis or detection by security software. To
        address this, some advanced malware types implement their own custom

                                           An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques: Olmasco   141
                   filesystem, which they store in an unallocated area of the hard drive. In the
                   vast majority of modern configurations, there are at least a few hundred
                   megabytes of unallocated space at the end of the hard drive, sufficient for
                   storing malicious components and configuration information. With this
                   approach, the files stored in a hidden filesystem aren’t accessible through
                   conventional APIs such as Win32 API CreateFileX, ReadFileX, and so on,
                   but the malware is still able to communicate with the hidden storage and
                   access data stored there through a special interface. The malware usually
                   also encrypts the contents of a hidden filesystem to further hinder forensic
                   analysis.
                         Figure 10-4 shows an example of a hidden filesystem. You can see that
                   it is located right after the OS filesystem and doesn’t interfere with normal
                   OS operation.
                     One
                    sector                                                     Unallocated space

                                              Disk partitions
                    MBR                                                        Hidden filesystem
                                              OS filesystem

                                          Variable length

Figure 10-4: A hidden filesystem on a hard drive

                        Olmasco’s methods for storing payload modules in the hidden file­
                   system are almost all inherited from the TDL4: it reserves space at the end
                   of the hard drive to house its filesystem, whose contents are protected by
                   low-level hooks and an RC4 stream cipher. However, Olmasco’s developers
                   extended the design and implementation of their hidden filesystem and
                   added enhancements that can support file and folder hierarchy, verify the
                   integrity of a file to check if it is corrupted, and better manage internal file­
                   system structures.

                   Folder Hierarchy Support
                   Whereas the TDL4 hidden filesystem was capable of storing only files,
                   Olmasco’s hidden filesystem can store both files and directories. The root
                   directory is denoted with the usual backslash (\). For instance, Listing 10-3
                   shows a fragment of a VBR in Olmasco’s hidden partition, which loads a file
                   named boot from the root directory using \boot .

                   seg000:01F4                     hlt
                   seg000:01F4 sub_195             endp
                   seg000:01F5                     jmp     short loc_1F4
                   seg000:01F7 aBoot              db '\boot',0
                   seg000:01FD                     db    0

Listing 10-3: A fragment of a VBR of an Olmasco partition

142   Chapter 10
Integrity Verification
Upon reading a file from the filesystem, Olmasco checks for corruption of
the contents. This capability wasn’t apparent in TDL4. Olmasco introduced
an additional field in each file’s data structure to store the CRC32 check­
sum value of the file contents. If Olmasco detects corruption, it removes the
corresponding entry from the filesystem and frees those occupied sectors,
as shown in Listing 10-4.

unsigned int stdcall RkFsLoadFile(FS_DATA_STRUCT *a1, PDEVICE_OBJECT
  DeviceObject, const char *FileName, FS_LIST_ENTRY_STRUCT *FileEntry)
{
  unsigned int result;

  // locate file in the root dir
 result = RkFsLocateFileInDir(&a1->root_dir, FileName, FileEntry);
  if ( (result & 0xC0000000) != 0xC0000000 ) {
    // read the file from the hard drive
   result = RkFsReadFile(a1, DeviceObject, FileEntry);
    if ( (result & 0xC0000000) != 0xC0000000 ) {
      // verify file integrity
     result = RkFsCheckFileCRC32(FileEntry);
      if ( result == 0xC000003F ) {
        // free occupied sectors
       MarkBadSectorsAsFree(a1, FileEntry->pFileEntry);
        // remove corresponding entry
        RkFsRemoveFile(a1, &a1->root_dir, FileEntry->pFileEntry->FileName);
        RkFsFreeFileBuffer(FileEntry);
        // update directory
        RkFsStoreFile(a1, DeviceObject, &a1->root_dir);
        RkFsStoreFile(a1, DeviceObject, &a1->bad_file);
        // update bitmap of occupied sectors
        RkFsStoreFile(a1, DeviceObject, &a1->bitmap_file);
        // update root directory
        RkFsStoreFile(a1, DeviceObject, &a1->root);
        result = 0xC000003F;
      }
    }
  }
  return result;
}

Listing 10-4: Reading a file from Olmasco’s hidden filesystem

    The routine RkFsLocateFileInDir  locates the file in the directory,
reads its contents , and then computes the file CRC32 checksum and
compares  it against the value stored in the filesystem. If the values don’t
match, the routine deletes the files and frees the sectors occupied by the
corrupted file . This makes the hidden filesystem more robust and the
rootkit more stable by reducing the chances of loading and executing a
corrupted file.

                                       An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques: Olmasco   143
                   Filesystem Management
                   The filesystem implemented in Olmasco is more mature than that imple­
                   mented in TDL4, so it requires more efficient management in terms of free
                   space usage and data structure manipulations. Two special files, $bad and
                   $bitmap, were introduced to help support filesystem contents.
                        The $bitmap file contains a bitmap of free sectors in the hidden file­
                   system. The bitmap is an array of bits, where every bit corresponds to a
                   sector in the filesystem. When a bit is set to 1, it means the correspond­
                   ing sector is occupied. Using $bitmap helps to find a location in the file­
                   system for storing a new file.
                        The $bad file is a bitmask used to track sectors that contain corrupted
                   files. Since Olmasco hijacks the unpartitioned space at the end of the hard
                   drive for the hidden filesystem, there is a possibility that some other soft­
                   ware may write to this area and corrupt the contents of Olmasco’s files.
                   The malware marks these sectors in a $bad file to prevent their usage in
                   the future.
                        Both of these system files occupy the same level as the root directory and
                   are not accessible to the payload, but are for system use only. Interestingly,
                   there are files with the same names in the NTFS. This means Olmasco may
                   also use these files to trick users into believing that the malicious partition is
                   a legitimate NTFS volume.

                   Implementing the Transport Driver Interface to Redirect Network
                   Communication
                   The Olmasco bootkit’s hidden filesystem has two modules, tdi32 and tdi64,
                   that work with the Transport Driver Interface (TDI). The TDI is a kernel-mode
                   network interface that provides an abstraction layer between transport pro­
                   tocols, such as TCP/IP, and TDI clients, such as sockets. It’s exposed at the
                   upper edge of all transport protocol stacks. A TDI filter allows malware to
                   intercept network communication before it reaches transport protocols.
                        The tdi32/tdi64 drivers are loaded by the main rootkit driver drv32/drv64
                   via the undocumented API technique IoCreateDriver(L"\\Driver\\usbprt",
                   tdi32EntryPoint), where tdi32EntryPoint corresponds to the entry point of the
                   malicious TDI driver. Listing 10-5 shows the routine that attaches the TDI to
                   these device objects.

NTSTATUS ___stdcall_ AttachToNetworkDevices(PDRIVER_OBJECT DriverObject,
                                   PUNICODE_STRING a2)
{
  NTSTATUS result;
  PDEVICE_OBJECT AttachedToTcp;
  PDEVICE_OBJECT AttachedToUdp;
  PDEVICE_OBJECT AttachedToIp;
  PDEVICE_OBJECT AttachedToRawIp;

  result = AttachToDevice(DriverObject, L"\\Device\\CFPTcpFlt",
                            L"\\Device\\Tcp", 0xF8267A6F, &AttachedToTcp);

144   Chapter 10
    if ( result >= 0 ) {
      result = AttachToDevice(DriverObject, L"\\Device\\CFPUdpFlt",
                              L"\\Device\\Udp", 0xF8267AF0, &AttachedToUdp);
      if ( result >= 0 ) {
        AttachToDevice(DriverObject, L"\\Device\\CFPIpFlt",
                              L"\\Device\\Ip", 0xF8267A16, &AttachedToIp);
        AttachToDevice(DriverObject, L"\\Device\\CFPRawFlt",
                              L"\\Device\\RawIp", 0xF8267A7E, &AttachedToRawIp);
        result = 0;
      }
    }
    return result;
}

Listing 10-5: Attaching the TDI driver to network devices

                       The malicious TDI driver then attaches to the following list of network
                   device objects:
                        \Device\Tcp Provides access to TCP protocol at 
                        \Device\Udp Provides access to UDP protocol at 
                        \Device\IP Provides access to IP protocol at 
                        \Device\RawIp Provides access to raw IP protocol (that is, raw
                        sockets) at 
                        The main functionality of the malicious TDI driver is to monitor
                   TDI_CONNECT requests. If an attempt is made to connect to IP address 1.1.1.1
                   over one of the hooked protocols, the malware changes it to address
                   69.175.67.172 and sets the port number to 0x5000. One of the reasons for
                   doing this is to bypass network security software that operates above the
                   TDI layer. In such a case, malicious components may attempt to establish a
                   connection with IP address 1.1.1.1, which is not malicious, shouldn’t draw
                   the attention of security software, and is processed further up than the
                   TDI level. At this point, the malicious tdi component replaces the original
                   value of the destination with the value 69.175.67.172, and the connection is
                   rerouted to another host.

      Conclusion
                   In this chapter, we looked at how the Olmasco bootkit uses the MBR parti­
                   tion table as another bootkit infection vector. Olmasco is a descendant of
                   the notorious TDL4 bootkit and inherits much of its functionality, while
                   adding a few tricks of its own; its combination of MBR partition table modi­
                   fication and use of a fake VBR makes it stealthier than its predecessor. In
                   the following chapters, we’ll consider two more bootkits that target the VBR
                   using sophisticated infection techniques: Rovnix and Gapz.

                                                            An Evolution of MBR and VBR Infection Techniques: Olmasco   145
