                          11
                 I P L B o o t k i t s:
            R o v n i x a n d C a rb e rp

           Distribution of Rovnix, the first known
           bootkit to infect the IPL code of the active
         partition on a bootable hard drive, began at
      the end of 2011. Security products at that time
had already evolved to monitor the MBR, as discussed
in Chapter 10, to protect against bootkits such as TDL4
and Olmasco. The appearance of Rovnix in the wild
was therefore a challenge for security software. Because Rovnix went further
in the boot process and infected the IPL code that executed after the VBR
code (see Chapter 5), it stayed under the radar for a few months until the
security industry managed to catch up.
     In this chapter, we’ll focus on the technical details of the Rovnix
bootkit framework by studying how it infects target systems and bypasses
the Kernel-Mode Signing Policy to load the malicious kernel-mode driver.
We’ll pay special attention to the malicious IPL code, and we’ll debug it
                   using VMware and the IDA Pro GDB, as discussed in Chapter 9. Finally,
                   we’ll see an implementation of Rovnix in the wild: the Carberp banking
                   trojan, which used a modification of Rovnix to persist on victims’ machines.

     Rovnix’s Evolution
                   Rovnix was first advertised on a private underground forum, shown in
                   Figure 11-1, as a new Ring0 bundle with extensive functionality.

Figure 11-1: Rovnix advertisement on a private underground forum

                        It had a modular architecture that made it very attractive for malware
                   developers and distributors. It seems likely that its developers were more
                   focused on selling the framework than on distributing and using the
                   malware.
                        Since its first appearance in the wild, Rovnix has gone through multiple
                   iterations. This chapter will focus on the latest generation at the time of
                   this writing, but we’ll touch on the earlier versions to give you an idea of its
                   development.

148   Chapter 11
             The first iterations of Rovnix used a simple IPL infector to inject a pay-
        load into the user-mode address space of the boot processes. The malicious
        IPL code was the same in all early iterations, so the security industry was
        able to quickly develop detection methods using simple static signatures.
            The next versions of Rovnix rendered these detection methods inef-
        fectual by implementing polymorphic malicious IPL code. Rovnix also added
        another new feature: a hidden filesystem to secretly store its configuration
        data, payload modules, and so on. Inspired by TDL4-like bootkits, Rovnix
        also began implementing functionality that monitored read and write
        requests to the infected hard drive, making it harder to remove the mal-
        ware from the system.
            A later iteration added a hidden communication channel to allow
        Rovnix to exchange data with remote C&C servers and bypass the traffic
        monitoring performed by personal firewalls and Host Intrusion Prevention
        Systems.
            At this point, we’ll turn our attention to the latest known modifications
        of Rovnix (also known as Win32/Rovnix.D) at the time of this writing and
        discuss its features in detail.

The Bootkit Architecture
        First we’ll consider the Rovnix architecture from a high-level point of view.
        Figure 11-2 shows the main components of Rovnix and how they relate.

                Process 1         Process 2        Process 3              Process N
                                                                 ...

                Payload 1       Payload 2         Payload 3              Payload N

        User mode

        Kernel mode
                                               Kernel-
                                               mode
                                               driver

                 Hidden storage                Bootkit         Hidden network channel

                       Configuration          Malicious         Command & Control
             Payload       data                 IPL                 servers

Figure 11-2: Rovnix architecture

           At the heart of Rovnix lies a malicious kernel-mode driver, the main
        purpose of which is to inject payload modules into processes in the system.
        Rovnix can hold multiple payloads for injection into different processes.

                                                                       IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    149
                   An example of such a payload is a banking trojan that creates fake transac-
                   tions, like the Carberp trojan discussed later in this chapter. Rovnix has a
                   default payload module hardcoded into the malicious kernel-mode driver,
                   but it is capable of downloading additional modules from remote C&C
                   servers through the hidden network channel (discussed in “The Hidden
                   Communication Channel” on page 169). The kernel-mode driver also
                   implements hidden storage to store downloaded payloads and configuration
                   information (covered in detail in “The Hidden Filesystem” on page 167).

     Infecting the System
                   Let’s continue our analysis of Rovnix by dissecting its infection algorithm,
                   depicted in Figure 11-3.

                                                                           Check if
                                                        No                 already
                                                                           infected

                        Windows XP               Check OS                  Windows 2000
                                                  version

                                              Vista and higher
                                                                                                     Yes

                                     Yes       Check admin            No
                                                privileges

                        Determine OS
                        digit capacity

                                                                 Call ShellExecuteEx
                       Overwrite IPL of                            API with runas
                       active partition

                    System is successfully
                          infected                                                    Self delete and exit

                    Initiate system reboot

Figure 11-3: Rovnix dropper infection algorithm

                        Rovnix first checks if the system has already been infected by accessing
                   the system registry key HKLM\Software\Classes\CLSID\<XXXXXXXX-XXXX​
                   -XXXX-XXXX-XXXXXXXXXXXX>, where X is generated from the file­system
                   volume serial number. If this registry key exists, it means the system is already
                   infected with Rovnix, so the malware terminates and deletes itself from the
                   system.

150   Chapter 11
      If the system is not already infected, Rovnix queries the version of
the operating system. To gain low-level access to the hard drive, the mal-
ware requires administrator privileges. In Windows XP, the regular user
is granted administrator rights by default, so if the OS is XP, Rovnix can
proceed as a regular user without having to check privileges.
      However, in Windows Vista, Microsoft introduced a new security
feature—User Account Control (UAC) —that demotes the privileges of appli-
cations running under the administrator account, so if the OS is Vista or
above, Rovnix has to check administrative privileges. If the dropper is run-
ning without administrative privileges, Rovnix tries to elevate the privileges
by relaunching itself with the ShellExecuteEx API using the runas command.
The dropper’s manifest contains a requireAdministrator property, so runas
attempts to execute the dropper with elevated privileges. On systems with
UAC enabled, a dialog displays, asking the user whether they authorize the
program to run with administrator privileges. If the user chooses Yes, the
malware starts with elevated privileges and infects the system. If the user
chooses No, the malware will not be executed. If there is no UAC on a sys-
tem or if UAC is disabled, the malware just runs with the privileges of the
current account.
      Once it has the required privileges, Rovnix gains low-level access to
the hard drive by using the native API functions ZwOpenFile, ZwReadFile, and
ZwWriteFile.
      First the malware calls ZwOpenFile using \??\PhysicalDrive0 as a filename,
which returns a handle corresponding to the hard drive. Rovnix then uses
the returned handle with the ZwReadFile and ZwWriteFile routines to read
data from and write data to the hard drive.
      To infect the system, the malware scans the partition table in the MBR
of the hard drive, and then reads the IPL of the active partition and reduces
its size with the aPlib compression library. Next, Rovnix creates a new mali-
cious IPL by prepending the compressed legitimate IPL with malicious
loader code, as shown in Figure 11-4.

 MBR    VBR         Legitimate IPL                      Filesystem data

                                                                                Before infecting
                           Compressed                                             After infecting
                              data

                                                                      Malicious       Reserved
               Malicious    Legitimate
 MBR    VBR                                 Filesystem data           unsigned       for hidden
                code            IPL
                                                                       driver         filesystem

                    Malicious IPL
                    (15 sectors)

Figure 11-4: Hard drive layout before and after Rovnix infection

                                                              IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    151
                        After modifying the IPL, Rovnix writes a malicious kernel-mode driver
                   at the end of the hard drive to be loaded by the malicious IPL code during
                   system start-up. The malware reserves some space at the end of the hard
                   drive for the hidden filesystem, which we’ll describe later in the chapter.

                                                             a Plib

                        aPlib is a small compression library used primarily for compressing execut-
                        able code. It’s based on the compression algorithm used in aPack software
                        for packing executable files. One of the library’s distinguishing features is a
                        good compression:speed ratio and tiny depacker footprint, which is especially
                        important in the preboot environment since it has only a small amount of mem-
                        ory. The aPlib compression library is also frequently used in malware to pack
                        and obfuscate the payload.

                       Finally, Rovnix creates the system registry key to mark the system as
                   infected and initiates a restart by calling ExitWindowsEx Win32 API with the
                   parameters EWX_REBOOT | EWX_FORCE.

     Post-Infection Boot Process and IPL
                   Once Rovnix infects the machine and forces a reboot, the BIOS boot
                   code carries on as usual, loading and executing the bootable hard drive’s
                   unmodified MBR. The MBR finds an active partition on the hard drive
                   and executes the legitimate, unmodified VBR. The VBR then loads and
                   executes the infected IPL code.

                   Implementing the Polymorphic Decryptor
                   The infected IPL begins with a small decryptor whose purpose is to
                   decrypt the rest of the malicious IPL code and execute it (Figure 11-5).
                   The fact that the decryptor is polymorphic means that each instance of
                   Rovnix comes with custom decryptor code.

                   Polymorphic Encrypted malicious     Compressed original
                    decryptor       IPL code               IPL code

                           Malicious IPL code

Figure 11-5: Layout of the infected IPL

152   Chapter 11
    Let’s take a look at how the decryptor is implemented. We’ll give a gen-
eral description of the decryption algorithm before analyzing the actual
polymorphic code. The decryptor follows this process to decrypt the con-
tent of the malicious IPL:

1.   Allocate a memory buffer to store decrypted code.
2.   Initialize the decryption key and decryption counters—the offset and
     size of the encrypted data, respectively.
3.   Decrypt the IPL code into the allocated buffer.
4.   Initialize registers before executing the decrypted code.
5.   Transfer control to the decrypted code.

     In order to customize the decryption routine, Rovnix randomly splits
it into basic blocks (sets of continuous instructions with no branches), each
of which contains a small number of assembly instructions for the routine.
Rovnix then shuffles the basic blocks and reorders them randomly, con-
necting them using jmp instructions, as shown in Figure 11-6. The result is
a custom decryption code for every instance of Rovnix.

                             Basic block 1                     Basic block 1

                             Basic block 2                     Basic block N

     Decryption
                             Basic block 3                     Basic block 2
      routine

                                 ...                                 ...

                             Basic block N                     Basic block 3

Figure 11-6: Generation of polymorphic decryptor

     This polymorphic mechanism is actually quite simple compared to
some other code obfuscation techniques employed in modern malware,
but because the byte pattern of the routine changes with every instance of
Rovnix, it’s sufficient for avoiding detection by security software that uses
static signatures.
     Polymorphism is not invulnerable, though, and one of the most common
approaches to defeating it is software emulation. In emulation, security soft-
ware applies behavioral patterns to detect malware.

Decrypting the Rovnix Bootloader with VMware and IDA Pro
Let’s take a look at the actual implementation of the decryption routine
using a VMware virtual machine and IDA Pro. All the necessary informa-
tion on how to set up VMware with IDA Pro can be found in Chapter 9.

                                                   IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    153
                   In this demonstration, we’ll use a VMware image preinfected with the
                   Win32/Rovnix.D bootkit, which you can download from https://nostarch​
                   .com/rootkits as the file bootkit_files.zip.
                       Our goal is to obtain the decrypted malicious IPL code using dynamic
                   analysis. We’ll walk you through the debugging process, skipping quickly
                   through the MBR and VBR steps to focus on analyzing the polymorphic
                   IPL decryptor.

                   Observing the MBR and VBR Code
                   Flip back to “Combining VMware GDB with IDA” on page 126 and follow
                   the steps there to decrypt the MBR from bootkit_files.zip . You’ll find the MBR
                   code located at address 0000:7c00h. In Figure 11-7, the address 0000:7c00h
                   is denoted as MEMORY:7c00h because IDA Pro displays the segment name (in
                   our case, MEMORY) instead of the segment base address 0000h. Because Rovnix
                   infects the IPL code and not the MBR, the MBR code shown in the debugger
                   is legitimate and we won’t dig into it very deeply.

                                          

                                           
                                           
                                            
                                     

Figure 11-7: The beginning of the MBR code

                       This routine code relocates the MBR to another memory address to
                   recycle the memory located at 0000:7c00h, in order to read and store the
                   VBR of the active partition. Register si v is initialized with the value 7C1h,
                   which corresponds to the source address, and register di w is initialized
                   with the value 61Bh, the destination address. Register cx x is initialized with
                   1E5h, the number of bytes to copy, and the rep movsb instruction y copies the
                   bytes. The retf instruction z transfers control to the copied code.
                       At this point, the instruction pointer register ip points at address
                   0000:7c00h u. Execute each instruction in the listing by pressing F8 until
                   you reach the last retf instruction z. Once retf is executed, control is

154   Chapter 11
transferred to the code that has just been copied to address 0000:061Bh—
namely, the main MBR routine, whose purpose is to find the active parti-
tion in the MBR’s partition table and load its very first sector, the VBR.
     The VBR also remains unchanged, so we’ll proceed to the next step by
setting up a breakpoint right at the end of the routine. The retf instruction
located at address 0000:069Ah transfers control directly to the VBR code
of the active partition, so we’ll put the breakpoint at the retf instruction
(highlighted in Figure 11-8). Move your cursor to this address and press
F2 to toggle the breakpoint. If you see a dialog upon pressing F2, just click
OK to use the default values.

Figure 11-8: Setting a breakpoint at the end of the MBR code

     Once you’ve set the breakpoint, press F9 to continue the analysis up to
the breakpoint. This will execute the main MBR routine. When execution
reaches the breakpoint, the VBR is already read into memory and we can
get to it by executing the retf (F8) instruction.
     The VBR code starts with a jmp instruction, which transfers control to
the routine that reads the IPL into memory and executes it. The disassembly
of the routine is shown in Figure 11-9. To go directly to the malicious IPL
code, set a breakpoint at the last instruction of the VBR routine at address
0000:7C7Ah u and press F9 again to release control. Once execution reaches
the breakpoint, the debugger breaks on the retf instruction. Execute this
instruction with F8 to get to the malicious IPL code.

                                                          IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    155
                                    

Figure 11-9: VBR code

                   Dissecting the IPL Polymorphic Decryptor
                   The malicious IPL code starts with a series of instructions, in basic blocks,
                   that initialize the registers before executing the decryptor. These are fol-
                   lowed by a call instruction that transfers control to the IPL decryptor.
                       The code in the first basic block of the decryptor (Listing 11-1) obtains
                   the base address of the malicious IPL in memory  and stores it on the
                   stack . The jmp instruction at  transfers control to the second basic
                   block (recall Figure 11-6).

                   MEMORY:D984 pop         ax
                   MEMORY:D985 sub         ax, 0Eh u
                   MEMORY:D988 push        cs
                   MEMORY:D989 push        ax v
                   MEMORY:D98A push        ds
                   MEMORY:D98B jmp         short loc_D9A0 w

Listing 11-1: Basic block 1 of the polymorphic decryptor

                       The second and the third basic blocks both implement a single step of
                   the decryption algorithm—memory allocation—and so are shown together
                   in Listing 11-2.

                   ; Basic Block #2
                   MEMORY:D9A0 push        es
                   MEMORY:D9A1 pusha
                   MEMORY:D9A2 mov         di, 13h
                   MEMORY:D9A5 push        40h ; '@'

156   Chapter 11
  MEMORY:D9A7 pop       ds
  MEMORY:D9A8 jmp       short loc_D95D
  --snip--
  ; Basic Block #3
  MEMORY:D95D mov       cx, [di]
  MEMORY:D95F sub       ecx, 3 u
  MEMORY:D963 mov       [di], cx
  MEMORY:D965 shl       cx, 6
  MEMORY:D968 push      cs
  MEMORY:D98B jmp       short loc_D98F v

Listing 11-2: Basic blocks 2 and 3 of the polymorphic decryptor

      The code allocates 3KB of memory (see Chapter 5 on memory alloca-
  tion in real mode) and stores the address of the memory in the cx register.
  The allocated memory will be used to store the decrypted malicious IPL
  code. The code then reads the total amount of available memory in real
  execution mode from address 0040:0013h and decrements the value by
  3KB . The jmp instruction at  transfers control to the next basic block.
      Basic blocks 4 through 8, shown in Listing 11-3, implement the decryp-
  tion key and decryption counter initializations, as well as the decryption loop.

  ; Basic Block #4
  MEMORY:D98F pop     ds
  MEMORY:D990 mov     bx, sp
  MEMORY:D992 mov     bp, 4D4h
  MEMORY:D995 jmp     short loc_D954
  --snip--
  ; Basic Block #5
  MEMORY:D954 push    ax
  MEMORY:D955 push    cx
  MEMORY:D956 add     ax, 0Eh
 MEMORY:D959 mov     si, ax
  MEMORY:D95B jmp     short loc_D96B
  --snip--
  ; Basic Block #6
  MEMORY:D96B add     bp, ax
  MEMORY:D96D xor     di, di
 MEMORY:D96F pop     es
  MEMORY:D970 jmp     short loc_D93E
  --snip--
  ; Basic Block #7
 MEMORY:D93E mov     dx, 0FCE8h
  MEMORY:D941 cld
 MEMORY:D942 mov     cx, 4C3h
  MEMORY:D945 loc_D945:
 MEMORY:D945 mov     ax, [si]
 MEMORY:D947 xor     ax, dx
  MEMORY:D949 jmp     short loc_D972
  --snip--

                                                            IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    157
                     ; Basic Block #8
                    MEMORY:D972 mov       es:[di], ax
                     MEMORY:D975 add       si, 2
                     MEMORY:D978 add       di, 2
                     MEMORY:D97B loop      loc_D945
                     MEMORY:D97D pop       di
                     MEMORY:D97E mov       ax, 25Eh
                     MEMORY:D981 push      es
                    MEMORY:D982 jmp       short loc_D94B

Listing 11-3: Basic blocks 4 through 8 of the polymorphic decryptor

                          At address 0000:D959h, the si register is initialized with the address
                     of the encrypted data . Instructions at  initialize the es and di registers
                     with the address of the buffer allocated to store the decrypted data. The
                     dx register at address 0000:D93Eh  is initialized with the decryption key
                     0FCE8h, and the cx register is initialized with the number of XOR operations
                     to execute  in the decryption loop. On every XOR operation, 2 bytes of
                     encrypted data are XORed with the decryption key, so the value in the cx
                     register is equal to number_of_bytes_to_decrypt divided by 2.
                          The instructions in the decryption loop read 2 bytes from the source ,
                     XOR them with the key , and write the result in the destination buffer .
                     Once the decryption step is complete, a jmp instruction  transfers control
                     to the next basic block.
                          Basic blocks 9 through 11 implement register initialization and transfer
                     control to the decrypted code (Listing 11-4).

                     ; Basic Block #9
                     MEMORY:D94B push      ds
                     MEMORY:D94C pop       es
                     MEMORY:D94D mov       cx, 4D4h
                     MEMORY:D950 add       ax, cx
                     MEMORY:D952 jmp       short loc_D997
                     --snip--
                     ; Basic Block #10
                     MEMORY:D997 mov       si, 4B2h
                    MEMORY:D99A push      ax
                     MEMORY:D99B push      cx
                     MEMORY:D99C add       si, bp
                     MEMORY:D99E jmp       short loc_D98D
                     --snip--
                     ; Basic Block #11
                     MEMORY:D98D pop       bp
                    MEMORY:D98E retf

Listing 11-4: Basic blocks 9 through 11 of the polymorphic decryptor

                         Instructions at  store the decrypted IPL code that will execute after
                     decryption on the stack address, and retf  pops this address from the
                     stack and transfers control to it.

158   Chapter 11
     To obtain the decrypted IPL code, we need to determine the address
of the buffer for the decrypted data. To do so, we set up a breakpoint at
address 0000:D970h right after instruction  in Listing 11-3 and release
control, as shown in Figure 11-10.

Figure 11-10: Setting up a breakpoint in IDA Pro

     Next, we’ll set up a breakpoint at address 0000:D98Eh ( in
Listing 11-4), the last instruction of the polymorphic decryptor, and
let the rest of the decryptor code run. Once the debugger breaks at this
address, we execute the last retf instruction, which brings us directly to
the decrypted code at address 9EC0:0732h.
     At this point, the malicious IPL code is decrypted in memory and is
available for further analysis. Note that, after decryption, the first routine
of the malicious IPL is located not at the very beginning of the decrypted
buffer at address 9EC0:0000h, but at offset 732h, due to the layout of the
malicious IPL. If you want to dump the contents of the buffer from memory
into a file on disk for static analysis, you should start dumping at address
9EC0:0000h, where the buffer starts.

Taking Control by Patching the Windows Bootloader
The main purpose of Rovnix’s IPL code is to load a malicious kernel-
mode driver. The malicious boot code works in close collaboration
with the OS bootloader components and follows the execution flow
from the very beginning of the boot process, through the processor’s

                                                   IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    159
                     execution-mode switching, until the OS kernel is loaded. The loader relies
                     heavily on the platform-debugging facilities and binary representations of
                     the OS bootloader components.
                         Once the decrypted malicious IPL code is executed, it hooks the INT
                     13h handler so it can monitor all the data being read from the hard drive
                     and set up further hooks in OS bootloader components. The malicious IPL
                     then decompresses and returns control to the original IPL code to resume
                     the normal boot process.
                          Figure 11-11 depicts the steps Rovnix takes to interfere with the boot
                     process and compromise the OS kernel. We’ve covered the steps up to the
                     fourth box, so we’ll resume our description of the bootkit functionality
                     from the “Load bootmgr” step at .

                                                         
                                                             Continue kernel
         Load MBR.
                                                              initialization.

                        MBR is loaded                                    Map malicious driver into
                        and executed.                                   kernel-mode address space.

                                                        Load ntoskrnl.exe, hal.dll,
         Load VBR.                                        kdcom.dll, bootvid.dll,
                                                               and so on.

                        VBR is loaded
                                                                                    Hook
                                                                        BllmgAllocateImageBuffer
                        and executed.
                                                                      and OsIArchTransferToKernel.

       Load malicious
                                                            Load winload.exe.
          IPL code.

                    Malicious IPL code is                                 Bootloader parameters
                   loaded and executed.                                    are read from BCD.

    Hook BIOS INT 13h
    handler and restore                                        Read BCD.
     original IPL code.

                       Original IPL
                                                                             Restore bootmgr,
                                                                          hook INT 1h handler,
                     code is restored.
                                                                         and copy itself over IDT.
                                                         
       Load bootmgr.                                         Patch bootmgr.
                                 bootmgr is loaded
                                and receives control.

Figure 11-11: Boot process of Rovnix IPL code

                         Once it has hooked the INT 13h handler, Rovnix monitors all data
                     being read from the hard drive and looks for a certain byte pattern cor-
                     responding to the bootmgr of the OS. When Rovnix finds the matching

160   Chapter 11
pattern, it modifies the bootmgr  to enable it to detect the switching of
the processor from real to protected mode, which is a standard step in the
boot process. This execution-mode switching changes the translation of the
virtual address to physical and, as a result, changes the layout of the virtual
memory, which would dislodge Rovnix. Therefore, in order to propagate
itself through the switch and keep control of the boot process, Rovnix hooks
bootmgr by patching it with a jmp instruction, allowing Rovnix to receive con-
trol right before the OS switches the execution mode.
     Before moving on, we’ll explore how Rovnix hides its hooks and then
look at how exactly it persists through the mode switching.

Abusing the Debugging Interface to Hide Hooks
One thing that makes Rovnix even more interesting than other bootkits is
the stealth of its control hooks. It hooks the INT 1h handler  to be able
to receive control at specific moments during OS kernel initialization, and
it abuses debugging registers dr0 through dr7 to set up hooks that avoid
detection by leaving the code being hooked unaltered. The INT 1h handler
is responsible for handling debugging events, such as tracing and setting
hardware breakpoints, using the dr0 through dr7 registers.
     The eight debugging registers, dr0 through dr7, provide hardware-
based debugging support on Intel x86 and x64 platforms. The first four,
dr0 through dr3, are used to specify the linear addresses of breakpoints.
The dr7 register lets you selectively specify and enable the conditions for
triggering breakpoints; for instance, you can use it to set up a breakpoint
that triggers upon code execution or memory access (read/write) at a spe-
cific address. The dr6 register is a status register that allows you to deter-
mine which debug condition has occurred—that is, which breakpoint has
been triggered. The dr41 and dr5 registers are reserved and not used. Once
a hardware breakpoint is triggered, INT 1h is executed to determine which
debug condition has occurred and respond accordingly to dispatch it.
     This is the functionality that enables the Rovnix bootkit to set up
stealthy hooks without patching code. Rovnix sets the dr0 through dr4
registers to their intended hook location and enables hardware break-
points for each register by setting a corresponding bitmask in the dr7
register.

Abusing the Interrupt Descriptor Table to Persist Through Boot
In addition to abusing the debugging facilities of the platform, the first
iterations of Rovnix used an interesting technique to survive the processor’s
switch from real to protected mode. Before execution switches to protected

1. Debug registers dr4 and dr5 are reserved when debug extensions are enabled (when the
DE flag in control register cr4 is set) and attempts to reference the dr4 and dr5 registers cause
invalid-opcode exceptions (#UD). When debug extensions are not enabled (when the DE flag
is clear), these registers are aliased to debug registers dr6 and dr7.

                                                               IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    161
                   mode, bootmgr initializes important system structures, such as the Global
                   Descriptor Table and Interrupt Descriptor Table (IDT). The latter is filled
                   with descriptors of interrupt handlers.

                                            Inte rrup t De scrip tor Ta ble

                         The IDT is a special system structure used by the CPU in protected mode to
                         specify CPU interrupt handlers. In real mode, the IDT (also referred to as the
                         Interrupt Vector Table, or IVT ) is trivial—merely an array of 4-byte addresses
                         of handlers, starting at address 0000:0000h. In other words, the address of
                         the INT 0h handler is 0000:0000h, the address of the INT 1h handler is
                         0000:0004h, the address of the INT 2h handler is 0000:0008h, and so on.
                         In protected mode, the IDT has a more complex layout: an array of 8-byte inter-
                         rupt handler descriptors. The base address of the IDT can be obtained via the
                         sidt processor instruction. For more information on IDT, refer to Intel’s documen-
                         tation at http://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/processors/architectures​
                         -software-developer-manuals.html.

                       Rovnix copies the malicious IPL code over the second half of the
                   IDT, which is not being used by the system at the moment. Given that
                   each descriptor is 8 bytes and there are 256 descriptors in the table, this
                   provides Rovnix with 1KB of IDT memory, sufficient to store its malicious
                   code. The IDT is in protected mode, so storing its code in the IDT ensures
                   that Rovnix will persist across the mode switching, and the IDT address
                   can be easily obtained via the sidt instruction. The overall layout of the
                   IDT after Rovnix’s modifications is shown in Figure 11-12.

                              INT 0h descriptor
                              INT 1h descriptor
                              INT 2h descriptor

                                     ...
                   IDT
                              INT 79h descriptor

                               Malicious code

Figure 11-12: How Rovnix abuses
                   the IDT to propagate through
                   execution-mode switching

162   Chapter 11
Loading the Malicious Kernel-Mode Driver
After hooking the INT 1h handler, Rovnix proceeds with hooking other
OS bootloader components, such as winload.exe and the OS kernel image
(ntoskrnl.exe, for instance). Rovnix waits while the bootmgr code loads
winload.exe and then hooks the BlImgAllocateImageBuffer routine (see 
in Figure 11-11) to allocate a buffer for an executable image by setting up
a hardware breakpoint at its starting address. This technique allocates
memory to hold the malicious kernel-mode driver.
     The malware also hooks the OslArchTransferToKernel routine in
winload​.exe. This routine transfers control from winload.exe to the kernel’s
entry point KiSystemStartup, which starts kernel initialization. By hooking
OslArchTransferToKernel, Rovnix gets control right before KiSystemStartup is
called, and it takes this opportunity to inject the malicious kernel-mode
driver.
     The routine KiSystemStartup takes the single parameter KeLoaderBlock,
which is a pointer to LOADER_PARAMETER_BLOCK—an undocumented structure
initialized by winload.exe that contains important system information, such
as boot options and loaded modules. The structure is shown in Listing 11-5.

typedef struct _LOADER_PARAMETER_BLOCK
{
     LIST_ENTRY LoadOrderListHead;
     LIST_ENTRY MemoryDescriptorListHead;
   LIST_ENTRY BootDriverListHead;
     ULONG KernelStack;
     ULONG Prcb;
     ULONG Process;
     ULONG Thread;
     ULONG RegistryLength;
     PVOID RegistryBase;
     PCONFIGURATION_COMPONENT_DATA ConfigurationRoot;
     CHAR * ArcBootDeviceName;
     CHAR * ArcHalDeviceName;
     CHAR * NtBootPathName;
     CHAR * NtHalPathName;
     CHAR * LoadOptions;
     PNLS_DATA_BLOCK NlsData;
     PARC_DISK_INFORMATION ArcDiskInformation;
     PVOID OemFontFile;
     _SETUP_LOADER_BLOCK * SetupLoaderBlock;
     PLOADER_PARAMETER_EXTENSION Extension;
     BYTE u[12];
     FIRMWARE_INFORMATION_LOADER_BLOCK FirmwareInformation;
} LOADER_PARAMETER_BLOCK, *PLOADER_PARAMETER_BLOCK;

Listing 11-5: The LOADER_PARAMETER_BLOCK description

    Rovnix is interested in the field BootDriverListHead , which contains
the head of a list of special data structures corresponding to boot-mode
drivers. These drivers are loaded by winload.exe at the same time that the

                                                       IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    163
                   kernel image is loaded. However, the DriverEntry routine that initializes the
                   drivers isn’t called until after the OS kernel image receives control. The OS
                   kernel initialization code traverses records in BootDriverListHead and calls
                   the DriverEntry routine of the corresponding driver.
                        Once the OslArchTransferToKernel hook is triggered, Rovnix obtains the
                   address of the KeLoaderBlock structure from the stack and inserts a record
                   corresponding to the malicious driver into the boot driver list using the
                   BootDriverListHead field. Now the malicious driver is loaded into memory
                   as if it were a kernel-mode driver with a legitimate digital signature. Next,
                   Rovnix transfers control to the KiSystemStartup routine, which resumes the
                   boot process and starts kernel initialization ( in Figure 11-11).
                        At some point during initialization, the kernel traverses the list of boot
                   drivers in KeLoaderBlock and calls their initialization routines, including that
                   of the malicious driver (Figure 11-13). This is how the DriverEntry routine of
                   the malicious kernel-mode driver is executed.

                                                 KeLoaderBlock
                                                      ...

                                               BootDriverListHead

                                                      ...

                       Driver1 info               Rovnix driver              DriverN info
                           ...                        ...                        ...

                        LIST_ENTRY       ...       LIST_ENTRY       ...       LIST_ENTRY

                           ...                        ...                        ...

Figure 11-13: A malicious Rovnix driver inserted into BootDriverList

     Kernel-Mode Driver Functionality
                   The main function of the malicious driver is to inject the payload, stored in
                   the driver’s binary and compressed with aPlib as discussed earlier, into tar-
                   get processes in the system—primarily into explorer.exe and browsers.

                   Injecting the Payload Module
                   The payload module contains the code JFA in its signature, so to extract
                   it, Rovnix looks for the JFA signature in a free space between the section
                   table of the driver and its first section. This signature signifies the begin-
                   ning of the configuration data block, an example of which is displayed in
                   Listing 11-6.

typedef struct _PAYLOAD_CONFIGURATION_BLOCK
{

164   Chapter 11
   DWORD Signature;              // "JFA\0"
   DWORD PayloadRva;             // RVA of the payload start
   DWORD PayloadSize;            // Size of the payload
   DWORD NumberOfProcessNames;   // Number of NULL-terminated strings in ProcessNames
   char ProcessNames[0];         // Array of NULL-terminated process names to inject payload
} PAYLOAD_CONFIGURATION_BLOCK, *PPAYLOAD_CONFIGURATION_BLOCK;

Listing 11-6: PAYLOAD_CONFIGURATION_BLOCK structure describing payload configuration

                       The fields PayloadRva and PayloadSize specify the coordinates of the com-
                   pressed payload image in the kernel-mode driver. The ProcessNames array
                   contains names of the processes to inject the payload into. The number of
                   entries in the array is specified by NumberOfProcessNames. Figure 11-14 shows
                   an example of such a data block taken from a real-world malicious kernel-
                   mode driver. As you can see, the payload is to be injected into explorer.exe
                   and the browsers iexplore.exe, firefox.exe, and chrome.exe.

Figure 11-14: A payload configuration block

                       Rovnix first decompresses the payload into a memory buffer. Then it
                   employs a conventional technique frequently used by rootkits to inject the
                   payload, consisting of the following steps:

                   1.   Register CreateProcessNotifyRoutine and LoadImageNotifyRoutine using the
                        standard documented kernel-mode API. This permits Rovnix to gain
                        control each time a new process is created or a new image is loaded into
                        the address of a target process.
                   2.   Monitor the new processes in the system and look for the target pro-
                        cess, identified by the image name.
                   3.   As soon as the target process is loaded, map the payload into its address
                        space and queue an asynchronous procedure call (APC), which transfers con-
                        trol to the payload.

                        Let’s examine this technique in more detail. The CreateProcessNotify rou-
                   tine allows Rovnix to install a special handler that’s triggered every time a
                   new process is created on the system. This way, the malware is able to detect
                   when a target process is launched. However, because the malicious create-
                   process handler is triggered at the very beginning of process creation, when
                   all the necessary system structures are already initialized but before the exe-
                   cutable file of the target process is loaded into its address space, the malware
                   isn’t able to inject the payload at this point.
                        The second routine, LoadImageNotifyRoutine, allows Rovnix to set up a
                   handler that’s triggered every time an executable module (.exe file, DLL

                                                                             IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    165
                   library, and so forth) is loaded or unloaded on the system. This handler
                   monitors the main executable image and notifies Rovnix once the image is
                   loaded in the target process’s address space, at which point Rovnix injects
                   the payload and executes it by creating an APC.

                   Stealth Self-Defense Mechanisms
                   The kernel-mode driver implements the same defensive mechanisms as the
                   TDL4 bootkit: it hooks the IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_CONTROL handler of the hard disk
                   miniport DRIVER_OBJECT. This handler is the lowest-level hardware-independent
                   interface with access to data stored on the hard drive, providing the malware
                   with a reliable way of controlling data being read from and written to the
                   hard drive.
                        This way, Rovnix can intercept all the read/write requests and protect
                   critical areas from being read or overwritten. To be specific, it protects:

                   •   The infected IPL code
                   •   The stored kernel-mode driver
                   •   The hidden filesystem partition

                       Listing 11-7 presents the pseudocode of the IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_CONTROL hook
                   routine, which determines whether to block or authorize an I/O operation
                   depending on which part of the hard drive is being read or written to.

                   int __stdcall NewIrpMjInternalHandler(PDEVICE_OBJECT DeviceObject, PIRP Irp)
                   {
                     UCHAR ScsiCommand;
                     NTSTATUS Status;
                     unsigned __int64 Lba;
                     PVOID pTransferBuffer;

                    if ( DeviceObject != g_DiskDevObj )
                       return OriginalIrpMjInternalHandler(DeviceObject, Irp);

                    ScsiCommand = GetSrbParameters(_Irp, &Lba, &DeviceObject, &pTransferBuffer,
                                                                                Irp);
                     if ( ScsiCommand == 0x2A || ScsiCommand == 0x3B )
                     {
                       // SCSI write commands
                     if ( CheckSrbParams(Lba, DeviceObject)
                       {
                          Status = STATUS_ACCESS_DENIED;
                        Irp->IoStatus.Status = STATUS_ACCESS_DENIED;
                          IofCompleteRequest(Irp, 0);
                       } else
                       {
                          return OriginalIrpMjInternalHandler(DeviceObject, Irp);
                       }
                     } else if ( ScsiCommand == 0x28 || ScsiCommand == 0x3C)
                     {

166   Chapter 11
                // SCSI read commands
                if ( CheckSrbParams(Lba, DeviceObject)
                {
                 Status = SetCompletionRoutine(DeviceObject, Irp, Lba,
                                                DeviceObject, pTransferBuffer, Irp);
                } else
                {
                  return OriginalIrpMjInternalHandler(DeviceObject, Irp);
                }
            }

            if ( Status == STATUS_REQUEST_NOT_ACCEPTED )
              return OriginalIrpMjInternalHandler(DeviceObject, Irp);

            return Status;
        }

Listing 11-7: The pseudocode of a malicious IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_CONTROL handler

             First the code checks whether the I/O request is addressed to the
        hard drive device object . If so, the malware checks whether the opera-
        tion is a read or write operation and which region of the hard drive is
        being accessed . The routine CheckSrbParams  returns TRUE when regions
        protected by the bootkit are being accessed. If someone tries to write data
        to the region protected by the bootkit, the code rejects the I/O opera-
        tion and returns STATUS​_ACCESS_DENIED . If someone tries to read from the
        bootkit-protected region, the malware sets a malicious completion rou-
        tine  and passes the I/O request down to the hard drive device object
        for completing the read operation. Once the read operation finishes, the
        malicious completion routine is triggered and wipes the buffer containing
        the read data by writing zeros into it. This way, the malware protects its
        data on the hard drive.

The Hidden Filesystem
        Another significant feature of Rovnix is its hidden filesystem (FS) partition
        (that is, one not visible to the operating system) that’s used to secretly
        store configuration data and additional payload modules. Implementation
        of hidden storage isn’t a new bootkit technique—it’s been used by other
        rootkits such as TDL4 and Olmasco—but Rovnix has a slightly different
        implementation.
             To physically store its hidden partition, Rovnix occupies space either at
        the beginning or end of the hard drive, depending on where there’s enough
        free space; if there are 0x7D0 (2,000 in decimal, almost 1MB) or more free
        sectors before the first partition, Rovnix places the hidden partition right
        after the MBR sector and extends it over the entirety of the free 0x7D0 sec-
        tors. If there isn’t enough space at the beginning of the hard drive, Rovnix
        tries to place the hidden partition at its end. To access the data stored in the
        hidden partition, Rovnix uses the original IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_CONTROL handler,
        hooked as explained in the previous section.

                                                                 IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    167
                   Formatting the Partition as a Virtual FAT System
                   Once Rovnix has allocated space for the hidden partition, it formats it
                   as a Virtual File Allocation Table (VFAT) filesystem—a modification of the
                   FAT filesystem capable of storing files with long Unicode filenames (up to
                   256 bytes). The original FAT filesystem imposes limitations on filename
                   lengths of 8 + 3, meaning up to eight characters for a filename and three
                   characters for an extension name.

                   Encrypting the Hidden Filesystem
                   To protect the data in the hidden filesystem, Rovnix implements partition-
                   transparent encryption with the RC6 encryption algorithm in Electronic
                   Code Book (ECB) mode and a key length of 128 bits. In ECB mode, the
                   data to be encrypted is split into blocks of equal lengths, each of which is
                   encrypted with the same key independently of the other blocks. The key
                   is stored in the last 16 bytes of the very first sector of the hidden partition,
                   as shown in Figure 11-15, and is used to encrypt and decrypt the whole
                   partition.

                                      Encrypted data                        Key

                                        496 bytes                         16 bytes

Figure 11-15: Encryption key location in the first sector of the
                   hidden partition

                                                                RC6

                        Rivest cipher 6, or RC6, is a symmetric key block cipher designed by Ron Rivest,
                        Matt Robshaw, Ray Sidney, and Yiqun Lisa Yin to meet the requirements of the
                        Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) competition. RC6 has a block size of
                        128 bits and supports key sizes of 128, 192, and 256 bits.

                   Accessing the Hidden Filesystem
                   To make the hidden filesystem accessible to the payload modules, Rovnix
                   creates a special object called a symbolic link. Loosely speaking, the symbolic
                   link is an alternative name for a hidden storage device object that can be
                   used by modules in user-mode processes. Rovnix generates the string
                   \DosDevices\<XXXXXXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXXXXXXXXXX>, where X is a randomly
                   generated hexadecimal number, from 0 to F, that’s used as the symbolic
                   link name for the hidden storage.
                       One advantage of the hidden filesystem is that it may be accessed as a
                   regular filesystem through the standard Win32 API functions provided by

168   Chapter 11
       the operating system, such as CreateFile, CloseFile, ReadFile, or WriteFile. For
       instance, to create the file file_to_create in the root directory of the hidden
       filesystem, a malicious payload calls CreateFile, passing the symbolic link
       string \DosDevices\<%XXXXXXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXX-XXXXXXXXXXXX>\file_to_create as a
       filename parameter. Once the payload module issues this call, the operating
       system redirects the request to the malicious kernel-mode driver responsible
       for handling requests for the hidden filesystem.
            Figure 11-16 shows how the malicious driver implements the filesystem
       driver functionality. Once it receives an I/O request from the payload,
       Rovnix dispatches the request using the hooked hard drive handler to per-
       form read and write operations for the hidden filesystem located on the
       hard drive.

              Applications                     Malware payload

                             User-mode address space
                             Kernel-mode address space
                                          Malicious kernel-mode driver
                                               Filesystem interface
          OS filesystem driver
                                            Physical storage interface

                         OS storage device driver stack

                                                               Hidden
                          Hard drive
                                                          filesystem area

Figure 11-16: Architecture of the Rovnix hidden storage filesystem

            In this scenario, the operating system and the malicious hidden file­
       system coexist on the same hard drive, but the operating system isn’t aware
       of the hard drive region used to store the hidden data.
            The malicious hidden filesystem potentially could alter legitimate data
       being stored on the operating system’s filesystem, but the chances of that
       are low due to the hidden filesystem’s placement at the beginning or end of
       the hard drive.

The Hidden Communication Channel
       Rovnix has further stealth tricks up its sleeve. The Rovnix kernel-mode
       driver implements a TCP/IP protocol stack to communicate secretly with
       remote C&C servers. The network interfaces provided by the OS are
       frequently hooked by security software in order to monitor and control

                                                                      IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    169
                   network traffic passing through the network. Instead of relying on these
                   network interfaces and risk detection by the security software, Rovnix uses
                   its own custom implementation of network protocols, independent of the
                   operating system, to download payload modules from C&C servers.
                        To be able to send and receive data over this network, the Rovnix kernel-
                   mode driver implements a complete network stack, including the following
                   interfaces:

                   •   Microsoft Network Driver Interface Specification (NDIS) miniport interface
                       to send data packets using a physical network Ethernet interface
                   •   Transport Driver Interface for TCP/IP network protocols
                   •   Socket interface
                   •   HTTP protocol to communicate with remote C&C servers

                        As shown in Figure 11-17, the NDIS miniport layer is responsible for
                   communicating with the network interface card to send and receive net-
                   work packets. The Transport Driver Interface provides a TCP/IP interface
                   for the upper-level socket interface, which in turn is used by Rovnix’s HTTP
                   protocol to transmit data.

                                HTTP protocol

                               Socket interface

                            TCP/IP transport driver

                                NDIS miniport

                            Network interface card

Figure 11-17: Architecture of Rovnix
                   custom network stack implementation

                        Rovnix’s creators didn’t develop this hidden network communication
                   system from scratch—such an implementation requires thousands of lines
                   of code and thus is prone to errors. Instead, they based their implementa-
                   tion on an open source, lightweight TCP/IP network library called lwIP.

170   Chapter 11
        The lwIP library is a small, independent implementation of the TCP/IP
        protocol suite with a focus on reducing resource usage while still deliver-
        ing a full-scale TCP/IP stack. According to its website, lwIP has a footprint
        of tens of kilobytes of RAM and around 40KB of code, which fits the boot-
        kit perfectly.
             Features like the hidden communication channel allow Rovnix to bypass
        local network monitoring security software. Since Rovnix comes with its own
        network protocol stack, network security software is unaware of—and thus
        unable to monitor—its communications over the network. From the very top
        of the protocol layer down to the very bottom of the NDIS miniport driver,
        Rovnix uses only its own network components, making it a very stealthy
        bootkit.

Case History: The Carberp Connection
        One real-world example of Rovnix being used in the wild is in the Carberp
        trojan malware, developed by the most prominent cybercrime group in
        Russia. Carberp was used to allow a banking trojan to persist on the victim’s
        system.2 We’ll look at a few aspects of Carberp and how it was developed
        from the Rovnix bootkit.

                                   C a rbe rp-re l ate d M a lwa re

             It was estimated that the group that developed Carberp earned an average
             weekly income of several million US dollars and invested heavily in other mal-
                                                               1
             ware technologies, such as the Hodprot dropper, which has been implicated
                                                                 2
             in installations of Carberp, RDPdoor, and Sheldor. RDPdoor was especially
             malicious: it installed Carberp in order to open a backdoor in the infected sys-
             tem and manually perform fraudulent banking transactions.

             1. https://www.welivesecurity.com/media_files/white-papers/Hodprot-Report.pdf
             2. https://www.welivesecurity.com/2011/01/14/sheldor-shocked/

        Development of Carberp
        In November 2011, we noticed that one of the C&C servers set up by the
        cybercrime group behind Carberp started distributing a dropper with a
        bootkit based on the Rovnix framework. We started tracking the Carberp
        trojan and found that during this period, its distribution was very limited.
             Two things in our analysis suggested that the bot was working in
        test mode and therefore being actively developed. The first clue was an

        2. https://www.welivesecurity.com/media_files/white-papers/CARO_2011.pdf; https://www
        .welivesecurity.com/wp-content/media_files/Carberp-Evolution-and-BlackHole-public.pdf

                                                                          IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    171
                   abundance of debugging and tracing information relating to the bot’s
                   installation and the binary’s behavior. The second, which we discovered
                   by gaining access to logfiles from the bot C&C server, was that masses of
                   information on failures in installation were being sent back to the C&C.
                   Figure 11-18 shows an example of the kind of information Carberp was
                   reporting.

Figure 11-18: An example of Rovnix dropper logs

                       The ID column specifies a unique identifier of a Rovnix instance; the
                   status column contains information on whether the victim’s system has
                   been successfully compromised. The infection algorithm was split into a
                   number of steps, and information was reported to the C&C server directly
                   after each step. The step column provides information on which step is
                   being executed, and the info column contains a description of any error
                   encountered during installation. By looking at the step and info columns,
                   operators of the botnet could determine at which step and for what reason
                   the infection failed.
                       The version of Rovnix that Carberp used contained a lot of debug-
                   ging strings and sent a lot of verbose messages to the C&C. Figure 11-19

172   Chapter 11
shows examples of the kind of strings it might send. This information
was extremely useful to us in analyzing this threat and understanding its
functionality. The debugging information left in the binary revealed the
names of the routines implemented in the binary and their purpose. It
documented the logic of the code. Using this data, we could more easily
reconstruct the context of the malicious code.

Figure 11-19: Debug strings left by developers in the Rovnix dropper

Dropper Enhancements
The framework of Rovnix used in Carberp was pretty much the same as
the bootkit we described in the beginning of the chapter, with the only
significant change appearing in the dropper. In “Infecting the System” on
page 150, we mentioned that Rovnix tries to elevate its privileges by using
the ShellExecuteEx Win32 API to achieve administrator rights on the victim’s
machine. In Carberp’s version of Rovnix, the dropper exploited the follow-
ing vulnerabilities in the system to elevate privileges:
    MS10-073 in the win32k.sys module This vulnerability was originally
    used by the Stuxnet worm and exploits the incorrect handling of a spe-
    cially crafted keyboard layout file.
    MS10-092 in Windows Task Scheduler This vulnerability was also first
    discovered in Stuxnet and exploits the integrity verification mechanism
    in Windows Scheduler.
    MS11-011 in the win32k.sys module This vulnerability results in a
    stack-based buffer overflow in win32k.sys!RtlQueryRegistryValues routine.
    .NET Runtime Optimization vulnerability This is a vulnerability in
    the Microsoft .NET Runtime Optimization Service that results in exe-
    cution of malicious code with SYSTEM privileges.
    Yet another interesting feature of the Carberp installer is that it removed
various hooks from the list of system routines, shown in Listing 11-8, just
before installing the trojan or bootkit onto the system. These routines are
common hook targets for security software, such as sandboxes and host
intrusion prevention and protection systems. By unhooking these functions,
the malware increased its ability to evade detection.

                                                           IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    173
                   ntdll!ZwSetContextThread
                   ntdll!ZwGetContextThread
                   ntdll!ZwUnmapViewOfSection
                   ntdll!ZwMapViewOfSection
                   ntdll!ZwAllocateVirtualMemory
                   ntdll!ZwWriteVirtualMemory
                   ntdll!ZwProtectVirtualMemory
                   ntdll!ZwCreateThread
                   ntdll!ZwOpenProcess
                   ntdll!ZwQueueApcThread
                   ntdll!ZwTerminateProcess
                   ntdll!ZwTerminateThread
                   ntdll!ZwResumeThread
                   ntdll!ZwQueryDirectoryFile
                   ntdll!ZwCreateProcess
                   ntdll!ZwCreateProcessEx
                   ntdll!ZwCreateFile
                   ntdll!ZwDeviceIoControlFile
                   ntdll!ZwClose
                   ntdll!ZwSetInformationProcess
                   kernel32!CreateRemoteThread
                   kernel32!WriteProcessMemory
                   kernel32!VirtualProtectEx
                   kernel32!VirtualAllocEx
                   kernel32!SetThreadContext
                   kernel32!CreateProcessInternalA
                   kernel32!CreateProcessInternalW
                   kernel32!CreateFileA
                   kernel32!CreateFileW
                   kernel32!CopyFileA
                   kernel32!CopyFileW
                   kernel32!CopyFileExW
                   ws2_32!connect
                   ws2_32!send
                   ws2_32!recv
                   ws2_32!gethostbyname

Listing 11-8: List of routines unhooked by the Rovnix dropper

                       The bootkit and kernel-mode driver sections of the Carberp’s Rovnix
                   modification remain the same as in the original version of the bootkit. After
                   successful installation onto the system, the malicious IPL code loaded the
                   kernel-mode driver, and the driver injected its Carberp trojan payload into
                   the system processes.

                   Leaked Source Code
                   In June 2013, the source code for Carberp and Rovnix was leaked to
                   the public. The complete archive was made available for download and
                   contained all the necessary source code for attackers to build their own
                   Rovnix bootkit. Despite this, we haven’t seen as many custom modifica-
                   tions of Rovnix and Carberp in the wild as we might expect, which we
                   assume is due to the complexity of this bootkit technology.

174   Chapter 11
Conclusion
        This chapter provided a detailed technical analysis of Rovnix in the con-
        tinuous bootkit arms race facing the security industry. Once security soft-
        ware caught up with contemporary bootkits infecting the MBR, Rovnix
        presented another infection vector, the IPL, triggering another round of
        evolution in antivirus technology. Due to its IPL infection approach, and
        its implementation of hidden storage and hidden network communication
        channels, Rovnix is one of the most complex bootkits seen in the wild.
        These features make it a dangerous weapon in the hands of cybercriminals,
        as confirmed by the Carberp case.
             In this chapter we devoted special attention to dissecting Rovnix’s IPL
        code using VMware and IDA Pro, demonstrating the practical usage of these
        tools in the context of bootkit analysis. You can download all the necessary
        data to repeat the steps, or to conduct your own in-depth investigation into
        Rovnix’s IPL code, from https://nostarch.com/rootkits/.

                                                         IPL Bootkits: Rovnix and Carberp    175
