                          13
  The Rise of MBR R ansomware

             So far, the examples of malware described
            in this book all belong to a particular class:
          computer trojans with rootkit or bootkit func-
       tionality whose intention is to persist on victims’
systems long enough to perform various malicious
activities—committing browser click fraud, sending
spam, opening a backdoor, or creating an HTTP proxy, to name just a few.
These trojans use bootkit persistence methods to persevere on infected
computers and rootkit functionality to remain undetected.
    In this chapter, we’ll take a look at ransomware, a family of malware with
a very different modus operandi. As the name suggests, the main purpose
of ransomware is to lock users out of their data or computer system entirely
and demand a ransom to restore access.
    In most known cases, ransomware uses encryption to deprive users of
their data. Once the malware is executed, it attempts to encrypt everything of
value to a user—documents, photos, emails, and so on—and then demands
the user pay a ransom to get the encryption key to decrypt their data.
                        Most ransomware targets user files stored in the computer filesystem,
                   though these methods don’t implement any advanced rootkit or bootkit
                   functionality and thus aren’t relevant for this book. However, some ransom-
                   ware families instead encrypt sectors of the hard drive to block user access
                   to the system, using bootkit functionality to do so.
                        In this chapter, we’ll focus on the latter category: ransomware that
                   targets computer hard drives and deprives victims not only of files but also
                   of access to the entire computer system. This type of ransomware encrypts
                   certain areas of the hard drive and installs a malicious bootloader onto the
                   MBR. Instead of booting the operating system, the bootloader performs
                   low-level encryption of the hard drive’s content and displays a message to a
                   victim demanding a ransom. In particular, we’ll focus on two families that
                   have received a lot of media attention: Petya and Satana.

     A Brief History of Modern Ransomware
                   The first traces of ransomware-like malware were apparent in the computer
                   virus AIDS, first discovered in the wild in 1989. AIDS used methods similar
                   to those of modern ransomware to infect old MS-DOS COM executables by
                   overwriting the beginning of files with malicious code in a way that made it
                   impossible to recover them. AIDS, however, didn’t demand that victims pay
                   a ransom to restore access to the infected programs—it simply obliterated
                   the information without the option of retrieval.
                        The first known malware to demand a ransom was the GpCode trojan,
                   which first appeared in 2004. It was famous for using a 660-bit RSA encryp-
                   tion algorithm to lock user files. Advances in integer factorization made it
                   nearly feasible to factor 600-bit integers in 2004 (a cash prize was awarded in
                   2005 for the successful factoring of RSA-640, a 640-bit number). Subsequent
                   modifications were upgraded with 1,024-bit RSA encryption, which improved
                   the malware’s resilience against brute-force attacks. GpCode was spread via
                   an email attachment purporting to be a job application. Once it was executed
                   on the victim systems, it proceeded to encrypt user files and display the ran-
                   som message.
                        Despite these early appearances, ransomware wasn’t a widespread
                   threat until 2012, but it has remained prevalent ever since. One factor that
                   likely played an important role in its growth was the rise in popularity of
                   anonymized online services, such as Bitcoin payment systems and Tor.
                   Ransomware developers could take advantage of such systems to collect
                   ransom payments without being tracked by law enforcement organizations.
                   This cybercrime business proved to be extremely profitable, resulting in
                   varied development and wide distribution of ransomware.
                        The ransomware that kicked off the surge in 2012 was Reveton, which
                   disguised itself as a message from a law enforcement organization tailored
                   to a user’s location. For instance, victims in the United States were shown a
                   message purporting to be from the FBI. The victims were accused of illegal

208   Chapter 13
        activities, such as using copyrighted content without permission or viewing
        and distributing pornography, and instructed to pay a fine to services such
        as Ukash, Paysafe, or MoneyPak.
             Shortly after, more threats with similar functionality appeared in the
        wild. CryptoLocker, discovered in 2013, was the leading ransomware threat
        at that time. It used 2,048-bit RSA encryption and was mainly spread via
        compromised websites and email attachments. One of the interesting fea-
        tures of CryptoLocker was that its victims had to pay the ransom in the
        form of Bitcoin or prepaid cash vouchers. Using Bitcoin added another
        level of anonymity to the threat and made it extremely difficult to track
        the attackers.
             Another remarkable piece of ransomware is CTB-Locker, which
        appeared in 2014. CTB stands for Curve/TOR/Bitcoin, indicating the core
        technologies employed by the threat. CTB-Locker used the Elliptic Curve
        Cryptography (ECC) encryption algorithm and was the first known ransom-
        ware to use the TOR protocol to conceal C&C servers.
             The cybercrime business remains extremely profitable to this day, and
        ransomware continues to evolve, with many modifications regularly emerg-
        ing. The ransomware families discussed here constitute only a small frac-
        tion of all the known threats in this class.

Ransomware with Bootkit Functionality
        In 2016, two new families of ransomware were discovered: Petya and Satana.
        Instead of encrypting user files in the filesystem, Petya and Satana encrypted
        parts of the hard drive to make the OS unbootable and displayed a message
        to victims demanding payment to restore the encrypted sectors. The easiest
        way to implement an interface to display a ransom message is to leverage
        MBR-based bootkit infection techniques.
              Petya locked users out of their systems by encrypting the contents of
        the master file table (MFT) on the hard drive. The MFT is an essential, special
        data structure in the NTFS volume that contains information on all the files
        stored within it, like their location on the volume, their filenames, and other
        attributes. It is primarily used as an index for finding the locations of files
        on the hard drive. By encrypting the MFT, Petya ensured that files could not
        be located and that victims weren’t able to access files on the volume or even
        boot their system.
              Petya was mainly distributed as a link in an email purporting to open
        a job application. The infected link actually pointed to the malicious ZIP
        archive containing the Petya dropper. The malware even used the legiti-
        mate service Dropbox to host the ZIP archives.
              Discovered shortly after Petya, Satana also deprived victims of access
        to their systems by encrypting the MBR of the hard drive. Though its MBR
        infection capabilities weren’t as sophisticated as Petya’s—and even con-
        tained a few bugs—they were interesting enough that Satana deserves a
        little discussion.

                                                              The Rise of MBR Ransomware   209
                                             Sh a moon: The Los t Troj a n

                       Shamoon was a trojan that appeared around the same time as Satana and
                       Petya and had similar functionality. It was notorious for destroying data on
                       the targeted systems and rendering them unbootable. Its main purpose was
                       to disrupt the services of targeted organizations, mostly in the energy and oil
                       sector, but because it didn’t demand ransoms from its victims, it’s not discussed
                       in detail here. Shamoon contained a component of a legitimate filesystem tool
                       that it used to access the hard drive at a low level in order to overwrite user
                       files, including the MBR sector, with chunks of its own data. This attack caused
                       serious outages in many targeted organizations. It took a week for one of its
                       victims—Saudi Aramco—to restore its services.

     The Ransomware Modus Operandi
                   Before going into the technical analysis of Petya and Satana’s bootloader
                   components, let’s take a high-level look at the way modern ransomware
                   operates. Each family of ransomware has its own peculiarities that devi-
                   ate slightly from the picture given here, but Figure 13-1 reflects the most
                   common pattern of ransomware operation.

                                                                 File encryption key
                        Generate file encryption key

                                                                                    
                       Send encrypted file encryption                                  Encrypt
                                                         Public key                              C&C server
                            key to C&C server                                           FEK

                                                           List of           Encrypt
                             Encrypt user files
                                                         extensions           files

                                                                         File
                         Destroy file encryption key                  encryption
                                                                         key

                         Display random message

Figure 13-1: Modus operandi of modern ransomware

                       Shortly after being executed on the victim’s system, the ransomware
                   generates a unique encryption key  for a symmetric cipher—that is, any
                   block or stream cipher (for example, AES, RC4, or RC5). This key, which
                   we’ll refer to as the file encryption key (FEK), is used to encrypt user files. The
                   malware uses a (pseudo-) random number generator to generate a unique
                   key that cannot be guessed or predicted.

210   Chapter 13
     Once the file encryption key is generated, it’s transmitted to a C&C
server  for storage. To avoid interception by network traffic monitoring
software, the malware encrypts the file encryption key with a public key
embedded in the malware , frequently using RSA encryption algorithms
or ECC encryption, as is the case with CTB-Locker and Petya. This private
key isn’t present in the malware body and is known only to the attackers,
ensuring that no one else can access the file encryption key.
     Once the C&C server confirms receipt of the file encryption key, the
malware proceeds to encrypt user files on the hard drive . To reduce the
volume of the files it needs to encrypt, the ransomware uses an embedded
list of file extensions to filter out irrelevant files (executables, system files,
and so forth), and encrypts only specific user files likely to be of greatest
value to the victim, such as documents, images, and photos.
     After encryption, the malware destroys the file encryption key on the
victim’s system , making it practically impossible for the user to recover
the contents of the files without paying the ransom. At this point, the file
encryption key typically exists only in the attacker’s C&C server, though
in some cases an encrypted version of it is stored on the victim’s system.
Even then, without knowing the private encryption key, it’s still practically
impossible for the user to recover the file encryption key and restore access
to the files.
     Next, the malware shows the user a ransom message  with instructions
on how to pay the ransom. In some cases, the ransom message is embedded
in the malware body, and in other cases, it retrieves a ransom page from the
C&C server.

                      Torre ntLocke r: A Fata l Fl aw

    Not all early ransomware was this impenetrable, due to flaws in the imple-
    mentation of the encryption process. The early versions of TorrentLocker, for
    instance, used an Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) cipher in counter
    mode to encrypt files. In counter mode, the AES cipher generates a sequence
    of key characters, which is then XORed with the contents of the file to encrypt
    it. The weakness of this approach is that it yields the same key sequence for
    the same key and initialization value, regardless of the contents of the file. To
    recover the key sequence, a victim can XOR an encrypted file with the cor-
    responding original version and then use this sequence to decrypt other files.
    After this discovery, TorrentLocker was updated to use the AES cipher in cipher
    block chaining (CBC) mode, eliminating the weakness. In CBC mode, before
    being encrypted, a plaintext block is XORed with the ciphertext block from
    the previous encryption iteration so that even a small difference in input data
    results in a significant difference in the encrypted result. This renders the data
    recovery approach against TorrentLocker ineffective.

                                                              The Rise of MBR Ransomware   211
     Analyzing the Petya Ransomware
                   In this section, we’ll focus on the technical analysis of the Petya hard drive
                   encryption functionality. Petya arrives on the victim’s computer in the form
                   of the malicious dropper, which, once executed, unpacks the payload con-
                   taining the main ransomware functionality implemented as a DLL file.

                   Acquiring Administrator Privileges
                   While most ransomware doesn’t require administrator privileges, Petya does
                   in order to be able to write data directly onto the hard drive of the victim’s
                   system. Without this privilege, Petya wouldn’t be able to modify the contents
                   of the MBR and install the malicious bootloader. The dropper executable file
                   contains a manifest specifying that the executable can be launched only with
                   administrator privileges. Listing 13-1 shows an excerpt from the dropper’s
                   manifest.

                   <trustInfo xmlns="urn:schemas-microsoft-com:asm.v2">
                    <security>
                     <requestedPrivileges>
                     <requestedExecutionLevel level="requireAdministrator" uiAccess="false"/>
                     </requestedPrivileges>
                    </security>
                   </trustInfo>

Listing 13-1: An excerpt from the Petya dropper’s manifest

                        The security section contains the parameter requestedExecutionLevel,
                   set to requireAdministrator . When a user attempts to execute the dropper,
                   the OS loader checks the user’s current execution level. If it is lower than
                   Administrator, the OS displays a dialog asking whether the user wants to run
                   the program with elevated privileges (if the user’s account has administrative
                   privileges) or prompts for the administrator’s credentials (if the user account
                   doesn’t have administrative privileges). If the user decides not to grant the
                   application administrator privileges, the dropper won’t be launched and no
                   damage will be done to the system. If the user is lured into executing the
                   dropper with administrator privileges, the malware proceeds to infect the
                   system.
                        Petya infects the system in two steps. In step 1, it gathers information on
                   the target system, determines the type of partitioning used on the hard drive,
                   generates its configuration information (encryption keys and ransomware
                   message), constructs the malicious bootloader for step 2, and then infects the
                   computer’s MBR with the malicious bootloader and initiates a system reboot.
                        After the reboot the malicious bootloader is executed, triggering
                   the second step of the infection process. The malicious MBR bootloader
                   encrypts the hard drive sectors that host the MFT and then reboots machine
                   one more time. After the second reboot, the malicious bootloader shows the
                   ransom message generated in step 1.
                        We’ll look at these steps in more detail in the following sections.

212   Chapter 13
Infecting the Hard Drive (Step 1)
Petya starts its infection of the MBR by getting the name of the file that
represents the physical hard drive. On Windows operating systems, you
can directly access the hard drive by executing the CreateFile API and
passing it the string '\\.\PhysicalDriveX' as a filename parameter, where
X corresponds to the index of the hard drive in the system. In the case of
a system with a single hard drive, the filename of the physical hard drive
is '\\.\PhysicalDrive0'. However, if there is more than one hard drive, the
malware uses the index of the drive from which the system is booted.
     Petya accomplishes this by sending the special request IOCTL_VOLUME_GET​
_VOLUME_DISK_EXTENTS to the NTFS volume that contains the current instance
of Windows, which it gets by executing the DeviceIoControl API. This request
returns an array of structures that describe all the hard drives used to host
the NTFS volume. More specifically, this request returns an array of NTFS
volume extents. A volume extent is a contiguous run of sectors on one disk.
For instance, a single NTFS volume might be hosted on two hard drives, in
which case this request will return an array of two extents. The layout of the
returned structures is shown in Listing 13-2.

typedef struct _DISK_EXTENT {
u DWORD         DiskNumber;
v LARGE_INTEGER StartingOffset;
w LARGE_INTEGER ExtentLength;
} DISK_EXTENT, *PDISK_EXTENT;

Listing 13-2: The DISK_EXTENT layout

    The StartingOffset field v describes the position of the volume extent on
the hard drive as the offset from the beginning of the hard drive in sectors,
and ExtentLength w provides its length. The DiskNumber parameter u contains
the index of the corresponding hard drive in the system, which also corre-
sponds to the index in the filename for the hard drive. The malware uses the
DiskNumber field of the very first structure in the returned array of the volume
extents to construct the filename and access the hard drive.
    After constructing the filename for the physical hard drive, the mal-
ware determines the partitioning scheme of the hard drive with the request
IOCTL_DISK_GET_PARTITION_INFO_EX, sent to the hard drive.
    Petya is capable of infecting hard drives with either MBR-based parti-
tions or GUID Partition Table (GPT) partitions (the layout of the GPT
partition is described in Chapter 14). First we’ll look at how Petya infects
MBR-based hard drives, and then we’ll describe the particulars of the GPT-
based disk infection.

Infecting the MBR Hard Drive
To infect an MBR partitioning scheme, Petya first reads the MBR to calcu-
late the amount of free disk space between the beginning of the hard drive
and the beginning of the very first partition. This space is used to store the
malicious bootloader and its configuration information. Petya retrieves the

                                                       The Rise of MBR Ransomware   213
                   starting sector number of the very first partition; if it starts at a sector with
                   an index less than 60 (0x3C), it means there’s not enough space on the
                   hard drive, so Petya stops the infection process and exits.
                       If the index is 60 or more, there is enough space and the malware pro-
                   ceeds with constructing the malicious bootloader, which consists of two
                   components: the malicious MBR code and the second-stage bootloader.
                   Figure 13-2 shows the layout of the first 57 sectors of the hard drive after
                   infection.

                                                                                                          Key validation
                                                                         Unused space

                                                                                         Configuration

                                                                                                                                        Encrypted
                                                                                                                            encrypted
                                                                                                                             Original
                       Infected

                                                                                                                                         counter
                                                                                                                                         clusters
                                      Encrypted        Malicious

                                                                                                              sector
                         MBR

                                                                                                                              MBR
                                                                                             data
                                       sectors         bootloader

                                                                                                                                            
                   0              1               34                51                  54               55                56       57         58

Figure 13-2: Layout of the hard drive sectors with Petya infection for MBR disks

                        To construct the malicious MBR, Petya combines the partition table
                   of the original MBR with the malicious MBR code, writing the result to
                   the very first sector of the hard drive  in place of the original MBR. The
                   original MBR is XORed with a fixed byte value of 0x37, and the result is
                   written to sector 56 z.
                        The second-stage malicious bootloader occupies 17 contiguous sectors
                   (0x2E00 bytes) of the disk space and is written on the hard drive in sectors
                   34 to 50 . The malware also obfuscates sectors 1 to 33 v by XORing its
                   contents with the fixed byte value 0x37.
                        The configuration data for the malicious bootloader is stored in sec-
                   tor 54 x and is used by the bootloader in step 2 of the infection process.
                   We’ll dive into the details of the configuration data structure in “Encrypting
                   with the Malicious Bootloader Configuration Data” on page 215.
                        Petya also uses sector 55 y to store a 512-byte buffer filled with
                   0x37 byte values, which will be used to validate the victim-provided pass-
                   word and unlock the hard drive, as we’ll discuss in “Displaying the Ransom
                   Message” on page 224.
                        With that, the infection of the MBR is complete. Although in Figure 13-2
                   sector 57  is marked “Encrypted clusters counter,” this isn’t used at this
                   stage of infection. It will be used by the malicious bootloader code in step 2
                   to store the number of the MFT’s encrypted clusters.

                   Infecting the GPT Hard Drive
                   The GPT hard drive infection process is similar to MBR hard drive infection,
                   but with a few extra steps. The first additional step encrypts the backup copy
                   of the GPT header to make system recovery more difficult. The GPT header
                   holds information about the layout of the GPT hard drive, and this backup
                   copy enables the system to recover the GPT header in the event that it’s cor-
                   rupted or invalid.

214   Chapter 13
    To find the backup GPT header, Petya reads the sector at offset 1 from
the hard drive that contains the GPT header, then reaches into the field
that contains the offset of the backup copy.
    Once it has the location, Petya obfuscates the backup GPT header, as
well as the 32 sectors preceding it, by XORing them with the fixed constant
0x37, as shown in Figure 13-3 . These sectors contain the backup GPT.

                                                                                backup GPT
    Petya-infected

                                                                                 Encrypted

                                                                                  header
    sectors (MBR,                                                  Encrypted
                                Filesystem data
     bootloader,                                                  backup GPT
    configuration)

                                                                                    
0                    58                                    N-32                N

Figure 13-3: Layout of the hard drive sectors with Petya infection for GPT disks

     Since the layout of the hard drive is different for a GPT partitioning
scheme than for MBR partitioning, Petya cannot simply reuse the GPT par-
tition table as is to construct the malicious MBR (as it does in the case of
the MBR hard drive). Instead, it manually constructs an entry in the parti-
tion table of the infected MBR that represents the whole hard drive.
     Apart from these points, the infection of a GPT hard drive is exactly
the same as that of MBR disks. However, it’s important to note that this
approach won’t work on systems with UEFI boot enabled. As you’ll learn
in Chapter 14, in a UEFI boot process, UEFI code (rather than the MBR
code) is responsible for booting the system. If Petya is executed on a UEFI
system, it will simply render the system unbootable, because the UEFI
loader won’t be able to read the encrypted GPT or its backup copy to
determine the location of the OS loader.
     The Petya infection will work on hybrid systems that use legacy BIOS
boot code and a GPT partitioning scheme—for instance, when the BIOS
Compatibility Support Mode is enabled—since on such systems the MBR
sector is still used to store the first-stage system bootloader code but is
modified to recognize GPT partitions.

Encrypting with the Malicious Bootloader Configuration Data
We mentioned that during step 1 of the infection process, Petya writes the
bootloader configuration data to sector 54 of the hard drive. The boot-
loader uses this data to complete the encryption of the hard drive’s sectors.
Let’s look how this data is generated.
    The configuration data structure is shown in Listing 13-3.

typedef struct _PETYA_CONFIGURATION_DATA {
 BYTE EncryptionStatus;
 BYTE SalsaKey[32];
 BYTE SalsaNonce[8];
  CHAR RansomURLs[128];

                                                               The Rise of MBR Ransomware   215
                     BYTE RansomCode[343];
                   } PETYA_CONFIGURATION_DATA, * PPETYA_CONFIGURATION_DATA;

Listing 13-3: Petya configuration data layout

                       The structure starts with a flag  indicating whether the MFT of the
                   hard drive is encrypted or not. During step 1 of the infection process, the
                   malware clears this flag, since no MFT encryption takes place at this stage.
                   This flag is set by the malicious bootloader in step 2, once it starts the MFT
                   encryption. Following the flag are the encryption key  and initialization
                   value (IV)  used for encrypting the MFT, which we’ll go over next.

                   Generating Cryptographic Keys
                   To implement cryptographic functionality, Petya uses the public library
                   mbedtls (“embedded TLS”), intended for use in embedded solutions. This
                   tiny library implements a wide variety of modern cryptographic algorithms
                   for symmetric and asymmetric data encryption, hash functions, and more.
                   Its small memory footprint is ideal for the limited resources available at the
                   stage of the malicious bootloader where MFT encryption takes place.
                        One of Petya’s most interesting features is that it uses the rare Salsa20
                   cipher to encrypt the MFT. This cipher generates a stream of key characters
                   that are XORed with plaintext to obtain a ciphertext, and it takes as input
                   a 256-bit key and a 64-bit initialization value. For the public key encryption
                   algorithm, Petya uses ECC. Figure 13-4 shows a high-level view of the pro-
                   cess for generating cryptographic keys.
                        To generate the Salsa20 encryption key, the malware first generates a
                   password—a 16-byte random string of alphanumerical characters . Petya
                   then expands this string into a 32-byte Salsa20 key  using the algorithm
                   presented in Listing 13-4, which encrypts the content of MFT sectors on the
                   hard drive. The malware also generates a 64-bit nonce (initialization value)
                   for Salsa20 using a pseudorandom-number generator.

                   do
                   {
                     config_data->salsa20_key[2 * i] = password[i] + 0x7A;
                     config_data->salsa20_key[2 * i + 1] = 2 * password[i];
                     ++i;
                   } while ( i < 0x10 );

Listing 13-4: Expanding the password into a Salsa20 encryption key

                       Next, Petya generates the key for the ransom message as a string to be
                   displayed on the ransom page. A victim must provide this ransom key to the
                   C&C server in order to get the password to decrypt the MFT.

216   Chapter 13
                      Generating the Ransom Key
                      Only the attacker should be able to retrieve the password from the ransom
                      key, so in order to protect it, Petya uses the ECC public key encryption
                      scheme, which is embedded in the malware. We will refer to this public key
                      as the C&C public key ecc_cc_public_key.

 Derive 256-bit key
    for Salsa20
      
                            Generate 16-character
                                                                   Get ransom key from victim
                                 password

                                                                  Get encrypted password and
                         Generate ephemeral ECC keys:            ephemeral key from ransom key:
                            ecc_ephemeral_pub and           ?           ecc_ephemeral_pub,
                               ecc_ephemeral_priv                      encrypted_password =
                                                                    base58_decode(ransom_key)

                            Compute shared secret                    Compute shared secret
                               using ECDHE:                             using ECDHE:
                                 shared_secret =            ?            shared_secret =
                           ECDHE(ecc_ephemeral_priv,                ECDHE(ecc_ephemeral_pub,
                               ecc_cc_public_key)                      ecc_cc_private_key)

                              Compute AES key:                         Compute AES key:
                                   aes_key =                ?               aes_key =
                         SHA512(shared_secret) [0:32]             SHA512(shared_secret) [0:32]

                                                                       Decrypt password:
                              Encrypt password:
                                                                            Password =
                             encrypted_password =
                                                                 EAS_DECRYPT(encrypted_password)
                           AES(aes_key XOR password)
                                                                           XOR aes_key

                                                                        Petya C&C Server
                             Compute ransom key:
                                  ransom_key =
                       base58_encode(ecc_ephemeral_pub,
                              encrypted_password)

                               Victim computer

Figure 13-4: Generating an encryption key

                                                                          The Rise of MBR Ransomware   217
                        First, Petya generates a temporary ECC key pair , known as an ephem-
                   eral key, on the victim’s system to establish secure communication with the
                   C&C server: ecc_ephemeral_pub and ecc_ephemeral_priv.
                        Next, it generates a shared secret (that is, a shared key) using the ECC
                   Diffie-Hellman key agreement algorithm . This algorithm allows two
                   parties to share a secret known only to them, and any adversary eavesdrop-
                   ping would not be able to deduce it. On the victim’s computer, the shared
                   secret is computed as shared_secret = ECDHE(ecc_ephemeral_priv, ecc_cc_public
                   _key), where ECDHE is the Diffie-Hellman key agreement routine. It takes two
                   parameters: the private ephemeral key of the victim and the public C&C
                   key embedded in the malware. The same secret is computed by the attacker
                   as shared_secret = ECDHE(ecc_ephemeral_pub, ecc_cc_private_key), where it takes
                   its own private C&C key and the victim’s public ephemeral key.
                        Once the shared_secret is generated, the malware computes its hash
                   value with the SHA512 hashing algorithm and uses the first 32 bytes of the
                   hash as an AES key : aes_key = SHA512(shared_secret)[0:32].
                        Then it encrypts the password  as follows, using the aes_key it just
                   derived: encrypted_password = AES(aes_key XOR password). As you can see,
                   before encrypting the password, the malware XORs the password with
                   the AES key.
                        Finally, Petya encodes the ephemeral public key and the encrypted
                   password using a base58 encoding algorithm to obtain an ASCII string that
                   is used as the ransom key : ransom_key = base58_encode(ecc_ephemeral_pub,
                   encrypted_password).

                   Verifying the Ransom Key
                   If the user pays the ransom, the attacker provides the password to decrypt the
                   data, so let’s look at how the attacker validates the ransom key to recover the
                   victim’s password.
                         Once the victim sends the ransom key to the attackers, Petya decodes
                   it using a base58 decoding algorithm and obtains the victim’s public ephem-
                   eral key and encrypted password: ecc_ephemeral_pub, encrypted_password =
                   base58_decode(ransom_key) .
                        The attacker then computes the shared secret using the ECDHE key
                   agreement protocol as described in the previous section: shared_secret =
                   ECDHE(ecc_ephemeral_pub, ecc_cc_private_key) .
                        With the shared secret, the attacker can derive the AES encryption key
                   by computing the SHA512 hash of the shared secret the same way as before:
                   aes_key = SHA512(shared_secret)[0:32] .
                        Once the AES key is computed, the attacker can decrypt the password
                   and get the victim’s password as password=AES_DECRYPT(encrypted_password) XOR
                   aes_key.
                        The attacker has now obtained the victim’s password from the ransom
                   key, which no one else can do without the attacker’s private key.

218   Chapter 13
Generating Ransom URLs
As the final piece of configuration information for the second stage of
the bootloader, Petya generates ransom URLs to be shown in the ransom
message that tells the victim how to pay the ransom and recover the sys-
tem’s data. The malware randomly generates an alphanumerical victim ID,
and then combines it with the malicious domain name to get URLs in the
form http://<malicious_domain>/<victim_id>. Figure 13-5 shows a couple of
example URLs.

Figure 13-5: Petya configuration data with ransom URLs

    You can see that the top-level domain name is .onion, which implies that
the malware uses TOR to generate the URLs.

Crashing the System
Once the malicious bootloader and its configuration data are written onto
the hard drive, Petya crashes the system and forces a reboot so that it can
execute the malicious bootloader and complete the infection of the system.
Listing 13-5 shows how this is done.

void __cdecl RebootSystem()
{
  hProcess = GetCurrentProcess();
  if ( OpenProcessToken(hProcess, 0x28u, &TokenHandle) )
  {
    LookupPrivilegeValueA(0, "SeShutdownPrivilege", NewState.Privileges);
    NewState.PrivilegeCount = 1;
    NewState.Privileges[0].Attributes = 2;
   AdjustTokenPrivileges(TokenHandle, 0, &NewState, 0, 0, 0);
    if ( !GetLastError() )
    {
      v1 = GetModuleHandleA("NTDLL.DLL");
      NtRaiseHardError = GetProcAddress(v1, "NtRaiseHardError");
     (NtRaiseHardError)(0xC0000350, 0, 0, 0, 6, &v4);
    }
  }
}

Listing 13-5: The Petya routine to force a system restart

                                                            The Rise of MBR Ransomware   219
                          Petya executes the system API routine NtRaiseHardError  to crash the
                     system, which notifies the system of a serious error preventing normal oper-
                     ation and requiring a reboot to avoid data loss or damage.
                          To execute this routine, the calling process needs the privilege
                     SeShutdownPrivilege, which is easily obtained given that Petya is launched
                     with administrator account rights. As shown in Listing 13-5, before
                     executing NtRaiseHardError, Petya adjusts the current privileges by calling
                     AdjustTokenPrivileges .

                     Encrypting the MFT (Step 2)
                     Now let’s focus on the second step of the infection process. The bootloader
                     consists of two components: a malicious MBR and the second-stage boot-
                     loader (which we’ll refer to as the malicious bootloader in this section).
                     The only purpose of the malicious MBR code is to load the second-stage
                     bootloader into memory and execute it, so we’ll skip an analysis of the mali-
                     cious MBR. The second-stage bootloader implements the most interesting
                     functionality of the ransomware.

                     Finding Available Disks
                     Once the bootloader receives control, it must gather information on the
                     available disks in the system. To do so, it relies on the well-known INT 13h
                     service, as shown in Listing 13-6.

                    mov      dl, [bp+disk_no]
                    mov      ah, 8
                     int      13h

Listing 13-6: Using INT 13h to check the availability of disks in system

                          To check for the availability and size of the hard drives, the malware
                     stores the index numbers in the dl register  and then executes INT 13h.
                     The disks are assigned index numbers sequentially, so Petya finds hard drives
                     in the system by checking disk indexes from 0 through 15. Next, it moves the
                     value 8 into the ah register , which denotes the “get current drive param-
                     eters” function of INT 13h. Then the malware executes INT 13h. After execu-
                     tion, if ah is set to 0, the specified disk is present in the system and the dx and
                     cx registers contain disk size information. If the ah register isn’t equal to 0, it
                     means that the disk with the given index doesn’t exist in the system.
                          Next, the malicious bootloader reads the configuration data from
                     sector 54 and checks whether the MFT of the hard drives is encrypted by
                     looking at the very first byte in the read buffer, which corresponds to the
                     EncryptionStatus field in the configuration data. If the flag is clear—meaning
                     that the contents of the MFT aren’t encrypted—the malware proceeds to
                     encrypt the MFT of the hard drives available in the system, completing the
                     infection process. If the MFT is already encrypted, the malicious bootloader
                     shows the ransom message to the victim. We’ll discuss the ransom message
                     shortly, but first, we’ll focus on how the malicious bootloader performs the
                     encryption.

220   Chapter 13
Encrypting the MFT
If the EncryptionStatus flag of the configuration data is clear (that is, set
to 0), the malware reads the Salsa20 encryption key and the IV from the
SalsaKey and SalsaNonce parameters, respectively, and uses them to encrypt
the hard drive data. The bootloader then sets the EncryptionStatus flag and
destroys SalsaKey in the section 54 configuration data to prevent decryption
of the data.
     Next, the bootloader reads sector 55 of the infected hard drive, which
will later be used to validate the password entered by the victim. At this
point, this sector occupies 0x37 bytes. Petya encrypts this sector with the
Salsa20 algorithm using the key and the IV read from the configuration
data, then writes the result back into sector 55.
     Now the malicious bootloader is ready to encrypt the MFT of the hard
drives in the system. The encryption process extends the duration of the
boot process considerably, so in order to avoid arousing suspicion, Petya
displays a fake chkdsk message, as shown in Figure 13-6. The system utility
chkdsk is used to repair filesystems on the hard drive, and it’s not unusual
to see a chkdsk message after a system crash. With the fake message on the
screen, the malware runs the following algorithm for each hard drive avail-
able in the system.

Figure 13-6: A fake chkdsk message

     First, the malware reads the MBR of the hard drive and iterates through
the MBR partition table, looking for available partitions. It checks the param-
eter describing the type of the filesystem used in the partition and skips all
the partitions with a type value other than 0x07 (indicating that the partition
contains an NTFS volume), 0xEE, and 0xEF (indicating that the hard drive
has a GPT layout). If the hard drive does have a GPT layout, the malicious
boot code obtains the location of the partition from the GPT partition table.

Parsing the GPT Partition Table
In the case of GPT partition tables, the malware takes an additional step
to find partitions on the hard drive: it reads the GPT partition table from
the hard drive, starting at the third sector. Each entry in the GPT partition
table is 128 bytes long and is structured as shown in Listing 13-7.

                                                      The Rise of MBR Ransomware   221
                   typedef struct _GPT_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY {
                     BYTE PartitionTypeGuid[16];
                     BYTE PartitionUniqueGuid[16];
                     QWORD PartitionStartLba;
                     QWORD PartitionLastLba;
                     QWORD PartitionAttributes;
                     BYTE PartitionName[72];
                   } GPT_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY, *PGPT_PARTITION_TABLE_ENTRY;

Listing 13-7: Layout of the GPT partition table entry

                        The very first field, PartitionTypeGuid, is an array of 16 bytes containing
                   the identifier of the partition type, which determines what kind of data the
                   partition is intended to store. The malicious boot code checks this field to
                   filter out all partition entries except those with a PartitionTypeGuid field equal
                   to {EBD0A0A2-B9E5-4433-87C0-68B6B72699C7}; this type is known as a basic data
                   partition for the Windows operating system, used to store NTFS volumes.
                   This is exactly what the malware is interested in.
                        If the malicious boot code identifies a basic data partition, it reads the
                   PartitionStartLba and PartitionLastLba fields that contain the address of the
                   very first and last sectors of the partition, respectively, to determine the loca-
                   tion of the target partition on the hard drive. Once the Petya boot code has
                   the coordinates of the partition, it proceeds to the next step.

                   Locating the MFT
                   To locate the MFT, the malware reads the VBR of the selected parti-
                   tions from the hard drive (the layout of the VBR is described in detail in
                   Chapter 5). The parameters of the filesystem are described in the BIOS
                   parameter block (BPB), the structure of which is shown in Listing 13-8.

                   typedef struct _BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS {
                     WORD SectorSize;
                    BYTE SectorsPerCluster;
                     WORD ReservedSectors;
                     BYTE Reserved[5];
                     BYTE MediaId;
                     BYTE Reserved2[2];
                     WORD SectorsPerTrack;
                     WORD NumberOfHeads;
                     DWORD HiddenSectors;
                     BYTE Reserved3[8];
                     QWORD NumberOfSectors;
                    QWORD MFTStartingCluster;
                     QWORD MFTMirrorStartingCluster;
                     BYTE ClusterPerFileRecord;
                     BYTE Reserved4[3];
                     BYTE ClusterPerIndexBuffer;
                     BYTE Reserved5[3];
                     QWORD NTFSSerial;

222   Chapter 13
  BYTE Reserved6[4];
} BIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS, *PBIOS_PARAMETER_BLOCK_NTFS;

Listing 13-8: Layout of the BIOS parameter block in the VBR

     The malicious boot code checks the MFTStartingCluster , which speci-
fies the location of the MFT as an offset from the beginning of the parti-
tion in clusters. A cluster is the minimal addressable unit of storage in the
filesystem. The size of the cluster may change from system to system and
is specified in the SectorsPerCluster field , which is also checked by the
malware. For instance, the most typical value for this field for NTFS is 8,
making it 4,096 bytes given that the sector size is 512 bytes. Using these
two fields, Petya computes the offset of the MFT from the beginning of
the partition.

Parsing the MFT
The MFT is laid out as an array of items, each describing a particular file or
directory. We won’t go into the details of the MFT format, as it is complex
enough to warrant at least a chapter of its own. Instead, we’ll provide only
the information necessary for understanding Petya’s malicious bootloader.
     At this point, the malware has the starting address of the MFT from
MFTStartingCluster, but to get the exact locations, Petya also needs to know
the size of the MFT. Moreover, the MFT may not be stored as a contiguous
run of sectors on the hard drive, but rather partitioned into small runs of
sectors spread out over the hard drive. To get information on the exact loca-
tion of the MFT, the malicious code reads and parses the special metadata
file $MFT, found in the NTFS metadata files that correspond to the first
16 records of the MFT.
     Each of these files contains essential information for ensuring the
correct operation of the filesystem:
    $MFT Self-reference to the MFT, containing information on the size
    and location of the MFT on the hard drive
    $MFTMirr Mirror of the MFT containing copies of the first 16 records
    $LogFile The logfile for the volume with the transaction data
    $BadClus A list of all the corrupted clusters on the volume marked
    as “bad”
    As you can see, the very first metadata file, $MFT, contains all the
information necessary for determining the exact location of the MFT on
the hard drive. The malicious code parses this file to get the location of the
contiguous runs of sectors, then encrypts them using the Salsa20 cipher.
    Once all the MFTs on the hard drives present in the system are
encrypted, the infection process is complete, and the malware executes
INT 19h to start the boot process all over again. This interrupt handler
makes the BIOS boot code load the MBR of the bootable hard drive in
memory and execute its code. This time, when the malicious boot code

                                                              The Rise of MBR Ransomware   223
                   reads the configuration information from sector 54, the EncryptionStatus
                   flag is set to 1, indicating that the MFT encryption is complete, and the
                   malware proceeds with displaying the ransom message.

                   Displaying the Ransom Message
                   The ransom message displayed by the boot code is shown in Figure 13-7.

Figure 13-7: The Petya ransom message

                        The message informs the victim that their system has been compro-
                   mised by Petya ransomware and that the hard disk is encrypted with a
                   military-grade encryption algorithm. It then provides instructions for
                   unlocking the data. You can see the list of URLs that Petya generated in
                   the first step of the infection process. The pages at these URLs contain
                   further instructions for the victim. The malware also displays the ransom
                   code the user needs to enter to get the password for decryption.
                        The malware generates the Salsa20 key from the password entered on
                   the ransom page and attempts to decrypt sector 55, used for the key veri-
                   fication. If the password is correct, the decryption of sector 55 results in a
                   buffer occupying 0x37 bytes. In this case, the ransomware accepts the pass-
                   word, decrypts the MFTs, and restores the original MBR. If the password is
                   incorrect, the malware shows the message "Incorrect key! Please try again."

                   Wrapping Up: Final Thoughts on Petya
                   This concludes our discussion of the Petya infection process, but we have a
                   few final notes on interesting aspects of its approach.
                       First, unlike other ransomware that encrypts user files, Petya works with
                   the hard drive in low-level mode, reading and writing raw data, and thus
                   requires administrator privileges. However, it doesn’t exploit any local privi-
                   lege escalation (LPE) vulnerabilities, instead relying on manifest informa-
                   tion embedded in the malware, as discussed earlier in this chapter. Thus,

224   Chapter 13
       if a user chooses not to grant the application administrator privileges, the
       malware won’t be launched due to the manifest requirements. And even if
       it were executed without administrative privileges, Petya couldn’t open the
       handle for the hard drive device and so couldn’t do any harm. In that case,
       the CreateFile routine that Petya used to obtain the handle for the hard
       drive would return a value of INVALID_HANDLE, resulting in an error.
            To circumvent this limitation, Petya was often distributed with another
       ransomware: Mischa. Mischa is an ordinary ransomware that encrypts user
       files rather than the hard drive and doesn’t require administrator access
       rights to the system. If Petya failed to get administrator privileges, the mali-
       cious dropper executed Mischa instead. Discussions on Mischa are outside
       the scope of this chapter.
            Second, as already discussed, rather than encrypting the contents of
       the files on the hard drive, Petya encrypts the metadata stored in the MFT
       so that the filesystem can’t get information on the file locations and attri-
       butes. Thus, even though the file contents aren’t encrypted, victims still
       cannot access their files. This means the contents of the files may poten-
       tially be recovered through data recovery tools and methods. Such tools are
       frequently used in forensic analysis to recover information from corrupted
       images.
            Finally, as you may already have gleaned, Petya is quite a complex piece
       of malware written by skilled developers. The functionality it implements
       implies a deep understanding of filesystems and bootloaders. This malware
       marks another step in ransomware evolution.

Analyzing the Satana Ransomware
       Now, let’s take a look at another example of ransomware that targets the
       boot process: Satana. Whereas Petya infects only the hard drive’s MBR,
       Satana also encrypts the victim’s files.
            Moreover, the MBR isn’t Satana’s main infection vector. We’ll demon-
       strate that the malicious bootloader code written in place of the original
       MBR contains flaws and was likely under development at the time of Satana’s
       distribution.
            In this section, we’ll focus only on the MBR infection functionality,
       since user-mode file encryption functionality is beyond the scope of this
       chapter.

       The Satana Dropper
       Let’s start with the Satana dropper. Once unpacked in memory, the mal-
       ware copies itself into a file with a random name in the TEMP directory
       and executes the file. Satana requires administrator privileges to infect
       the MBR and, like Petya, doesn’t exploit any LPE vulnerabilities to gain
       elevated privileges. Instead, it checks the privilege level of its process
       using the setupapi!IsUserAdmin API routine, which in turn checks whether
       the security token of the current process is a member of the administra-
       tor group. If the dropper doesn’t have the privileges to infect the system,

                                                              The Rise of MBR Ransomware   225
                   it executes the copy in the TEMP folder and attempts to execute the mal-
                   ware under the administrator account by using the ShellExecute API rou-
                   tine with a runas parameter, which displays a message asking the victim to
                   grant the application administrator privileges. If the user chooses No, the
                   malware calls ShellExecute with the same parameters over and over again
                   until the user chooses Yes or kills the malicious process.

                   The MBR Infection
                   Once Satana gains administrator privileges, it proceeds with infecting the
                   hard drive. Throughout the infection process, the malware extracts several
                   components from the dropper’s image and writes them to the hard drive.
                   Figure 13-8 shows the layout of the first sectors of a hard drive infected
                   by Satana. In this section, we’ll describe each element of the MBR infec-
                   tion in detail. We assume that sector indexing starts with 0, to simplify the
                   explanation.

                                                        encryption
                                  encrypted
                       Infected

                                   Original

                                              Ransom                 Code page
                         MBR

                                                          MBR
                                    MBR

                                              message      key         data

                                                                         
                   0              1       2             6        7               15

Figure 13-8: Layout of the hard drive with Satana infection

                       To access the hard drive in low-level mode, the malware uses the same
                   APIs as Petya: CreateFile, DeviceIoControl, WriteFile, and SetFilePointer.
                   To open a handle to a file representing the hard drive, Satana uses the
                   CreateFile routine with the string '\\.\PhysicalDrive0' as a FileName argu-
                   ment. Then the dropper executes the DeviceIoControl routine with the
                   IOCTL_DISK_GET_DRIVE_GEOMETRY parameter to get the hard drive parameters,
                   such as the total number of sectors and the sector size in bytes.

        Note       The method of using '\\.\PhysicalDrive0' to obtain a handle to the hard drive isn’t
                   100 percent reliable, as it assumes that the bootable hard drive is always at index 0.
                   Though this is the case for most systems, it is not guaranteed. In this regard, Petya
                   is more careful, as it determines the index of the current hard drive dynamically at
                   infection time, while Satana uses a hardcoded value.

                        Before proceeding with the infection of the MBR, Satana ensures there
                   is enough free space to store the malicious bootloader components on the
                   hard drive between the MBR and the first partition by enumerating the
                   partitions and locating the first partition and its starting sector. If there are
                   fewer than 15 sectors between the MBR and the first partition, Satana quits
                   the infection process and continues with encrypting user files. Otherwise, it
                   attempts to infect the MBR.

226   Chapter 13
     First, Satana is supposed to write a buffer with user font information in
sectors starting at sector 7 y. The buffer can take up to eight sectors of the
hard drive. The information written to these sectors is intended to be used by
the malicious bootloader to display the ransom message in a language other
than the default (English). However, we haven’t seen it used in the Satana
samples we’ve analyzed. The malware didn’t write anything at sector 7 and
therefore used the default English language to display the ransom message.
     Satana writes the ransom message to display to the user at boot time in
sectors 2 to 5 w, written in plaintext without encryption.
     Then the malware reads the original MBR from the very first sector
and encrypts it by XORing with a 512-byte key, generated at the stage of
infection using a pseudorandom-number generator. Satana fills a buffer of
512 bytes with random data and XORs every byte of the MBR with the cor-
responding byte in the key buffer. Once the MBR is encrypted, the malware
stores the encryption key in sector 6 x and the encrypted original MBR in
sector 1 v of the hard drive.
     Finally, the malware writes the malicious MBR to the very first sector of
the hard drive u. Before overwriting the MBR, Satana encrypts the infected
MBR by XORing it with a randomly generated byte value and writes the key
at the end of the infected MBR so that the malicious MBR code can use this
key to decrypt itself at system bootup.
     This step completes the MBR infection process, and Satana continues
with user file encryption. To trigger the execution of the malicious MBR,
Satana reboots the computer shortly after encrypting the user files.

Dropper Debug Information
Before continuing our analysis of the malicious MBR code, we’d like to men-
tion a particularly interesting aspect of the dropper. The samples of Satana
we analyzed contained a lot of verbose debug information documenting the
code implemented in the dropper, similar to our findings from the Carberp
trojan discussed in Chapter 11.
     This presence of debug information in the dropper reinforces the
notion that Satana was in development when we were analyzing it. Satana
uses the OutputDebugString API to output debugging messages, which you
can see in the debugger or by using other tools that intercept debug output.
Listing 13-9 shows an excerpt from the malware’s debug trace intercepted
with the DebugMonitor tool.

00000042  27.19946671   [2760] Engine: Try to open drive \\.\PHYSICALDRIVE0
00000043   27.19972229   [2760] Engine: \\.\PHYSICALDRIVE0 opened
00000044  27.21799088   [2760] Total sectors:83875365
00000045   27.21813583   [2760] SectorSize: 512
00000046   27.21813583   [2760] ZeroSecNum:15
00000047   27.21813583   [2760] FirstZero:2
00000048   27.21813583   [2760] LastZero:15
00000049 w 27.21823502   [2760] XOR key=0x91
00000050   27.21839333   [2760] Message len: 1719
00000051 x 27.21941948   [2760] Message written to Disk
00000052   27.22294235   [2760] Try write MBR to Disk: 0

                                                     The Rise of MBR Ransomware   227
                   00000053  27.22335243      [2760] Random sector written
                   00000054   27.22373199      [2760] DAY: 2
                   00000055  27.22402954      [2760] MBR written to Disk# 0

Listing 13-9: Debug output of the Satana dropper

                       You can see in this output that the malware tries to access '\\.\
                   PhysicalDrive0'  to read and write sectors from and to the hard drive.
                   At , Satana obtains the parameters of the hard drive: size and total num-
                   ber of sectors. At x, it writes the ransom message on the hard drive and
                   then generates a key to encrypt the infected MBR w. It stores the encryp-
                   tion key  and then overwrites the MBR with the infected code . These
                   messages reveal the malware’s functionality without requiring us to do
                   hours of reverse-engineering work.

                   The Satana Malicious MBR
                   Satana’s malicious bootloader is relatively small and simple compared to
                   Petya’s. The malicious code is contained in a single sector and implements
                   the functionality for displaying the ransom message.
                       Once the system boots, the malicious MBR code decrypts itself by read-
                   ing the decryption key from the end of the MBR sectors and XORing the
                   encrypted MBR code with the key. Listing 13-10 shows the malicious MBR
                   decryptor code.

                   seg000:0000    pushad
                   seg000:0002    cld
                   seg000:0003  mov      si, 7C00h
                   seg000:0006    mov     di, 600h
                   seg000:0009    mov     cx, 200h
                   seg000:000C v rep movsb
                   seg000:000E    mov     bx, 7C2Ch
                   seg000:0011    sub     bx, 7C00h
                   seg000:0015    add     bx, 600h
                   seg000:0019    mov     cx, bx
                   seg000:001B decr_loop:
                   seg000:001B    mov     al, [bx]
                   seg000:001D w xor      al, byte ptr ds:xor_key
                   seg000:0021    mov     [bx], al
                   seg000:0023    inc     bx
                   seg000:0024    cmp     bx, 7FBh
                   seg000:0028    jnz     short loc_1B
                   seg000:002A x jmp      cx

Listing 13-10: Satana’s malicious MBR decryptor

                        First, the decryptor initializes the si, di, and cx registers  to copy the
                   encrypted MBR code to another memory location, and then it decrypts
                   the copied code by XORing it with the byte value w. Once the decryption
                   is done, the instruction at x transfers the execution flow to the decrypted
                   code (address in cx).

228   Chapter 13
     If you look closely at the line copying the encrypted MBR code to
another memory location, you may spot a bug: the copying is done by the
rep movsb instruction v, which copies the number of bytes specified by the cx
register from the source buffer, whose address is stored in ds:si, to the desti-
nation buffer, whose address is specified in the es:di registers. However, the
segment registers ds and es aren’t initialized in the MBR code. Instead, the
malware assumes that the ds (data segment) register has exactly the same
value as the cs (code segment) register (that is, that ds:si should be trans-
lated to cs:7c00h, which corresponds to the address of the MBR in memory).
However, this isn’t always true: the ds register may contain a different value.
If that is the case, the malware will attempt to copy the wrong bytes from the
memory at the ds:si address—which is completely different from the loca-
tion of the MBR. To fix the bug, the ds and es registers need to be initialized
with the value of the cs register, 0x0000 (since the MBR is loaded at address
0000:7c00h, the cs register contains 0x0000).

                The Pre-MBR E x ecu t ion E n v ironme nt

    The very first code executed after the CPU comes out of reset is not the MBR
    code but BIOS code that performs basic system initialization. The contents
    of the segment registers cs, ds, es, ss, and so on are initialized by BIOS before
    the MBR is executed. Since different platforms have different implementations
    of the BIOS, it is possible that the contents of certain segment registers may
    differ across different platforms. It’s therefore up to MBR code to ensure that
    segment registers contain the expected values.

    The functionality of the decrypted code is straightforward: the mal-
ware reads the ransom message from sectors 2 to 5 into a memory buffer,
and if there is a font written to sectors 7 to 15, Satana loads it using the
INT 10h service. The malware then displays the ransom message using the
same INT 10h service and reads input from the keyboard. Satana’s ransom
message is shown in Figure 13-9.
    At the bottom, the message prompts the user to enter the password
to unlock the MBR. There’s a trick, though: the malware doesn’t actually
unlock the MBR upon entry of the password. As you can see in the pass-
word verification routine presented in Listing 13-11, the malware doesn’t
restore the original MBR.

seg000:01C2 u mov        si, 2800h
seg000:01C5   mov        cx, 8
seg000:01C8 v call       compute_checksum
seg000:01CB   add        al, ah
seg000:01CD  cmp        al, ds:2900h

                                                             The Rise of MBR Ransomware   229
                   seg000:01D1 infinit_loop:
                   seg000:01D1  jmp      short infinit_loop

Listing 13-11: Satana password verification routine

Figure 13-9: Satana ransom message

                       The compute_checksum routine v computes a checksum of the 8-byte string
                   stored at address ds:2800h u and stores the result in the ax register. Then the
                   code compares the checksum with the value at address ds:2900h . However,
                   regardless of the outcome of the comparison, the code loops infinitely at ,
                   meaning the execution flow doesn’t go any further from this point, even
                   though the malicious MBR contains code for decrypting the original MBR
                   and restoring it at the very first sector. The victim who paid the ransom to
                   unlock their system isn’t actually able to do so without system recovery soft-
                   ware. This is a vivid reminder that victims of ransomware shouldn’t pay the
                   ransom, as no one can guarantee that they’ll retrieve their data.

                   Wrapping Up: Final Thoughts on Satana
                   Satana is an example of a ransomware program still catching up with
                   modern ransomware trends. The flaws observed in the implementation
                   and the abundance of debugging information suggest that the malware
                   was in development when we first saw it in the wild.
                        Compared to Petya, Satana lacks sophistication. Despite the fact that
                   it never restores the original MBR, its MBR infection approach isn’t as
                   damaging as Petya’s. The only boot component affected by Satana is the
                   MBR, making it possible for the victim to restore access to the system by
                   repairing the MBR using the Windows installation DVD, which can recover
                   information on the system partitions and rebuild a new MBR with a valid
                   partition table.

230   Chapter 13
             Victims can also restore access to the system by reading the encrypted
        MBR from sector 1 of the MBR and XORing it with the encryption key
        stored in sector 6. This retrieves the original MBR, which should be written
        to the very first sector to restore access to the system. However, even if a
        victim manages to restore access to the system by recovering the MBR, the
        contents of the files encrypted by Satana will still be unavailable.

Conclusion
        This chapter covers some of the major evolutions in modern ransomware.
        Attacks on both home users and organizations constitute a modern trend in
        the malware evolution, one that the antivirus industry has had to struggle
        to catch up with after the outbreak of trojans encrypting the contents of
        user files in 2012.
            Although this new trend in ransomware is gaining in popularity, devel-
        oping bootkit components requires different skills and knowledge than
        developing trojans for encrypting user files. The flaws in Satana’s boot-
        loader component are a clear example of this gulf of skills.
            As we’ve seen with other malware, this arms race between malware and
        security software development has forced ransomware to evolve and adopt
        bootkit infection techniques to stay under the radar. As more and more
        ransomware has emerged, many security practices have become routine,
        such as backing up data—one of the best protection methods against a
        wide variety of threats, especially ransomware.

                                                            The Rise of MBR Ransomware   231
