                         16
U E F I F i r m w a r e V u l n e r a b i l i t ie s

            Security products nowadays tend to focus
            on threats that operate at the high levels
           of the software stack, and they achieve
         reasonably good results. However, this leaves
them unable to see what’s going on in the dark waters
of firmware. If an attacker has already gained privi-
leged access to the system and installed a firmware
implant, these products are useless.
     Very few security products examine firmware, and those that do only do
so from the operating system level, detecting the presence of implants only
after they’ve successfully installed and compromised the system. More com-
plex implants can also use their privileged position in the system to avoid
detection and subvert OS-level security products.
                        For these reasons, firmware rootkits and implants are one of the most
                   dangerous threats to PCs, and they pose an even bigger threat they pose
                   to modern cloud platforms, where a single misconfigured or compromised
                   guest operating system endangers all other guests, exposing their memory
                   to malicious manipulation.
                        Detecting firmware anomalies is a difficult technical challenge for
                   many reasons. The UEFI firmware codebases provided by various vendors
                   are all different, and the existing methods of detecting anomalies aren’t
                   effective in every case. Attackers can also use both the false positives and
                   false negatives of a detection scheme to their advantage, and they can even
                   take over the interfaces that OS-level detection algorithms use to access and
                   examine the firmware.
                        The only viable way to protect against firmware rootkits is to prevent
                   their installation. Detection and other mitigations don’t work; instead, we
                   have to block the possible infection vectors. Solutions for detecting or pre-
                   venting firmware threats work only when the developer has full control over
                   both the software and hardware stacks, like Apple or Microsoft does. Third-
                   party solutions will always have blind spots.
                        In this chapter, we’ll outline most of the known vulnerabilities and
                   exploitation vectors used for infecting UEFI firmware. We’ll first examine
                   the vulnerable firmware, classify types of firmware weaknesses and vulner-
                   abilities, and analyze existing firmware security measures. We will then
                   describe vulnerabilities in Intel Boot Guard, SMM modules, the S3 Boot
                   Script, and the Intel Management Engine.

     What Makes Firmware Vulnerable?
                   We’ll begin by going over the specific firmware that attackers could tar-
                   get with a malicious update. Updates are the most effective method of
                   infection.
                        Vendors will typically describe UEFI firmware updates broadly as
                   BIOS updates, because the BIOS is the main firmware included, but a
                   typical update also delivers many other kinds of embedded firmware to
                   the various hardware units inside the motherboard, or even the CPU.
                        A compromised BIOS update destroys the integrity guarantees for all
                   other firmware updates managed by the BIOS (some of these updates, like
                   Intel microcode, have additional authentication methods and don’t rely
                   solely on the BIOS), so any vulnerability that bypasses authentication for a
                   BIOS update image also opens the door for the delivery of malicious root-
                   kits or implants to any of these units.
                        Figure 16-1 shows the typical firmware units managed by the BIOS, all
                   of which are susceptible to malicious BIOS updates.

286   Chapter 16
              Boot Guard     BIOS Guard           TXT

                                                            CPU
    Network
                                                         microcode

                                ACM

                                                        Management
   Graphics
                                                          Engine

    Sensors                 UEFI firmware                  AMT
                               image

   Embedded
                                                           BMC
    controller

      PMU                                                  SMC

Figure 16-1: Overview of different firmware in modern x86-based computers

    Here are brief descriptions of each type of firmware:
    Power Management Unit (PMU) A microcontroller that controls the
    power functions and transitions of a PC between different power states,
    such as sleep and hibernate. It contains its own firmware and a low-
    power processor.
    Intel Embedded Controller (EC) A microcontroller that is always on.
    It supports multiple features, such as turning the computer on and off,
    processing signals from the keyboard, calculating thermal measure-
    ments, and controlling the fan. It communicates with the main CPU
    over ACPI, SMBus, or shared memory. The EC, along with the Intel
    Management Engine described shortly, can function as a security root
    of trust when the System Management Mode is compromised. The
    Intel BIOS Guard technology (vendor-specific implementations), for
    example, uses the EC to control the read/write access to SPI flash.
    Intel Integrated Sensor Hub (ISH) A microcontroller responsible
    for sensors, such as device rotation detectors and automatic backlight
    adjustors. It can also be responsible for some low-power sleep states for
    those sensors.

                                                           UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   287
                   Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) An integrated graphics processor
                   (iGPU) that is part of the Platform Controller Hub (PCH) design
                   in most modern Intel x86-based computers. GPUs have their own
                   advanced firmware and computing units focused on generating
                   graphics, such as shaders.
                   Intel Gigabit Network Intel-integrated ethernet network cards for
                   x86-based computers are represented as PCIe devices connected to
                   PCH and contain their own firmware, delivered via BIOS update
                   images.
                   Intel CPU Microcode The CPU’s internal firmware, which is the inter-
                   pretive layer that interprets the ISA. The programmer-visible instruction
                   set architecture (ISA) is a part of microcode, but some instructions can be
                   more deeply integrated on the hardware level. Intel microcode is a layer
                   of hardware-level instructions that implement higher-level machine code
                   instructions and the internal state machine sequencing in many digital
                   processing elements.
                   Authenticated Code Module (ACM) A signed binary blob executed
                   in cache memory. Intel microcode loads and executes within protected
                   internal CPU memory, which is called Authenticated Code RAM (ACRAM),
                   or Cache-as-RAM (CAR). This fast memory is initialized early in the boot
                   process. It functions as regular RAM before the main RAM is activated
                   and before the reset-vector code for early boot ACM code (Intel Boot
                   Guard) runs; it can also be loaded later in the boot process. Later, it
                   is repurposed for general-purpose caching. The ACM is signed by an
                   RSA binary blob with a header that defines its entry point. Modern Intel
                   computers can have multiple ACMs for different purposes, but they are
                   mostly used to support additional platform security features.
                   Intel Management Engine (ME) A microcontroller that provides the
                   root-of-trust functionality for multiple security features developed by
                   Intel, including the software interface to the firmware Trusted Platform
                   Module, or fTPM (usually the TPM is a specialized chip on an endpoint
                   device for hardware-based authentication that also contains separate
                   firmware of its own). Since the sixth generation of the Intel CPU, the
                   Intel ME is an x86-based microcontroller.
                   Intel Active Management Technology (AMT) The hardware and
                   firmware platform used for managing personal computers and servers
                   remotely. It provides remote access to monitors, keyboards, and other
                   devices. It comprises Intel’s chipset-based Baseboard Management
                   Controller technology for client-oriented platforms (discussed next),
                   integrated into Intel’s ME.
                   Baseboard Management Controller (BMC) A set of computer inter-
                   face specifications for an autonomous computer subsystem that pro-
                   vides management and monitoring capabilities independently of the
                   host system’s CPU, UEFI firmware, and real-time operating system. The
                   BMC is usually implemented on a separate chip with its own ethernet
                   network interface and firmware.

288   Chapter 16
            System Management Controller (SMC) A microcontroller on the
            logic board that controls the power functions and sensors. It’s most
            commonly found in computers produced by Apple.
             Every firmware unit is an opportunity for an attacker to store and exe-
        cute code, and all units depend on one another to maintain their integrity.
        As an example, Alex Matrosov identified an issue in recent Gigabyte hard-
        ware wherein the ME allowed its memory regions to be written to and read
        from the BIOS. When combined with a weak Intel Boot Guard configuration,
        this issue allowed us to bypass the hardware’s Boot Guard implementation
        completely. (See CVE-2017–11313 and CVE-2017–11314 for more information
        about this vulnerability, which the vendor has since confirmed and patched.)
        We’ll discuss implementations of Boot Guard and possible ways to bypass
        them later in this chapter.
             The primary objective of a BIOS rootkit is to maintain a persistent and
        stealthy infection, just like the kernel-mode rootkits and MBR/VBR bootkits
        described in the book so far. However, a BIOS rootkit may have additional
        interesting goals. It might, for instance, try to temporarily gain control of
        the System Management Mode (SMM) or nonprivileged Driver Execution
        Environment (DXE; executed outside of SMM) to conduct hidden opera-
        tions with memory or the filesystem. Even a nonpersistent attack executed
        from the SMM can bypass security boundaries in modern Windows systems,
        including virtualization-based security (VBS) and instances of virtual
        machine guests.

Classifying UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities
        Before digging into the vulnerabilities, let’s classify the kinds of security
        flaws a BIOS implant installation might target. All the classes of vulnerabili-
        ties shown in Figure 16-2 can help an attacker violate security boundaries
        and install persistent implants.
             Intel researchers first attempted to classify UEFI firmware vulnerabilities
        according to the potential impact of an attack on that vulnerability. They
        presented their classifications at Black Hat USA 2017 in Las Vegas in their
        talk “Firmware Is the New Black—Analyzing Past Three Years of BIOS/UEFI
        Security Vulnerabilities” (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SeZO5AYsBCw),
        which covered different classes of security issues as well as some mitigations.
        One of its most important contributions is the statistics on the growth in the
        total number of security issues processed by Intel PSIRT.
             We have a different classification of security issues related to UEFI firm-
        ware that focuses on the impact of firmware rootkits, shown in Figure 16-2.

 Note   The threat model represented in Figure 16-2 covers only flows related to UEFI firm-
        ware, but the scope of security issues for Intel ME and AMT is increasing signifi-
        cantly. Additionally, in the past few years, the BMC has emerged as a very important
        security asset for remote management server platforms and is getting a lot of attention
        from researchers.

                                                                    UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   289
                                                 UEFI vulnerabilities

                                  Post-exploitation          Compromised supply chain

          Secure Boot bypass
                                                 BIOS update issues             Weak configuration
       SMM privilege escalation

        UEFI firmware implant

                                  Outdated BIOS with known issues               Incorrectly configured protections

                                  Non-authenticated BIOS updates                     Non-secure root of trust

                                   Implanted BIOS update image                    Malicious peripheral devices

Persistent non-SMM (DXE, PEI)

 Persistent SMM (DXE driver)            Non-persistent SMM (shellcode)

Figure 16-2: A classification of BIOS vulnerabilities useful for installing BIOS implants

                        We can categorize the vulnerability classes proposed in Figure 16-2 by
                    how they are used, giving us two major groups: post-exploitation and compro-
                    mised supply chain.

                    Post-Exploitation Vulnerabilities
                    Post-exploitation vulnerabilities are usually used as the second stage in
                    delivering malicious payloads (this exploitation scheme is explained in
                    Chapter 15). This is the main category of vulnerabilities that attackers
                    take advantage of to install both persistent and non-persistent implants
                    after they’ve successfully exploited previous stages of attack. The following
                    are the classes for the main implants, exploits, and vulnerabilities in this
                    category.
                         Secure Boot bypass Attackers focus on compromising the Secure
                         Boot process over exploiting root of trust (that is, full compromise) or
                         another vulnerability in one of the boot stages. Secure Boot bypasses
                         can occur at different boot stages and can be leveraged by the attacker
                         against all the subsequent layers and their trust mechanisms.
                         SMM privilege escalation SMM has a lot of power on x86 hardware,
                         as almost all privilege escalation issues for SMM end up as code execu-
                         tion issues. Privilege escalation to SMM is often one of the final stages
                         of a BIOS implant installation.

290   Chapter 16
    UEFI firmware implant A UEFI firmware implant is the final stage
    of a persistent BIOS implant installation. The attacker can install the
    implant on various levels of the UEFI firmware, either as a modified
    legitimate module or a stand-alone driver like DXE or PEI, which we’ll
    discuss later.
    Persistent implant A persistent implant is one that can survive full
    reboot and shutdown cycles. In some cases, in order to survive the
    post-update process, it can modify BIOS update images before those
    updates are installed.
    Non-persistent implant A non-persistent implant is one that doesn’t
    survive full reboot and shutdown cycles. These implants might provide
    privilege escalation and code execution inside the OS with protected
    hardware virtualization (such as Intel VT-x) and layers of trusted exe-
    cution (such as MS VBS). They can also be used as covert channels to
    deliver malicious payloads to the kernel mode of the operating system.

Compromised Supply Chain Vulnerabilities
Compromised supply chain attacks take advantage of mistakes made by the
BIOS development team or the OEM hardware vendor, or they involve
deliberate misconfigurations of the target software that provide attackers
with a deniable bypass of the platform’s security features.
     In supply chain attacks, an attacker gets access to the hardware during
its production and manufacturing processes and injects malicious modifi-
cations to the firmware or installs malicious peripheral devices before the
hardware ever gets to the consumer. Supply chain attacks can also happen
remotely, as when an attacker gains access to the firmware developer’s inter-
nal network (or sometimes a vendor website) and delivers malicious modifi-
cations directly into the source code repository or build server.
     Supply chain attacks with physical access involve covertly meddling
with the target platform, and they sometimes have similarities with evil
maid attacks, when attackers have physical access for a limited time dur-
ing which they exploit a supply chain vulnerability. These attacks take
advantage of situations in which the hardware’s owner can’t monitor physi-
cal access to the hardware—such as when the owner leaves a laptop in a
checked bag, surrenders it for a foreign customs inspection, or simply for-
gets it in a hotel room. An attacker can use these opportunities to miscon-
figure hardware and firmware to deliver BIOS implants or just physically
flash malicious firmware to the SPI flash chip.
     Most of the following issues apply to supply chain and evil maid attack
scenarios.

                                                     UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   291
                       Misconfigured protections By attacking the hardware or firmware
                       during the development process or post-production stage, an attacker
                       can misconfigure technology protections to allow them to be bypassed
                       easily later.
                       Nonsecure root of trust This vulnerability involves compromising
                       the root of trust from the operating system via its communication
                       interfaces with firmware (SMM, for example).
                       Malicious peripheral devices This kind of attack involves implanting
                       peripheral devices during the production or delivery stages. Malicious
                       devices can be used in multiple ways, such as for Direct Memory Access
                       (DMA) attacks.
                       Implanted BIOS updates An attacker may compromise a vendor
                       website or another remote update mechanism and use it to deliver an
                       infected BIOS update. The points of compromise can include the ven-
                       dor’s build servers, developer systems, or stolen digital certificates with
                       the vendor’s private keys.
                       Unauthenticated BIOS update process Vendors may break the
                       authentication process for BIOS updates, whether intentionally or not,
                       allowing attackers to apply any modifications they want to the update
                       images.
                       Outdated BIOS with known security issues BIOS developers might
                       continue to use older, vulnerable code versions of BIOS firmware, even
                       after the underlying codebase has been patched, which makes the firm-
                       ware vulnerable to attack. An outdated version of the BIOS originally
                       delivered by the hardware vendor is likely to persist, without updates,
                       on the users’ PCs or data center servers. This is one of the most com-
                       mon security failures involving BIOS firmware.

                   Supply Chain Vulnerability Mitigation
                   It’s very hard to mitigate risks related to supply chains without making radi-
                   cal changes to the development and production lifecycles. The typical pro-
                   duction client or server platform includes a lot of third-party components,
                   in both software and hardware. Most companies that don’t own their full
                   production cycle don’t care too much about security, nor can they really
                   afford to.
                         The situation is exacerbated by the general lack of information and
                   resources related to BIOS security configuration and to chipset configura-
                   tion. The NIST 800-147 (“BIOS Protection Guidelines”) and NIST 800-147B
                   (“BIOS Protection Guidelines for Servers”) publications serve as a useful
                   starting point but are quickly becoming outdated since their initial release
                   in 2011 and update for servers in 2014.

292   Chapter 16
            Let’s dive into the details of some UEFI firmware attacks to fill some of
        these gaps in widespread knowledge.

A History of UEFI Firmware Protections
        In this section, we’ll go over some classes of vulnerabilities that allow an
        attacker to bypass Secure Boot; we’ll discuss specific Secure Boot imple-
        mentation details in the next chapter.
             Previously, any security issue that allowed the attacker to execute code
        in the SMM environment could bypass Secure Boot. Though some modern
        hardware platforms, even with recent hardware updates, are still vulnerable
        to SMM-based Secure Boot attacks, most enterprise vendors have shifted to
        using the newest Intel security features, which make these attacks harder.
        Today’s Intel technologies, such as Intel Boot Guard and BIOS Guard
        (both of which will be discussed later in this chapter), move the boot pro-
        cess’s root of trust from SMM to a more secure environment: the Intel ME
        firmware/hardware.

                                          Root of Trus t

            The root of trust is a proven cryptographic key represented as the anchor for
            Secure Boot. Secure Boot establishes a hardware-validated boot process to
            ensure the platform can be started only with trusted code that has been veri-
            fied successfully with the root of trust. Modern platform designs lock their root
            of trust in hardware-based protected storage, such as one-time programmable
            fuses or a separate chip with persistent storage.

             The first version of UEFI Secure Boot was introduced in 2012. Its main
        components included a root of trust implemented in the DXE boot phase
        (one of the latest stages in UEFI firmware boot, just before the OS receives
        control). That meant this early implementation of Secure Boot only really
        ensured the integrity of the OS bootloaders, not the BIOS itself.
             Soon the weaknesses of this design became clear, and in the next imple-
        mentation, the root of trust was moved to PEI, an early platform initializa-
        tion stage, where it was locked before DXE. That security boundary also
        proved weak. Since 2013, with the release of the Intel Boot Guard technol-
        ogy, the root of trust has been locked into hardware by way of the TPM chip
        (or equivalent functionality implemented in ME firmware to reduce the cost
        of support). Field-programmable fuses (FPFs) are located in the mother-
        board chipset (the PCH component, programmable via ME firmware).
             Before we dig into the history of the relevant exploitations that motivated
        these redesigns, let’s discuss how basic BIOS protection technologies work.

                                                                       UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   293
                   How BIOS Protections Work
                   Figure 16-3 shows a high-level view of the technologies used to protect per-
                   sistent SPI flash storage. The SMM was originally allowed both read and
                   write access to SPI flash storage as a means of implementing routine BIOS
                   updates. This meant the integrity of the BIOS was dependent on the code
                   quality of any code running in the SMM, as any such code would be able to
                   modify the BIOS in the SPI storage. The security boundary was therefore as
                   weak as the weakest code ever run in SMM that had access to the memory
                   region outside of it. As a result, platform developers took steps to separate
                   BIOS updates from the rest of the SMM functionality, introducing a series
                   of additional security controls, such as Intel BIOS Guard.

                                                      FLOCKDN

                                                       SPI write
                          BIOS_CNTL
                                                       protection
                                                         (PRx)
                         BIOS lock bit                                         ACM/Microcode
                            (BLE)

                                                                                  BIOS Guard

                          BIOS_WE                    UEFI firmware
                                                        image
                                                                                  Boot Guard

                          SMM_BWP

                                                     Signed image

Figure 16-3: High-level representation of BIOS security technologies

                   SPI Flash Protections and Their Vulnerabilities
                   We discussed some of the controls shown in Figure 16-3 in “(In)Effectiveness
                   of Memory Protection Bits” on page 263: the BIOS Control Bit Protection
                   (BIOS_CNTL), the Flash Configuration Lock-Down (FLOCKDN), and the
                   SPI flash Write Protection (PRx). However, the BIOS_CNTL protections are
                   effective only against an attacker attempting to modify the BIOS from the
                   OS, and they can be bypassed by any code execution vulnerability from SMM
                   (SMI handlers accessible from outside), as SMM code can freely change these
                   protection bits. Basically, BIOS_CNTL only creates an illusion of security.
                        Originally, the SMM had both read and write access to SPI Flash storage
                   so it could implement routine BIOS updates. This made the integrity of the
                   BIOS dependent on the quality of any code running in the SMM with calls
                   to outside memory regions, as any such code was able to modify the BIOS in
                   the SPI storage. This security boundary proved rather weak—as weak as the
                   weakest code ever running in SMM.

294   Chapter 16
     As a result, platform developers took steps to separate BIOS updates
from the rest of SMM functionality. Many of these controls themselves were
rather weak. An example is the BIOS Control Bit Protection (BIOS_CNTL),
which is effective only against an attacker attempting to modify the BIOS
from the operating system; it can be bypassed by any code execution vulner-
ability from SMM, since SMM code can freely change these protection bits.
     The PRx control is more effective because its policies can’t be changed
from the SMM. However, as we’ll discuss shortly, many vendors don’t use
PRx protections—including Apple and, surprisingly, Intel, the inventor of
this protection technology.
     Table 16-1 summarizes the state of active protection technologies based
on security lock bits on x86-based hardware used by popular vendors as of
January 2018. Here, RP indicates read protections and WP write protections.

Table 16-1: Security Level of Popular Hardware Vendors

 Vendor name      BLE               SMM_BWP           PRx                  Authenticated
                                                                           update
 ASUS             Active            Active            Not active           Not active
 MSI              Not active        Not active        Not active           Not active
 Gigabyte         Active            Active            Not active           Not active
 Dell             Active            Active            RP/WP                Active
 Lenovo           Active            Active            RP                   Active
 HP               Active            Active            RP/WP                Active
 Intel            Active            Active            Not active           Active
 Apple            Not active        Not active        WP                   Active

     As you can see, vendors differ wildly in their approaches to BIOS secu-
rity. Some of these vendors don’t even authenticate BIOS updates, thereby
creating a serious security concern because it is far easier to install implants
(unless the vendor enforces Intel Boot Guard policies).
     Moreover, PRx protections must be configured correctly to be effective.
Listing 16-1 shows an example of poorly configured flash regions with all
PRx segment definitions set to zero, rendering them useless.

[*] BIOS Region: Base = 0x00800000, Limit = 0x00FFFFFF
SPI Protected Ranges
------------------------------------------------------------
PRx (offset) | Value    | Base     | Limit    | WP? | RP?
------------------------------------------------------------
PR0 (74)     | 00000000 | 00000000 | 00000000 | 0   | 0
PR1 (78)     | 00000000 | 00000000 | 00000000 | 0   | 0
PR2 (7C)     | 00000000 | 00000000 | 00000000 | 0   | 0
PR3 (80)     | 00000000 | 00000000 | 00000000 | 0   | 0
PR4 (84)     | 00000000 | 00000000 | 00000000 | 0   | 0

Listing 16-1: Poorly configured PRx access policies (dumped by Chipsec tool)

                                                              UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   295
                        We’ve also seen some vendors configure policies for read protection
                   only, which still allows the attacker to modify SPI flash. Furthermore, PRx
                   doesn’t guarantee any type of integrity measurements on the actual con-
                   tents of SPI, as it only implements bit-based locking of direct read/write
                   access in the very early PEI stage of the boot process.
                        The reason vendors like Apple and Intel tend to disable PRx protec-
                   tions is that these protections require an immediate reboot, making updat-
                   ing the BIOS less convenient. Without PRx protections, a vendor’s BIOS
                   update tool can write the new BIOS image into a free region of physical
                   memory using OS APIs, then call an SMI interrupt, so that some helper
                   code residing in the SMM can take the image from that region and write
                   it into SPI flash. The updated SPI flash image takes control on the next
                   reboot, but that reboot can occur in the future at the user’s convenience.
                        When PRx is enabled and configured correctly to protect the appropri-
                   ate regions of the SPI from modifications made by SMM code, the BIOS
                   updater tool no longer can use the SMM to modify the BIOS. Instead, it
                   must store the update image in dynamic random access memory (DRAM)
                   and trigger an immediate reboot. The helper code to install the update
                   must be part of a special early boot-stage driver, which runs before PRx pro-
                   tections are activated and transfers the update image from DRAM to SPI.
                   This method of update sometimes requires a reboot (or a call to the SMI
                   handler directly without reboot) right when the tool runs, which is a lot less
                   convenient for the user.
                        No matter which route the BIOS updater takes, it’s critical that the
                   helper code authenticate the update image before installing it. Otherwise,
                   PRx or no PRx, reboot or no reboot, the helper code will happily install
                   an altered BIOS image with an implant, so long as the attacker manages
                   to modify it at some point before the helper runs. As Table 16-1 shows,
                   some hardware vendors don’t authenticate firmware updates, making the
                   attacker’s job as easy as tampering with the update image.

                                      Firs t Publicly Know n At tack on
                                           the BIOS Update Proce ss
                       Keep in mind that even if you correctly configure PRx and authenticate the
                       BIOS updates’ cryptographic signatures, you could still be susceptible to
                       attacks. The first publicly known attack against an authenticated and signed
                       BIOS update process armed with active SPI flash protection bits was presented
                       in “Attacking Intel BIOS” by Rafal Wojtczuk and Alex Tereshkin at Black Hat
                       Vegas in 2009. The authors demonstrated a memory corruption vulnerability
                       inside the parser for the BIOS update image file that led to arbitrary code
                       execution and bypassed authentication of the update file’s signature.

296   Chapter 16
Risks Posed by an Unauthenticated BIOS Update
In September 2018, the antivirus company ESET released a research
report about LOJAX, a rootkit that attacked UEFI firmware from the
OS.1 All of the techniques used by the LOJAX rootkit were well-known
at the time of the attack, having been used in other discovered malware
over the previous five years. LOJAX used tactics similar to those of the
Hacking Team’s UEFI rootkit: it abused the unauthenticated Computrace
components stored in the NTFS, as we discussed in Chapter 15. Thus, the
LOJAX rootkit doesn’t use any new vulnerabilities; its only novelty is in how
it infects the targets—it checks the systems for unauthenticated access to
the SPI flash and, finding it, delivers a modified BIOS update file.
     Loose approaches to BIOS security present plenty of opportunities for
attacks. An attacker can scan a system at runtime to find the right vulner-
able targets and the right infection vector, both of which are plentiful. The
LOJAX rootkit infector checked for several protections, including the BIOS
Lock Bit (BLE) and the SMM BIOS Write Protection Bit (SMM_BWP). If
the firmware hadn’t been authenticated, or if it hadn’t checked the integrity
of a BIOS update image before transferring it to SPI storage, the attacker
could deliver modified updates directly from the OS. LOJAX used the
Speed Racer vulnerability (VU#766164, originally discovered by Corey
Kallenberg in 2014) to bypass SPI flash protection bits via a race condition.
You can detect this vulnerability and other weaknesses related to BIOS lock
protection bits with the chipsec_main -m common.bios_wp command.
     This example shows that a security boundary is only as strong as its
weakest component. No matter what other protections the platform may
have, Computrace’s loose handling of code authentication undermined
them, reenabling the OS-side attack vector that the other protections
sought to eliminate. It only takes one breach of a sea wall to flood the
plains.

BIOS Protection with Secure Boot
How does Secure Boot change this threat landscape? The short answer is,
it depends on its implementation. Older versions, implemented before 2016
without Intel Boot Guard and BIOS Guard technologies, will be in danger,
because in these old implementations, the root of trust is in the SPI flash
and can be overwritten.
     When the first version of UEFI Secure Boot was introduced in 2012,
its main components included a root of trust implemented in the DXE boot
phase, which is one of the latest stages in UEFI firmware boot, occurring
just before the OS receives control. Because the root of trust came so late

1. ESET Research, “LOJAX: First UEFI Rootkit Found in the Wild, Courtesy of the Sednit
Group” (whitepaper), September 27, 2018, https://www.welivesecurity.com/wp-content/
uploads/2018/09/ESET-LoJax.pdf.

                                                              UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   297
                   in the boot process, this early Secure Boot implementation really assured
                   only the integrity of the OS bootloaders, rather than the integrity of the
                   BIOS itself. The weakness of this design soon became clear, and in the
                   next implementation, the root of trust was moved to PEI, an early platform
                   initialization stage, to lock the root of trust before DXE. That security
                   boundary also proved weak.
                        Boot Guard and BIOS Guard, more recent additions to Secure Boot,
                   address this weakness: Boot Guard moved the root of trust from SPI into
                   hardware, and BIOS Guard moved the task of updating the contents of the
                   SPI flash from SMM to a separate chip (the Intel Embedded Controller, or
                   EC) and removed the permissions that allowed the SMM to write to the SPI
                   flash.
                        Another consideration for moving the root of trust earlier in the boot
                   process, and into hardware, is minimizing the boot time of a trusted plat-
                   form. You could imagine a boot protection scheme that would verify digital
                   signatures over dozens of individual available EFI images rather than a
                   single image that includes all the drivers. However, this would be too slow
                   for today’s world, in which platform vendors look to shave milliseconds off
                   the bootup time.
                        At this point, you might be asking: with so many moving parts involved
                   in the Secure Boot process, how can we avoid situations in which a trivial
                   bug destroys all of its security guarantees? (We’ll cover the full process of
                   Secure Boot in Chapter 17.) The best answer, to date, is to have tools that
                   make sure every component plays its appointed role and that every stage of
                   the boot process takes place in the exact intended order. That is to say, we
                   need a formal model of the process that automated code analysis tools can
                   validate—and that means that the simpler the model, the more confidence
                   we have that it will be checked correctly.
                        Secure Boot relies on a chain of trust: the intended execution path
                   begins with the root of trust locked into the hardware or SPI flash storage
                   and moves through the stages of the Secure Boot process, which can pro-
                   ceed only in a particular order and only if all of the conditions and policies
                   at every stage are satisfied.
                        Formally speaking, we call this model a finite state machine, where differ-
                   ent states represent different stages of the system boot process. If any of the
                   stages has nondeterministic behavior—for example, if a stage can switch
                   the boot process into a different mode or have multiple exits—our Secure
                   Boot process becomes a nondeterministic finite state machine. This makes
                   the task of automatically verifying the Secure Boot process significantly
                   harder, because it exponentially increases the number of execution paths
                   we must verify. In our opinion, nondeterministic behavior in Secure Boot
                   should be regarded as a design mistake that is likely to lead to costly vulner-
                   abilities, as in the case of the S3 Boot Script vulnerability discussed later in
                   this chapter.

298   Chapter 16
Intel Boot Guard
        In this section, we’ll discuss how Intel Boot Guard technology works, then
        explore some of its vulnerabilities. Although Intel has no publicly available
        official documentation about Boot Guard, our research and that of others
        allow us to paint a coherent picture of this remarkable technology.

        Intel Boot Guard Technology
        Boot Guard divides Secure Boot into two phases: in the first phase, Boot
        Guard authenticates everything located in the BIOS section of the SPI
        storage, and in the second stage, Secure Boot handles the rest of the boot
        process, including authentication of the OS bootloader (Figure 16-4).

                         Locked in hardware

             CPU               CPU            Boot Guard             Reset
             reset          microcode           ACM                  vector

                                                      Locked in BIOS

                                                       Secure Boot                IBB
                                     OS loader
                                                       (DXE + BDS)            (SEC + PEI)

Figure 16-4: The boot process with active Intel Boot Guard technology

             The Intel Boot Guard technology spans several levels of the CPU archi-
        tecture and the related abstractions. One benefit is that it doesn’t need to
        trust the SPI storage, so it’s able to avoid the vulnerabilities we discussed
        earlier in this chapter. Boot Guard separates integrity checking of the BIOS
        stored in the SPI flash from the BIOS itself by using the Authenticated Code
        Module (ACM), which is signed by Intel, to verify the integrity of the BIOS
        image before allowing it to execute. With Boot Guard activated on a plat-
        form, the root of trust moves inside the Intel microarchitecture, wherein the
        CPU’s microcode parses the ACM contents and checks the digital signature
        verification routines implemented in the ACM, which in turn will check the
        BIOS signature.
             By contrast, the original UEFI Secure Boot root of trust resided in the
        UEFI DXE phase, almost the last one before control is passed to the OS
        bootloader—which is, as we’ve mentioned before, very late in the game.
        If UEFI firmware is compromised at the DXE stage, an attacker can com-
        pletely bypass or disable Secure Boot. Without hardware-assisted verifica-
        tion, there is no way to guarantee the integrity of the boot process stages
        that take place before the DXE phase (PEI implementation also has con-
        firmed weaknesses), including the integrity of the DXE drivers themselves.

                                                                       UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   299
                        Boot Guard addresses this problem by moving the root of trust for
                   Secure Boot from the UEFI firmware to the hardware itself. For example,
                   Verified Boot—a recent variant of Boot Guard that Intel introduced in
                   2013, which we’ll discuss in more detail in the next chapter—locks the
                   hash of an OEM public key within the field programmable fuse (FPF)
                   store. The FPF can be programmed only one time, and the hardware
                   vendor locks the configuration by the end of the manufacturing process
                   (in some cases this can be revoked, but because these are edge cases, we
                   won’t discuss them here).

                   Vulnerabilities in Boot Guard
                   Boot Guard’s efficacy depends on all of its components working together,
                   with no layer containing any vulnerabilities for the attacker to execute
                   code or to elevate privileges in order to interfere with other components
                   of the multilayer Secure Boot scheme. Alex Matrosov’s “Betraying the
                   BIOS: Where the Guardians of the BIOS Are Failing” (https://www.youtube​
                   .com/watch?v=Dfl2JI2eLc8), presented at Black Hat USA 2017, revealed that
                   an attacker could successfully target the scheme by interfering with the
                   bit flags set by the lower levels to pass the information about their state of
                   integrity to the upper levels.
                        As has been demonstrated, firmware cannot be trusted because most
                   SMM attacks can compromise it. Even the Measured Boot scheme, which
                   relies on the TPM as its root of trust, can be compromised, because the
                   measuring code itself runs in SMM and can in many cases be modified
                   from the SMM, even though the key stored in the TPM hardware cannot
                   be changed by SMM. Although some attacks on the TPM chip are possible,
                   the SMM privilege–wielding attackers do not need them, as they would
                   simply attack the firmware’s interfaces to the TPM. In 2013 Intel introduced
                   Verified Boot, which we just mentioned, to address this Measured Boot
                   weakness.
                        The Boot Guard ACM verification logic measures the initial boot block
                   (IBB) and checks its integrity before passing control to the IBB entry point.
                   If IBB verification fails, the boot process will generally be interrupted
                   depending on the policy. The IBB part of the UEFI firmware (BIOS)
                   executes on a normal CPU (not isolated or authenticated). Next, IBB con-
                   tinues the boot process, following the Boot Guard policies in the verified
                   or measured mode to the platform initialization phase. The PEI driver
                   verifies the integrity of the DXE drivers and transitions the chain of trust
                   to the DXE phase. The DXE phase then continues the chain of trust to the
                   operating system bootloader. Table 16-2 presents research data about the
                   state of security in each of these stages across various hardware vendors.

300   Chapter 16
Table 16-2: How Different Hardware Vendors Configure Security (as of January 2018)

Vendor        ME access    EC access    CPU       Boot          Forced        Boot              BIOS
name                                    debugging Guard         Boot          Guard FPF         Guard
                                        (DCI)                   Guard
                                                                ACM
ASUS          Disabled     Disabled     Enabled    Disabled     Disabled      Disabled          Disabled
VivoMini
MSI Cubi2     Disabled     Disabled     Enabled    Disabled     Disabled      Disabled          Disabled
Gigabyte      Read/write   Read/write   Enabled    Measured     Enabled       Not set           Disabled
Brix          enabled      enabled                 verified     (FPF not
                                                                set)
Dell          Disabled     Disabled     Enabled    Measured     Enabled       Enabled           Enabled
                                                   verified
Lenovo        Disabled     Disabled     Enabled    Disabled     Disabled      Disabled          Disabled
ThinkCenter
HP            Disabled     Disabled     Enabled    Disabled     Disabled      Disabled          Disabled
Elitedesk
Intel NUC     Disabled     Disabled     Enabled    Disabled     Disabled      Disabled          Disabled
Apple         Read         Disabled     Disabled   Not          Not           Not               Not
              enabled                              supported    supported     supported         supported

                      As you can see, catastrophic misconfigurations of these security options
                 are not merely theoretical. For example, some vendors have not written their
                 hashes in the FPF, or did so but didn’t subsequently disable the manufactur-
                 ing mode that allows such a write. As a result, the attackers can write FPF
                 keys of their own and then lock the system, tying it forever to their own root
                 and chain of trust (though if the hardware manufacturer has developed a
                 revocation process, a fuse overwrite for revocation exists). More precisely,
                 the FPF can be written by the ME as its memory regions when the ME is still
                 in the manufacturing mode; the ME in that mode, in turn, can be accessed
                 from the OS for both reads and writes. In this way, the attacker really gets
                 the keys to the kingdom.
                      Additionally, most of the researched Intel-based hardware had CPU
                 debugging enabled, so all the doors were open to attackers with physical
                 access to the CPU. Some of the platforms included support for the Intel
                 BIOS Guard technology, but it was disabled in the manufacturing process
                 to simplify BIOS updates.
                      Thus, Table 16-2 provides multiple excellent examples of supply chain
                 security problems, wherein the vendors trying to simplify supporting hard-
                 ware have created critical security holes.

                                                                            UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   301
     Vulnerabilities in the SMM Modules
                   Let’s now look at another vector for exploiting UEFI firmware from the OS:
                   leveraging mistakes in the SMM modules.

                   Understanding SMM
                   We’ve discussed SMM and SMI handlers in previous chapters, but we’ll
                   review both concepts now as a refresher.
                        SMM is a highly privileged execution mode of x86 processors. It was
                   designed to implement platform-specific management functions indepen-
                   dently of the OS. These functions include advanced power management,
                   secure firmware updates, and configuration of UEFI Secure Boot variables.
                        The key design feature of SMM is that it provides a separate execution
                   environment, invisible to the OS. The code and data used in SMM are stored
                   in a hardware-protected memory region, called SMRAM, that is accessible
                   only to code running within SMM. To enter SMM, the CPU generates a
                   System Management Interrupt (SMI), a special interrupt intended to be
                   raised by the OS software.
                        SMI handlers are the platform firmware’s privileged services and func-
                   tions. The SMI serves as a bridge between the OS and these SMI handlers.
                   Once all the necessary code and data have been loaded in SMRAM, the
                   firmware locks the memory region so that it can be accessed only by code
                   running in SMM, preventing the OS from accessing it.

                   Exploiting SMI Handlers
                   Given SMM’s high privilege level, SMI handlers present a very interesting
                   target for implants and rootkits. Any vulnerability in these handlers may
                   present an opportunity for the attacker to elevate privileges to that of the
                   SMM, the so-called Ring –2.
                        As with other multilayer models, such as the kernel-userland separa-
                   tion, the best way to attack the privileged code is to target any data that
                   can be consumed from outside the isolated privileged memory region. For
                   SMM, this is any memory outside the SMRAM. For SMM’s security model,
                   the attacker is the OS or privileged software (such as BIOS update tools);
                   thus, any location in the OS that is outside the SMRAM is suspect because
                   it can at times be manipulated by an attacker (potentially even after it has
                   been somehow checked). Potential targets include function pointers con-
                   sumed by the SMM code that can point execution to areas outside SMRAM
                   or any buffers with data that SMM code reads/parses.
                        Nowadays, UEFI firmware developers try to reduce this attack surface
                   by minimizing the number of SMI handlers communicating directly with
                   the outside world (Ring 0—the kernel mode of the operating system), as
                   well as by finding new ways to structure and check these interactions. But
                   this work has only just started, and security problems with SMI handlers
                   will likely persist for quite some time.

302   Chapter 16
     Of course, the code in SMM can receive some data from the OS to be
useful. However, in order to remain secure, just as with other multilayer
models, the SMM code must never act on the outside data unless it’s been
copied and checked inside the SMRAM. Any data that’s been checked but
left outside the SMRAM can’t be trusted, as the attacker could potentially
race to change it between the point of check and the point of use. Moreover,
any data that has been copied in shouldn’t reference any unchecked and
uncopied outside data.
     This sounds simple, but languages like C don’t natively help track the
regions to which pointers point, and thus the all-important security distinc-
tion between the “inside” SMRAM memory locations and the “outside,”
attacker-controlled, OS memory is not necessarily evident in the code. So
the programmers are mostly on their own. (If you’re wondering how much
of this problem can be solved with static analysis tools, read on—as it turns
out, the SMI calling convention we discuss next makes it quite a challenge.)
     To understand how attackers can exploit SMI handlers, you need to
understand their calling convention. Although, as Listing 16-2 shows, calls
to the SMI handler from the Python side of the Chipsec framework look
like regular function calls, the actual binary calling convention, shown in
Listing 16-3, is different.

import chipsec.chipset
import chipsec.hal.interrupts

#SW SMI handler number
SMI_NUM = 0x25

#CHIPSEC initialization
cs = chipsec.chipset.cs()
cs.init(None, True)

#create instances of required classes
ints = chipsec.hal.interrupts.Interrupts(cs)

#call SW SMI handler 0x25
cs.ints.send_SW_SMI(0, SMI_NUM, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0)

Listing 16-2: How to call an SMI handler from Python with the Chipsec framework

    The code in Listing 16-2 calls the SMI handler with all the parameters
zeroed out except for 0x25, the number of the called handler. Such a call
may indeed pass no parameters, but it’s also possible that the SMI handler
retrieves these parameters indirectly—via ACPI or UEFI variables, for
example—once it gets control. When the operating system triggers SMI
(for instance, as a software interrupt via I/O port 0xB2), it passes argu-
ments to the SMI handler via general-purpose registers. In Listing 16-3,
you can see what an actual call to the SMI handler looks like in assembly
and how the parameters are passed. The Chipsec framework, of course,
implements this calling convention under the hood.

                                                            UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   303
                   mov rax, rdx       ; rax_value
                   mov ax, cx         ; smi_code_data
                   mov rdx, r10       ; rdx_value
                   mov dx, 0B2h       ; SMI control port (0xB2)
                   mov rbx, r8        ; rbx_value
                   mov rcx, r9        ; rcx_value
                   mov rsi, r11       ; rsi_value
                   mov rdi, r12       ; rdi_value

                   ; write smi data value to SW SMI control/data ports (0xB2/0xB3)
                   out dx, ax

Listing 16-3: An SMI handler call in assembly language

                   SMI Callout Issues and Arbitrary Code Execution
                   Most common SMI handler vulnerabilities of interest for BIOS implants
                   fall into two major groups: SMI callout issues and arbitrary code execution
                   (which, in many cases, is preceded by SMI callout issues). In SMI callout
                   issues, SMM code unwittingly uses a function pointer, controlled by the
                   attacker, that points at an implant payload outside the SMM. In arbitrary
                   code execution, SMM code consumes some data from outside SMRAM that
                   is capable of affecting the control flow and can be leveraged for more con-
                   trol. Such addresses are typically below the first megabyte of physical mem-
                   ory, as SMI handlers expect to use that memory range, which is unused by
                   the OS. In SMI callout issues, when an attacker can overwrite the address
                   of an indirect jump or a function pointer that is called from SMM, then
                   arbitrary code under the attacker’s control will be executed outside of
                   SMM, but with the privileges of SMM (a good example of such an attack
                   is VU#631788).
                        In the newer versions of the BIOS from major enterprise vendors, such
                   vulnerabilities are harder to find, but issues with accessing pointers outside
                   the SMRAM range remain, despite the introduction of the standard func-
                   tion SmmIsBufferOutsideSmmValid() to check whether a pointer to a memory
                   buffer is in that range. The implementation of this generic check was intro-
                   duced in the Intel EDK2 repository on GitHub (https://github.com/tianocore/
                   edk2/blob/master/MdePkg/Library/SmmMemLib/SmmMemLib.c), and its decla-
                   ration is shown in Listing 16-4.

                   BOOLEAN
                   EFIAPI
                   SmmIsBufferOutsideSmmValid (
                     IN EFI_PHYSICAL_ADDRESS Buffer,
                     IN UINT64                Length
                     )

Listing 16-4: Prototype of the function SmmIsBufferOutsideSmmValid() from Intel EDK2

                      The SmmIsBufferOutsideSmmValid() function accurately detects pointers to
                   memory buffers outside the SMRAM range, with one exception: it’s possible

304   Chapter 16
for the Buffer argument to be a structure and for one of the fields of this
structure to be a pointer to another buffer outside SMRAM. If the secu-
rity check happens only for the address of the structure itself, SMM code
may still be vulnerable, despite a check with SmmIsBufferOutsideSmmValid().
Thus, SMI handlers have to validate each address or pointer—including
offsets!—that they receive from the OS prior to reading from or writing
to such memory locations. Importantly, this includes returning status and
error codes. Any type of arithmetic calculation that happens inside SMM
should validate any parameters coming from outside of SMM or less privi-
leged modes.

SMI Handler Exploitation Case Studies
Now that we’ve discussed the perils of SMI handlers taking data from
the OS, it’s time to dig into a real case of SMI handler exploitation. We’ll
look at the common workflow of a UEFI firmware update process used by
Windows 10, among other operating systems. In this situation, the firmware
is validated and authenticated inside SMM with weak DXE runtime drivers.
     Figure 16-5 shows a high-level picture of the BIOS update process in
this scenario.

            OS

        Update App

                                   Ring 3

       Update Driver

                                   Ring 0

                                                               Update Image

                                                             Memory (DRAM)

           SMM
                                   Ring 2

         SmiFlash
                                                                  SPI Flash

        SecSmiFlash

Figure 16-5: High-level representation of the BIOS update process from the OS

    As you can see, the userland BIOS update tool (Update App) com-
municates with its kernel-mode driver (Update Driver), which usually has
direct access to the physical memory device over the Ring 0 API function

                                                             UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   305
                   MmMapIoSpace(). This access allows potential attackers to modify or map mali-
                   cious data to the memory regions used to communicate with the SMI han-
                   dler BIOS (SmiFlash or SecSmiFlash) update parsers. Usually, the parsing
                   flow is complex enough to leave room for vulnerabilities, especially when
                   the parsers are written in C, as they typically are. The attacker crafts a
                   malicious data buffer and calls a vulnerable SMI handler by its number,
                   as shown in Listing 16-3, using __outbyte() intrinsic functions available in
                   the MS Visual C++ compiler.
                        The DXE drivers shown in Figure 16-5, SmiFlash and SecSmiFlash, are
                   found across many SMM codebases. SmiFlash flashes a BIOS image without
                   any authentication. Using an update tool based on this driver, the attacker
                   can simply flash a maliciously modified BIOS update image without further
                   ado (a good example of this type of vulnerability is VU#507496, found by
                   Alex Matrosov). SecSmiFlash, by contrast, can authenticate the update by
                   checking its digital signature, blocking this kind of attack.

     Vulnerabilities in the S3 Boot Script
                   In this section, we’ll give you an overview of vulnerabilities in the S3 Boot
                   Script, the script that the BIOS uses to wake from sleep mode. Although the
                   S3 Boot Script speeds up the waking process, incorrect implementations of
                   it can have serious security impacts, as we’ll explore here.

                   Understanding the S3 Boot Script
                   The power transition states of modern hardware—such as working mode
                   and sleep mode—are very complex and involve multiple DRAM manipula-
                   tion stages. During sleep mode, or S3, DRAM is kept powered, although the
                   CPU is not. When the system wakes from the sleep state, the BIOS restores
                   the platform configuration, including the contents of the DRAM, and
                   then transfers control to the operating system. You can find a good sum-
                   mary of these states in https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/desktop/power/
                   system-power-states/.
                        The S3 boot script is stored in DRAM, preserved across the S3 state,
                   and executed when resuming full function from S3. Although called
                   a “script,” it is really a series of opcodes interpreted by the Boot Script
                   Executor firmware module (https://github.com/tianocore/edk2/blob/master/
                   MdeModulePkg/Library/PiDxeS3BootScriptLib/BootScriptExecute.c). The Boot
                   Script Executor replays every operation defined by these opcodes at the end
                   of the PEI phase to restore the configuration of the platform hardware and
                   the entire preboot state for the OS. After executing the S3 boot script, the
                   BIOS locates and executes the OS waking vector to restore its software exe-
                   cution to the state it was in when it left off. This means the S3 boot script

306   Chapter 16
allows the platform to skip the DXE phase and reduces the time it takes to
wake from the S3 sleep state. Yet this optimization comes with some risks, as
we’ll discuss next.2

Targeting Weaknesses of the S3 Boot Script
An S3 boot script is just another kind of program code stored in mem-
ory. An attacker who can gain access to it and alter the code can either
add surreptitious actions to the boot script itself (staying within the S3
programming model so as not to ring alarm bells) or, if this doesn’t suf-
fice, exploit the boot script’s interpreter by going beyond the opcodes’
intended functionality.
     The S3 boot script has access to input/output (I/O) ports for read
and write, PCI configuration read and write, direct access to the physical
memory with read and write privileges, and other data that is critical for
the platform’s security. Notably, an S3 boot script can attack a hypervisor to
disclose otherwise isolated memory regions. All of this means that a rogue
S3 script will have an impact similar to a code execution vulnerability inside
the SMM, discussed earlier in this chapter.
     As S3 scripts are executed early in the wake process, before vari-
ous security measures are activated, the attacker can use them to bypass
some security hardware configurations that would normally take effect
during the boot process. Indeed, by design, most of the S3 boot script
opcodes cause the system firmware to restore the contents of various hard-
ware configuration registers. For the most part, this process isn’t any dif-
ferent from writing to these registers during the operating system runtime,
except that write access is allowed for the S3 script but disallowed for the
operating system.
     Attackers can target the S3 boot script by altering a data structure
called the UEFI boot script table, which saves the platform state during the
Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI) specification’s S3
sleep stage, when most of the platform’s components are powered off.
UEFI code constructs a boot script table during normal boot and inter-
prets its entries during an S3 resumption, when the platform is waking up
from sleep. Attackers able to modify the current boot script table’s con-
tents from the OS kernel mode and then trigger an S3 suspend-resume
cycle can achieve arbitrary code execution at the early platform wake
stage, when some of security features are not yet initialized or locked in
the memory.

2. You can find a detailed technical explanation of the S3–to–working-state resumption
implementation in Jiewen Yao and Vincent J. Zimmer, “A Tour Beyond BIOS Implementing S3
Resume with EDKII” (Intel whitepaper), October 2014, https://firmware.intel.com/sites/default/
files/A_Tour_Beyond_BIOS_Implementing_S3_resume_with_EDKII.pdf.

                                                                 UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   307
                              Discove ry of the S3 Boot Scrip t V ulne r a bilit y

                         The first researchers to publicly describe the malicious behavior of an S3 boot
                         script were Rafal Wojtczuk and Corey Kallenberg. In their December 2014
                         presentation “Attacks on UEFI Security, Inspired by Darth Venamis’s Misery
                         and Speed Racer” (https://bit.ly/2ucc2vU) at the 31st Chaos Communication
                         Congress (31C3), they revealed the S3-related vulnerability CVE-2014-8274
                         (VU#976132). A few weeks later, security researcher Dmytro Oleksiuk (also
                         known as Cr4sh) released the first proof-of-concept exploit for this vulnerability.
                         The PoC’s release triggered multiple discoveries by other researchers. A few
                         months later, Pedro Vilaca found multiple related problems in Apple products
                         based on UEFI firmware. Researchers at the Intel Advanced Threat Research
                         group also highlighted several potential S3 attacks in virtualization security in
                         their talk “Attacking Hypervisors via Firmware and Hardware” (https://www​
                         .youtube.com/watch?v=nyW3eTobXAI), presented at Black Hat Vegas in 2015.
                         If you want to know more about the S3 boot script vulnerabilities, we recom-
                         mend looking at some of these presentations.

                    Exploiting the S3 Boot Script Vulnerability
                    The impact of an S3 boot script exploit is clearly huge. But how exactly does
                    the attack work? First, the attacker must already have code execution in the
                    kernel mode (Ring 0) of the operating system, as Figure 16-6 shows.

                   Kernel mode                                          ACPI NVS
                                                   
    Malicious kernel-mode shellcode or driver                  AcpiGlobalVariable structure

                     
                                                              +0x18: S3 boot script pointer
     Call GetFirmwareEnvironmentVariable()
                                                              Original S3 boot script pointer

                                                  

                                                                      UEFI firmware

                                                                 Malicious dispatch code

                                                                  Copied S3 boot script            ?

                                                                        Shellcode

Figure 16-6: Step-by-step exploitation of an S3 boot script

308   Chapter 16
     Let’s dig into each step of this exploit.

1.   Initial reconnaissance. During the reconnaissance phase, an attacker
     must get the S3 boot script pointer (address) from the UEFI vari-
     able AcpiGlobalVariable, which points to the boot script location in
     unprotected DRAM memory. Then they must copy the original boot
     script into a memory location so they can restore the original state
     after exploitation. Finally, they must make sure the system is actually
     affected by the S3 boot script vulnerability by using the modification
     dispatch code EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_DISPATCH_OPCODE, which adds a record into
     the specified boot script table to execute arbitrary code, as shown in
Listing 16-5. If the modification of a single S3 opcode is successful, the
     system is most likely vulnerable.
2.   S3 boot script modification. To modify the boot script, the attacker
     inserts a malicious dispatch opcode record at the top of the copied boot
     script to place as the first boot script opcode command. They then over-
     write the boot script address location by setting the AcpiGlobalVariable to
     a pointer to the modified malicious version of the boot script.
3.   Payload delivery. The S3 boot script dispatch code (EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT​
     _DISPATCH_OPCODE) should now point to the malicious shellcode. The
     content of the payload depends on the attacker’s target. It could serve
     multiple purposes, including bypassing SMM memory protection or
     executing additional shellcode stages mapped separately elsewhere in
     memory.
4.   Vulnerability trigger. The malicious boot script is executed right after
     the attacked machine returns from sleep mode. To trigger an exploit,
     either the user or additional malicious code inside the OS would have to
     activate S3 sleep mode. After the boot script starts execution, it jumps to
     the entry point address defined by the dispatch code—where the mali-
     cious shellcode receives control.

    Listing 16-5 lists all S3 boot script opcodes documented by Intel, includ-
ing the highlighted EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_DISPATCH_OPCODE, which executes the mali-
cious shellcode.

EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_IO_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x00
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_IO_READ_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x01
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_MEM_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x02
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_MEM_READ_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x03
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_PCI_CONFIG_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x04
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_PCI_CONFIG_READ_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x05
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_SMBUS_EXECUTE_OPCODE = 0x06
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_STALL_OPCODE = 0x07
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_DISPATCH_OPCODE = 0x08
EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_MEM_POLL_OPCODE = 0x09

Listing 16-5: S3 Boot Script dispatch opcodes

                                                       UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   309
                         You can find a reference implementation of the S3 boot script developed
                   by Intel in the EDKII repository on GitHub (https://github.com/tianocore/edk2/
                   tree/master/MdeModulePkg/Library/PiDxeS3BootScriptLib/). This code is useful
                   for understanding both the internals of the S3 boot script behavior on x86
                   systems and the mitigations implemented to prevent the vulnerability we just
                   discussed.
                         To check whether a system is affected by the S3 boot script vulnerabil-
                   ity, you can use Chipsec’s S3 Boot Script tool (chipsec/modules/common/uefi/
                   s3bootscript.py). You can’t use this tool to exploit the vulnerability, however.
                         You could, however, use Dmytro Oleksiuk’s PoC of the exploit published
                   on GitHub (https://github.com/Cr4sh/UEFI_boot_script_expl/) to deliver a pay-
                   load. Listing 16-6 shows the successful result of this PoC exploitation.

                   [x][ =======================================================================
                   [x][ Module: UEFI boot script table vulnerability exploit
                   [x][ =======================================================================
                   [*] AcpiGlobalVariable = 0x79078000
                   [*] UEFI boot script addr = 0x79078013
                   [*] Target function addr = 0x790780b6
                   8 bytes to patch
                   Found 79 zero bytes at 0x0x790780b3
                   Jump from 0x79078ffb to 0x79078074
                   Jump from 0x790780b6 to 0x790780b3
                   Going to S3 sleep for 10 seconds ...
                   rtcwake: wakeup from "mem" using /dev/rtc0 at Mon Jun 6 09:03:04 2018
                   [*] BIOS_CNTL = 0x28
                   [*] TSEGMB = 0xd7000000
                   [!] Bios lock enable bit is not set
                   [!] SMRAM is not locked
                   [!] Your system is VULNERABLE

Listing 16-6: The result of successful S3 boot script exploitation

                       This vulnerability and its exploit are also useful for disabling some
                   of the BIOS protection bits, such as BIOS Lock Enabled, BIOS Write
                   Protection, and some others configured in the FLOCKDN (Flash Lock-
                   Down) register. Importantly, an S3 exploit can also disable the protected
                   ranges of PRx registers by modifying their configuration. Also, as we men-
                   tioned before, you can use the S3 vulnerability to bypass virtualization
                   memory isolation technologies, such as Intel VT-x. In fact, the following
                   S3 opcodes can make direct memory accesses during recovery from sleep
                   state:

                   EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_IO_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x00
                   EFI_BOOT_SCRIPT_IO_READ_WRITE_OPCODE = 0x01

                       Those opcodes can write some value to a specified memory location
                   on behalf of the UEFI firmware, which makes it possible to attack a guest
                   VM. Even when the architecture includes a hypervisor more privileged than
                   the host system, the host system can attack it via S3 and, through it, all the
                   guests.

310   Chapter 16
        Fixing the S3 Boot Script Vulnerability
        The S3 boot script vulnerability was one of the most impactful security vul-
        nerabilities in UEFI firmware. It was easy to exploit and hard to mitigate,
        since an actual fix required multiple firmware architectural changes.
             Mitigating the S3 boot script issue required integrity protection from
        Ring 0 modifications. One way to achieve this was to move the S3 boot script
        to the SMRAM (SMM memory range). But there’s another way: in a tech-
        nique introduced in EDKII (edk2/MdeModulePkg/Library/SmmLockBoxLib),
        Intel architects designed a LockBox mechanism to protect the S3 boot script
                                                   3
        from any modifications outside of SMM.

Vulnerabilities in the Intel Management Engine
        The Intel Management Engine is interesting for an attacker. This technol-
        ogy has tantalized hardware security researchers ever since its inception,
        because it’s both virtually undocumented and extremely powerful. Today,
        the ME uses a separate x86-based CPU (in the past, it used the boutique
        ARC CPU) and serves as the foundation for the Intel hardware root of trust
        and multiple security technologies such as Intel Boot Guard, Intel BIOS
        Guard, and, partially, Intel Software Guard Extension (SGX). Thus, com-
        promising ME provides a way to bypass Secure Boot.
            Control of ME is a highly coveted goal for attackers, since ME has all
        the power of SMM but can also execute an embedded real-time OS on a
        separate 32-bit microcontroller that operates totally independently of the
        main CPU. Let’s look at some of its vulnerabilities.

        A History of ME Vulnerabilities
        In 2009, security researchers Alexander Tereshkin and Rafal Wojtczuk from
        Invisible Things Lab presented their research on abusing ME in their talk,
        “Introducing Ring –3 Rootkits,” presented at the Black Hat USA conference
        in Las Vegas.4 They shared their discoveries about Intel ME internals and
        discussed ways of injecting code into the Intel AMT execution context—by
        co-opting ME into a rootkit, for example.
            The next advance in understanding ME vulnerabilities came an entire
        eight years later. Researchers Maxim Goryachy and Mark Ermolov from
        Positive Technologies discovered code execution vulnerabilities in the
        newer version of ME, present in Intel’s sixth, seventh, and eighth genera-
        tions of CPUs. These vulnerabilities—CVE-2017-5705, CVE-2017-5706, and
        CVE-2017-5707, respectively—allowed an attacker to execute arbitrary code
        inside ME’s operating system context, resulting in a complete compro-
        mise of the respective platforms at the highest level of privilege. Goryachy

        3. More information can be found in the aforementioned paper “A Tour Beyond BIOS:
        Implementing S3 Resume with EDKII” (https://firmware.intel.com/sites/default/files/A_Tour​
        _Beyond_BIOS_Implementing_S3_resume_with_EDKII.pdf ).
        4. https://invisiblethingslab.com/resources/bh09usa/Ring%20-3%20Rootkits.pdf

                                                                           UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   311
                   and Ermolov presented these discoveries in “How to Hack a Turned-Off
                   Computer, or Running Unsigned Code in Intel Management Engine” at
                   Black Hat Europe 2017, 5 where the researchers showed how rootkit code
                   could bypass or disable multiple security features, including Intel’s Boot
                   Guard and BIOS Guard technologies, by compromising their root of
                   trust. Whether any security technologies are resilient to a compromised
                   ME remains an open research question. Among other capabilities, rootkit
                   code that executes in the Intel ME context allows the attacker to modify the
                   BIOS image (and, partially, the root of trust of Boot Guard) directly inside
                   the SPI flash chip and thus to bypass most security features.

                   ME Code Attacks
                   Even though ME code executes on its own chip, it communicates with other
                   layers of the OS and can be attacked via these communications. As always,
                   the communication boundary is a part of any computational environment’s
                   attack surface, no matter how isolated the environment.
                        Intel created a special interface, called the Host-Embedded Controller
                   Interface (HECI), so ME applications could communicate with the operating
                   system kernel. This interface could be used, for example, to remotely man-
                   age a system via a network connection terminating at the ME but capable of
                   capturing the operating system GUI (via VNC, for example) or for operat-
                   ing system–aided configuration of the platform during the manufacturing
                   process. It could also be used to implement Intel vPro enterprise manage-
                   ment services, including AMT (which we discuss in the next section).
                        Typically, UEFI firmware initializes HECI via a proxy SMM driver,
                   HeciInitDxe, located inside the BIOS. This SMM driver passes messages
                   between ME and the host OS vendor-specific driver over the PCH bridge,
                   which connects the CPU and the ME chip.
                        Applications running inside the ME can register HECI handlers to
                   accept communication from the host operating system (the ME should not
                   trust any input from the OS). If the OS kernel is taken over by an attacker,
                   these interfaces become a part of the ME’s attack surface; for example, an
                   overly trusting parser inside an ME application that does not fully validate
                   messages coming from the OS side could be compromised by a crafted mes-
                   sage, just as weak network servers are. This is why it’s important to reduce
                   the attack surface for ME applications by minimizing the number of HECI
                   handlers. Indeed, Apple platforms permanently disable the HECI interfaces
                   and minimize the number of their ME applications as a deliberate security
                   policy decision. However, one compromised ME application doesn’t mean
                   the entire ME is compromised.

                   Case Studies: Attacks on Intel AMT and BMC
                   Let’s now consider vulnerabilities in two technologies that use the ME.
                   To manage large data centers, as well as massive enterprise workstation

                   5. https://www.blackhat.com/docs/eu-17/materials/eu-17-Goryachy-How-To-Hack-A-Turned-Off-Com-
                   puter-Or-Running-Unsigned-Code-In-Intel-Management-Engine.pdf

312   Chapter 16
inventories that must be centrally managed, organizations often use tech-
nologies that embed the management endpoint and logic into a platform’s
main board. This allows them to control the platform remotely, even when
the platform’s main CPU isn’t running. These technologies, which include
Intel’s AMT and various baseboard management controller (BMC) chips,
have inevitably become a part of their platforms’ attack surface.
    A full discussion of attacks on AMT and BMCs is outside the scope
of this chapter. However, we still want to provide some pointers, since
exploitation of these technologies is directly tied to UEFI vulnerabilities
and has gotten a lot of attention lately, due to high-impact Intel AMT and
BMC vulnerabilities revealed in 2017 and 2018. We’ll discuss these vulner-
abilities next.

AMT Vulnerabilities
Intel’s AMT platform is implemented as an ME application and so directly
relates to the Intel ME execution environment. AMT leverages the ME’s
ability to communicate with a platform over a network even when the main
CPU is not active or is completely powered down. It also uses the ME to
read and write DRAM at runtime, independently of the main CPU. AMT is
an archetypical example of an ME firmware application that is intended to
be updated via the BIOS update mechanism. For this purpose, Intel AMT
runs its own web server, used as the main entry point for an enterprise
remote management console.
     In 2017, after nearly two decades of having a clean public security
record, AMT had its first vulnerability reported—but it was a shocking
one, and, given its nature, hardly the last one we’ll see! Researchers from
Embedi (a private security company) alerted Intel about the critical issue
CVE-2017-5689 (INTEL-SA-00075), which allowed for remote access and
authentication bypass. All Intel systems produced since 2008 and that sup-
port the ME are affected. (This excludes the sizable Intel Atom population,
which itself did not include the ME, although all of its server and worksta-
tion products were likely vulnerable if they included vulnerable compo-
nents of the ME. Officially, only Intel vPro systems have AMT.) The scope of
this vulnerability is pretty interesting, as it mostly affected systems designed
to be accessed via a remote AMT management console even when turned
off—meaning that the system could also be attacked when turned off.
     Typically, AMT was marketed as a part of the Intel vPro technology,
but in the same presentation, Embedi researchers demonstrated that AMT
could be enabled for non-vPro systems. They released the AMTactivator
tool, which an operating system administrator could run to activate AMT
even when it was not officially a part of the platform. The researchers
showed that AMT was a part of all current Intel CPUs powered by the ME,
no matter whether they were marketed as vPro-enabled or not; in the latter
case, AMT was still present and could be activated, for good or bad. More
details about this vulnerability can be found at https://www.blackhat.com/
docs/us-17/thursday/us-17-Evdokimov-Intel-AMT-Stealth-Breakthrough-wp.pdf.

                                                       UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   313
                        Intel has deliberately disclosed very little information regarding AMT,
                   creating considerable difficulties for anyone outside of Intel attempting
                   to research the security failings of this technology. However, advanced
                   attackers took the challenge and made significant progress in analyzing
                   AMT’s hidden possibilities. Further nasty surprises for defenders may
                   follow.

                                              The Pl at inum A P T Rootkit

                        Not directly related to Intel AMT firmware but also interesting is the fact that
                        the so-called PLATINUM APT actor used AMT’s Serial-over-LAN (SOL) chan-
                        nel for network communications. This rootkit was discovered by Microsoft’s
                        Windows Defender Research group in the summer of 2017. AMT SOL’s com-
                        munications worked independently of the operating system and so were
                        invisible to the OS-level firewall and network monitoring applications run-
                        ning on the host device. Until this incident, no malware had been known
                        to abuse the AMT SOL feature as a covert communication channel. For
                        additional details, check out the original paper and blog post released by
                        Microsoft (https://cloudblogs.microsoft.com/microsoftsecure/2017/06/07/
                        platinum-continues-to-evolve-find-ways-to-maintain-invisibility/). The existence
                        of this channel was discovered by LegbaCore researchers, who disclosed it
                        before it was discovered in the wild (http://legbacore.com/Research_files/
                        HowManyMillionBIOSWouldYouLikeToInfect_Full.pdf).

                   BMC Chip Vulnerabilities
                   At the same time that Intel was developing vPro offerings powered by the
                   AMT platform’s ME execution environments, other vendors were busy devel-
                   oping competing centralized remote management solutions for servers: BMC
                   chips integrated into the servers. As products of this parallel evolution, BMC
                   designs have a lot of the same weaknesses as AMT.
                       Commonly found in server hardware, BMC deployments are ubiquitous
                   in data centers. Major hardware vendors like Intel, Dell, and HP have their
                   own BMC implementations, based primarily on ARM microcontrollers with
                   integrated network interfaces and flash storage. This dedicated flash stor-
                   age contains a real-time OS (RTOS) that powers a number of applications,
                   such as a web server listening on the BMC chip’s network interface (a sepa-
                   rate network management interface).
                       If you’ve been reading attentively, this should scream “attack surface!”
                   Indeed, a BMC’s embedded web server is typically written in C (includ-
                   ing CGI) and is thus a prime target for attackers in the market for input-
                   handling vulnerabilities. A good example of such a vulnerability is HP
                   iLO BMC’s CVE-2017-12542, which allowed an authentication bypass and
                   remote code execution in the respective BMC’s web server. This security
                   issue was discovered by Airbus researchers Fabien Périgaud, Alexandre

314   Chapter 16
        Gazet, and Joffrey Czarny. We highly recommend their detailed whitepaper
        “Subverting Your Server Through Its BMC: The HPE iLO4 Case” (https://
        bit.ly/2HxeCUS).
              BMC vulnerabilities underscore the fact that, no matter what hardware
        separation techniques you employ, the overall measure of a platform’s attack
        surface is its communication boundary. The more functionality you expose
        at this boundary, the greater the risk to the platform’s overall security. A
        platform may feature a separate CPU with a separate firmware running
        on it, but if this firmware includes a rich target, such as a web server, the
        attacker can leverage the platform’s weaknesses to install an implant. For
        example, a BMC-based firmware update process that does not authenticate
        over-the-network update images is just as vulnerable as any security-through-
        obscurity software installation scheme.

Conclusion
        The trustworthiness of UEFI firmware and other system firmware for x86-
        based platforms is a hot topic today, worthy of an entire book of its own. In
        a sense, UEFI was meant to reinvent the BIOS, but it did so with all the fail-
        ings of security-by-obscurity approaches of the legacy BIOS, plus a lot more.
            We made some hard decisions about which vulnerabilities to include
        here and which to give more detailed coverage to in order to illustrate
        the larger architectural failings. In the end, we hope that this chapter has
        covered just enough background to give you a deeper understanding of
        the current state of UEFI firmware security through the prism of common
        design flaws, rather than merely regaling you with a hodgepodge of infa-
        mous vulnerabilities.
            Nowadays UEFI firmware is the cornerstone of platform security, despite
        being universally neglected by vendors a few years ago. The collaborative
        effort of the security research community made this change possible—and
        we hope that our book gives it its due and helps further its progress.

                                                              UEFI Firmware Vulnerabilities   315
