                         17
  How UEFI Secure Boot Works

            In previous chapters, we talked about the
           introduction of the Kernel-Mode Code
          Signing Policy, which encouraged malware
      developers to shift from using rootkits to using
bootkits, moving the attack vector from the OS kernel
to unprotected boot components. This kind of malware
executes before the OS loads, so it’s able to bypass or
disable OS security mechanisms. In order to enforce security and ensure
safety, then, the OS must be able to boot into a trusted environment whose
components have not been tampered with.
    This is where UEFI Secure Boot technology, the subject of this chapter,
comes into play. Aimed primarily at protecting the platform’s boot com-
ponents against modification and ensuring that only trusted modules are
loaded and executed at bootup, UEFI Secure Boot can be an effective
solution to bootkit threats—as long as it covers all angles of attack.
                        However, the protections offered by UEFI Secure Boot are vulnerable
                   to firmware rootkits, the newest and fastest-growing malware technology. As
                   a result, you need another layer of security to cover the entire boot process
                   from the very beginning. You can achieve this with an implementation of
                   Secure Boot called Verified and Measured Boot.
                        This chapter introduces you to the core of this security technology, first
                   describing how it can protect against firmware rootkits when anchored into
                   hardware and then discussing its implementation details and how it protects
                   victims against bootkits.
                        As often happens in the security industry, though, very few security solu-
                   tions can provide an ultimate protection against attacks; the attackers and
                   defenders are locked in an eternal arms race. We’ll close the chapter by dis-
                   cussing the flaws of UEFI Secure Boot, ways to bypass it, and how to protect
                   it using two versions of Verified and Measured Boot from Intel and ARM.

     What Is Secure Boot?
                   The main purpose of Secure Boot is to prevent anyone from executing
                   unauthorized code in the preboot environment; thus, only code that meets
                   the platform’s integrity policy is allowed to execute. This technology is
                   very important for high-assurance platforms, and it’s also frequently used
                   on embedded devices and mobile platforms, as it allows vendors to restrict
                   platforms to vendor-approved software, such as iOS on iPhones or the
                   Windows 10 S operating system.
                       Secure Boot comes in three forms, which depend on the level of the
                   boot process hierarchy at which it’s enforced:
                       OS Secure Boot Implemented at the level of the OS bootloader. This
                       verifies components loaded by the OS bootloader, such as the OS kernel
                       and boot-start drivers.
                       UEFI Secure Boot Implemented in UEFI firmware. This verifies UEFI
                       DXE drivers and applications, Option ROMs, and OS bootloaders.
                       Platform Secure Boot (Verified and Measured Secure Boot) Anchored
                       in the hardware. This verifies platform initialization firmware.
                      We discussed OS Secure Boot in Chapter 6, so in this chapter we focus
                   on UEFI Secure Boot and Verified and Measured Boot.

     UEFI Secure Boot Implementation Details
                   We’ll start this discussion with how UEFI Secure Boot works. First, it’s impor-
                   tant to note that UEFI Secure Boot is a part of the UEFI specification, which
                   you can find at http://www.uefi.org/sites/default/files/resources/UEFI_Spec_2_7​
                   .pdf. We’ll be referring to the specification—in other words, the description
                   of how UEFI Secure Boot is supposed to work—though different platform
                   manufacturers may have different implementation details.

320   Chapter 17
Note   When we refer to “Secure Boot” from now on in this section, we’re talking about UEFI
       Secure Boot unless otherwise mentioned.

           We’ll begin by looking at the boot sequence to see where Secure Boot
       comes into play. Then, we’ll look at how Secure Boot authenticates execut­
       ables and discuss the databases involved.

       The Boot Sequence
       Let’s quickly review the UEFI boot sequence described in Chapter 14 to see
       where Secure Boot comes into the process. If you skipped that chapter, it’s
       worth visiting it now.
            If you refer back to “How UEFI Firmware Works” on page 242, you’ll
       see that the first piece of code executed when a system comes out of reset
       is the platform initialization (PI) firmware, which performs basic initializa-
       tion of the platform hardware. When the PI is executed, the chipset and
       memory controller are still in an uninitialized state: no DRAM is available
       for the firmware yet, and peripheral devices on the PCIe bus have not yet
       been enumerated. (The PCIe bus is a high-speed serial bus standard used
       on virtually all modern PCs; we’ll discuss it more in later chapters.) At this
       point, Secure Boot isn’t yet active, meaning the PI part of the system’s firm-
       ware isn’t protected at this point.
            Once the PI firmware discovers and configures RAM and performs the
       basic platform initialization, it proceeds to load the DXE drivers and UEFI
       applications, which in turn continue to initialize the platform hardware.
       This is when Secure Boot comes into play. Anchored in the PI firmware,
       Secure Boot is used to authenticate the UEFI modules loaded from the SPI
       (Serial Peripheral Interface) flash or Option ROMs of peripheral devices.
            The authentication mechanism used in Secure Boot is, in essence, a
       digital signature verification process. Only properly authenticated images
       are allowed to execute. Secure Boot relies on a public key infrastructure (PKI)
       to manage signature verification keys.
            Explained simply, a Secure Boot implementation contains a public key
       that is used to verify the digital signature of executable images loaded at
       boot. The images should have an embedded digital signature, although, as
       you’ll see later in this chapter, there are some exceptions to this rule. If an
       image passes verification, it is loaded and eventually executed. If an image
       does not have a signature and verification fails, it will trigger remediation
       behavior—actions executed in cases when Secure Boot fails. Depending on
       the policy, the system can continue booting normally or abort the boot pro-
       cess and display an error message to the user.
            Actual implementations of Secure Boot are a bit more complicated than
       we’ve described here. To properly establish trust in the code that’s executed
       during boot, Secure Boot uses different types of signature databases, keys,
       and policies. Let’s take a look at these factors one by one and dig into the
       details.

                                                                How UEFI Secure Boot Works   321
                                Re a l-World Imple mentat ions: Tr a deoffs

                       In real implementations of UEFI firmware, platform manufacturers often compro-
                       mise between security and performance. Checking the digital signature of every
                       UEFI image requesting execution takes time. On an average modern platform,
                       there may be a few hundred UEFI images trying to load, so verifying the digital
                       signature of every single executable would prolong the boot process. At the
                       same time, manufacturers are under pressure to reduce boot time, especially in
                       embedded systems and in the automotive industry. Instead of verifying every
                       UEFI image, firmware vendors often choose to verify UEFI images with hashes
                       to increase performance. The set of hashes for allowed images is located in a
                       storage solution, the integrity and authenticity of which is ensured only once, via
                       digital signature, when the storage is accessed. We’ll discuss these hashes in
                       more detail later in this chapter.

                   Executable Authentication with Digital Signatures
                   As a first step toward understanding Secure
                   Boot, let’s take a look at how UEFI execut­ables                    PE header
                   are actually signed—that is, where the digital
                   signature is located in an executable file and                  Certificate table
                   what kinds of signatures Secure Boot supports.                   data directory
                         For UEFI executable files that are Portable
                   Executable (PE) images, the digital signatures
                   are contained in special data structures called
                   signature certificates. The location of these cer-
                                                                               List of digital signature
                   tificates in the binary is determined by a spe-                    certificates
                   cial field of the PE header data structure called
                                                                               Signature certificate 1
                   the Certificate Table Data Directory, illustrated in
                                                                                          ...
Figure 17-1. It’s worth mentioning that there
                   may be multiple digital signatures for a single             Signature   certificate N
                   file, generated using different signing keys for
                   different purposes. By looking at this field, the    Figure 17-1: Location of digital
                                                                        signatures in UEFI images
                   UEFI firmware can locate the signature infor-
                   mation used to authenticate the executable.
                         Other types of UEFI executable images, such as Terse Executable (TE)
                   images, don’t have embedded digital signatures due to the specifics of
                   their executable format. The TE image format was derived from the PE/
                   COFF format in an attempt to reduce the TE’s size so that it would take
                   up less space. Thus, TE images contain only the fields of the PE format
                   that are necessary to execute an image in a PI environment, which means
                   they don’t contain fields like the Certificate Table Data Directory. As a
                   result, UEFI firmware can’t directly authenticate such images by verify-
                   ing their digital signature. However, Secure Boot provides capabilities for

322   Chapter 17
authenticating these images using cryptographic hashes, a mechanism that
is described in more detail in the next section.
     The layout of an embedded signature certificate depends on its type. We
won’t get into layout specifics here, but you can learn more in “Location of
Driver Signatures” on page 73.
     Every type of signature certificate used in Secure Boot contains the fol-
lowing at a minimum: information on the cryptographic algorithms used
for signature generation and verification (for instance, cryptographic hash
functions and digital signature algorithm identifiers), a cryptographic hash
of the executable in question, the actual digital signature, and the public
key used to verify the digital signature.
     This information is sufficient for Secure Boot to verify the authenticity of
an executable image. To do this, the UEFI firmware locates and reads a sig-
nature certificate from the executable, computes the hash of the executable
according to a specified algorithm, and then compares the hash with the one
provided in the signature certificate. If they match, the UEFI firmware veri-
fies the digital signature of the hash using the key provided in the signature
certificate. If the signature verification succeeds, then the UEFI firmware
accepts the signature. In any other case (like a hash mismatch or signature
verification failure), the UEFI firmware fails to authenticate the image.
     However, simply verifying that the signature matches isn’t enough to
establish trust in a UEFI executable. UEFI firmware must also ensure that
the executable was signed with an authorized key. Otherwise, there’s noth-
ing to prevent anyone from generating a custom signing key and signing a
malicious image with it to pass Secure Boot validation.
     That’s why the public key used for signature validation should be
matched with a trusted private key. The UEFI firmware explicitly trusts
these private keys, so they may be used to establish trust in an image.
A list of the trusted public keys is stored in the db database, which we’ll
explore next.

The db Database
The db database holds a list of trusted public key certificates authorized to
authenticate signatures. Whenever Secure Boot performs signature verifi-
cation on an executable, it checks the signature public key against the list
of keys in the db database to determine whether or not it can trust the key.
Only code signed with private keys that correspond to these certificates will
be executed on the platform during the boot process.
     In addition to the list of trusted public key certificates, the db database
contains hashes of individual executables that are allowed to execute on the
platform, regardless of whether or not they’re digitally signed. This mecha-
nism can be used to authenticate TE files that don’t have embedded digital
signatures.
     According to the UEFI specification, the signatures database is stored
in a nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM) variable that persists across reboots of the
system. The implementation of NVRAM variables is platform specific, and
different original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) may implement it in

                                                       How UEFI Secure Boot Works   323
                   different ways. Most commonly, these variables are stored in the same SPI
                   flash that contains platform firmware, such as the BIOS. As you’ll see in
                   “Modifying the UEFI Variables to Bypass Security Checks” on page 337,
                   this leads to vulnerabilities that you can use to bypass Secure Boot.
                        Let’s check out the contents of the db database on your own system by
                   dumping the contents of the NVRAM variable that holds the database.
                   We’ll be using the Lenovo Thinkpad T540p platform as our example, but
                   you should use whatever platform you’re working with. We’ll dump the con-
                   tents of the NVRAM variable using the Chipsec open source toolset, which
                   you encountered in Chapter 15. This toolset has rich functionality useful
                   for forensic analysis, and we’ll discuss it in more detail in Chapter 19.
                        Download the Chipsec tool from GitHub at https://github.com/chipsec/
                   chipsec/. The tool depends on winpy (Python for Windows Extensions), which
                   you’ll need to download and install before running Chipsec. Once you have
                   both, open Command Prompt or another command line interpreter and
                   navigate into the directory holding the downloaded Chipsec tool. Then
                   enter the following command to get a list of your UEFI variables:

                   $ chipsec_util.py uefi var-list

                        This command dumps all the UEFI variables from your current direc-
                   tory into the subdirectory efi_variables.dir and decodes the contents of some
                   of them (Chipsec decodes only the contents of known variables). Navigate
                   to the directory, and you should see something similar to Figure 17-2.

Figure 17-2: UEFI variables dumped by Chipsec

                       Every entry in this directory corresponds to a separate UEFI
                   NVRAM variable. These variable names have the structure VarName
                   _VarGUID_VarAttributes.bin, where VarName is the name of the variable,
                   VarGUID is the variable’s 16-byte global unique identifier (GUID), and
                   VarAttributes is a list of the variable’s attributes in short form. Based on

324   Chapter 17
the UEFI specification, here are some of the attributes of the entries in
Figure 17-2.
    NV   Nonvolatile, meaning the variable’s content persists across reboot.
    BS Can be accessed by UEFI boot services. UEFI boot services are
    generally available during boot time before the OS loader is executed.
    Once the OS loader is launched, the UEFI boot services are no longer
    available.
    RT Can be accessed by UEFI runtime services. Unlike UEFI boot ser-
    vices, the runtime services persist throughout the loading of the OS
    and during the OS runtime.
    AWS Count-based authenticated variable, meaning that any new vari-
    able content needs to be signed with an authorized key so the variable
    can be written to. The variable’s signed data includes a counter to pro-
    tect against rollback attacks.
    TBAWS Time-based authenticated variable, meaning any new variable
    content needs to be signed with an authorized key in order for the
    variable to be written to. The timestamp in the signature reflects the
    time when the data was signed. It’s used to confirm that the signature
    was created before the corresponding signing key expired. We provide
    more information on time-based authentication in the next section.
     If Secure Boot is configured and the db variable exists on the platform,
you should find a subfolder in this directory with a name starting with
db_D719B2CB-3D3A-4596-A3BC-DAD00E67656F. When Chipsec dumps the
db UEFI variable, it automatically decodes the variable’s contents into this
subfolder, which contains files corresponding to public key certificates and
hashes of UEFI images authorized for execution. In our case, we have five
files—four certificates and one SHA256 hash, as shown in Figure 17-3.

Figure 17-3: The contents of a signature database UEFI variable

    These certificates are encoded with X.509, a cryptographic standard
that defines the format of public key certificates. We can decode these
certificates to get information about the issuer, which will tell us whose
signature will pass Secure Boot verification. For this, we’ll use the openssl

                                                            How UEFI Secure Boot Works   325
                   toolkit, described in the box “The OpenSSL Toolkit.” Install the tool from
                   https://github.com/openssl/openssl/, and then run it with the following com-
                   mand, replacing certificate_file_path with the directory on your computer
                   that contains openssl:

                   $ openssl x509 -in certificate_file_path

                       On a Windows operating system, simply change the extension of the
                   X.509 certificate file from bin to crt and open the file with Explorer to see
                   the results of the decoding. Table 17-1 shows our results, with the issuers
                   and subjects of the certificates.

Table 17-1: The Decoded Certificates and Hashes from the UEFI Variable

                   Filename                        Issued to                Issued by
                   X509-7FACC7B6-127F-4E9C-        Thinkpad Product CA      Lenovo Ltd. Root CA 2012
                   9C5D-080F98994345-03.bin        2012
                   X509-7FACC7B6-127F-4E9C-        Lenovo UEFI CA 2014      Lenovo UEFI CA 2014
                   9C5D-080F98994345-04.bin
                   X509-77FA9ABD-0359-4D32-        Microsoft Corporation    Microsoft Corporation Third-
                   BD60-28F4E78F784B-01.bin        UEFI CA 2011             Party Marketplace Root
                   X509-77FA9ABD-0359-4D32-        Microsoft Windows        Microsoft Root Certificate
                   BD60-28F4E78F784B-02.bin        Production PCA 2011      Authority 2010

                      From the table, you can see that only UEFI images signed by Lenovo
                   and Microsoft will pass the UEFI Secure Boot code integrity checks.

                                               The OpenSSL Toolkit
                       OpenSSL is an open source software library that implements the Secure Socket
                       Layer and Transport Layer Security protocols, as well as general-purpose cryp-
                       tography primitives. Licensed under an Apache-style license, OpenSSL is fre-
                       quently used in commercial and noncommercial applications. The library offers
                       rich functionality for working with X.509 certificates, whether you’re parsing
                       existing certificates or generating new ones. You can find information on the
                       project at https://www.openssl.org/.

                   The dbx Database
                   In contrast to db, the dbx database contains certificates of public keys and
                   hashes of UEFI executables that are prohibited from executing at boot time.
                   This database is also referred to as the Revoked Signature Database, and it
                   explicitly lists images that will fail Secure Boot verification, preventing
                   execution of a module with a known vulnerability that may compromise
                   the security of the whole platform.

326   Chapter 17
                        We’ll explore the contents of the dbx database the same way we did
                   for the db signature database. Among the folders generated when you run
                   the Chipsec tool, you’ll find the folder efi_variables.dir, which should con-
                   tain a subfolder with a name beginning dbx_D719B2CB-3D3A-4596-A3BC-
                   DAD00E67656f. This folder contains certificates and hashes of forbidden
                   UEFI images. In our case, the folder contains only 78 hashes and no cer-
                   tificates, as shown in Figure 17-4.

Figure 17-4: Contents of the dbx database (the revoked signature database)
                   UEFI variable

                       Figure 17-5 shows the image signature verification algorithm using both
                   the db and dbx databases.

                                       UEFI
                                    executable

                                      Does the
                        No                              Yes
                                 executable have a
                                  valid signature?

     No           Is the hash         Yes
                    in the db
                  database?

                                            Yes      Is the publisher      No
                                                      or hash in the
                                                     dbx database?

                                                              No        Is the publisher        Yes
                                                                            in the db
                                                                           database?

   Fail                                                                                          Pass

Figure 17-5: The UEFI Secure Boot image verification algorithm

                                                                                  How UEFI Secure Boot Works   327
                       From this figure, you can see that an UEFI executable passes authentica-
                   tion only when its hash or signature certificate is trusted per the db database
                   and when it is not listed in the dbx database. Otherwise, the image fails the
                   Secure Boot integrity check.

                   Time-Based Authentication
                   In addition to the db and dbx databases, Secure Boot uses two other data-
                   bases, called dbt and dbr. The first, dbr, contains public key certificates used
                   to verify the signatures of the OS recovery loader. We won’t discuss it much.
                        The second, dbt, contains timestamping certificates used to validate the
                   timestamp of a UEFI executable’s digital signature, enabling time-based
                   authentication (TBAWS) in Secure Boot. (You saw TBAWS earlier in this
                   chapter when we looked at the attributes of UEFI variables.)
                        The digital signature of a UEFI executable sometimes contains a time-
                   stamp issued by the Time Stamping Authority (TSA) service. The signature’s
                   timestamp reflects the time at which the signature was generated. By com-
                   paring the signature timestamp and the expiration timestamp of the signing
                   key, Secure Boot determines whether the signature was generated before
                   or after the signing key expired. Generally, the expiration date of the sign-
                   ing key is the date after which the signing key is considered compromised.
                   As a result, the timestamp of the signature allows Secure Boot to verify that
                   the signature was generated at a moment when the signing key wasn’t com-
                   promised, ensuring that the signature is legitimate. In this way, time-based
                   authentication reduces the complexity of PKI when it comes to Secure Boot
                   db certificates.
                        Time-based authentication also allows you to avoid re-signing the same
                   UEFI images. The timestamp of the signature proves to Secure Boot that
                   a UEFI image was signed before the corresponding signing key expired or
                   was revoked. As a result, the signature remains valid even after the signing
                   key is expired, since it was created when the signing key was still valid and
                   not compromised.

                   Secure Boot Keys
                   Now that you’ve seen where Secure Boot obtains information on trusted and
                   revoked public key certificates, let’s talk about how these databases are stored
                   and protected from unauthorized modification. After all, by modifying the
                   db database, an attacker could easily bypass Secure Boot checks by injecting
                   a malicious certificate and replacing the OS bootloader with a rogue boot-
                   loader signed with a private key corresponding to the malicious certificate.
                   Since the malicious certificate is in the db signature database, Secure Boot
                   would allow the rogue bootloader to run.
                       So, to protect the db and dbx databases from unauthorized modifica-
                   tion, the platform or OS system vendor must sign the databases. When
                   the UEFI firmware goes to read the content of these databases, it first

328   Chapter 17
authenticates them by verifying their digital signature with a public key
called the key exchange key (KEK). It then authenticates each KEK with a
second key called the platform key (PK).

Key Exchange Keys
As with the db and dbx databases, the list of public KEKs is stored in an
NVRAM UEFI variable. We’ll explore the content of the KEK variable using
the results of our previous execution of the chipsec command. Open the
directory containing the results, and you should see a subfolder labeled
something like KEK_8BE4DF61-93CA-11D2-AA0D-00E098032B8C, which
contains certificates of public KEKs (Figure 17-6). This UEFI variable is
authenticated as well, as you’ll see next.

Figure 17-6: Contents of the KEK UEFI variable

    Only the owner of the private key corresponding to any of these certifi-
cates can modify the contents of the db and dbx databases. In this example,
we have only two KEK certificates, by Microsoft and Lenovo, as indicated in
Table 17-2.

Table 17-2: Certificates in the KEK UEFI Variable

 Filename                         Issued to               Issued by
 X509-7FACC7B6-127F-4E9C​         Lenovo Ltd. KEK CA      Lenovo Ltd. KEK CA 2012
 -9C5D-080F98994345-00.bin        2012
 X509-77FA9ABD-0359-4D32​         Microsoft Corporation   Microsoft Corporation Third-
 -BD60-28F4E78F784B-01.bin        KEK CA 2011             Party Marketplace Root

     You can discover the owners of the private keys corresponding to your
system’s KEK certificates by dumping the KEK variable and executing the
openssl command we used earlier.

                                                           How UEFI Secure Boot Works   329
                   Platform Key
                   The PK is the last signing key in the PKI key hierarchy of Secure Boot. As
                   you might have guessed, this key is used to authenticate KEKs by signing
                   the KEK UEFI variable. According to the UEFI specification, each platform
                   has a single PK. Usually, this key corresponds to the platform manufacturer.
                        Return to the PK_8BE4DF61-93CA-11D2-AA0D-00E098032B8C subfolder
                   of efi_variables.dir that was created when you executed chipsec. There, you
                   can find the certificate of the public PK. Your certificate will correspond to
                   your platform. So, since we used the Lenovo Thinkpad T540p platform, we
                   would expect our PK certificate to correspond to Lenovo (see Figure 17-7).

Figure 17-7: The PK certificate

                        You can see that ours was indeed issued by Lenovo. The PK UEFI vari-
                   able is also authenticated, and every update of the variable should be signed
                   with the corresponding private key. In other words, if the platform owner
                   (or the platform manufacturer, in UEFI terminology) wants to update the PK
                   variable with a new certificate, the buffer with the new certificate should be
                   signed with the private key that corresponds to the current certificate stored
                   in the PK variable.

                   UEFI Secure Boot: The Complete Picture
                   Now that we’ve explored the complete hierarchy of the PKI infrastructure
                   used in UEFI Secure Boot, let’s put everything together to see the whole
                   picture, shown in Figure 17-8.

330   Chapter 17
                UEFI Secure Boot root of trust

      Platform initialization firmware
                                           Platform key
       (SEC/PEI & DXE dispatcher)

              UEFI Secure Boot                   KEK

                                                 db
      UEFI
              Option    UEFI      DXE
      boot-
              ROM       app      driver
     loader
                                                 dbx

              UEFI OS loader

                  OS kernel

Figure 17-8: UEFI Secure Boot verification flow

     At the top of the figure, you can see that the root of trust (the com-
ponents that UEFI Secure Boot inherently trusts, upon which it bases all
of its future verification) is the platform initialization firmware and the
platform key. The platform initialization firmware is the very first piece of
code executed when the CPU comes out of a reset, and the UEFI Secure
Boot implicitly trusts this code. If an attacker compromises the PI firm-
ware, the whole chain of trust enforced by Secure Boot is broken. In that
case, the attacker can patch any UEFI module that implements the Secure
Boot image verification routines so it always returns a success and, as a
result, allows every UEFI image supplied to pass authentication.
     That’s why the Secure Boot trust model assumes you’ve correctly imple-
mented the Firmware Secure Update mechanism, which requires every
update of the firmware to be signed with the proper signing key (which
must be different from the PK). That way, only authorized updates of PI
firmware take place, and the root of trust remains uncompromised.
     It’s easy to see that this trust model does not protect against physical
attackers, who can physically reprogram the SPI flash with a malicious
firmware image and compromise the PI firmware. We’ll talk about pro-
tecting firmware against physical attacks in “Protecting Secure Boot with
Verified and Measured Boot” on page 338.
     At the top of Figure 17-8, you can see the platform key provided by the
platform manufacturer has the same level of inherent trust as PI firmware.

                                                          How UEFI Secure Boot Works   331
                   This key is used to establish trust between the PI firmware and the platform
                   manufacturer. Once the platform key is provided, the platform firmware
                   allows the manufacturer to update the KEKs and, as a result, control which
                   images pass Secure Boot checks and which don’t.
                        One level below, you see the KEKs that establish trust between the PI
                   firmware and the OS running on the platform. Once the platform KEK is
                   provisioned in the UEFI variable, the OS is able to specify which images
                   can pass Secure Boot check. For example, the OS vendor can use the KEK
                   to allow the UEFI firmware to execute the OS loader.
                        At the bottom of the trust model, you see the db and dbx databases signed
                   with KEKs, which contain hashes of images and public key certificates that
                   are used directly in integrity checks of executables enforced by Secure Boot.

                   Secure Boot Policy
                   By itself, Secure Boot uses the PK, KEK, db, dbx, and dbt variables to tell
                   the platform whether or not an executable image is trusted, as you’ve
                   seen. However, the way in which the result of Secure Boot verification is
                   interpreted (in other words, whether or not to execute an image) largely
                   depends on the policy in place.
                        We’ve already mentioned Secure Boot policies a few times in this chapter
                   without getting into the details of what one actually is. So, let’s take a closer
                   look at this concept.
                        In essence, a Secure Boot policy dictates which actions the platform
                   firmware should take after it performs image authentication. The firmware
                   might execute the image, deny image execution, defer image execution, or
                   ask a user to make the decision.
                        Secure Boot policy isn’t rigorously defined in the UEFI specification
                   and, therefore, is specific to each implementation. In particular, poli-
                   cies can vary between implementations of UEFI firmware by different
                   vendors. In this section, we’ll explore some Secure Boot policy elements
                   implemented in Intel’s EDK2 source code, which we used in Chapter 15.
                   Download or clone the EDK2 source code now from the repository at
                   https://github.com/tianocore/edk2/ if you haven’t already.
                        One of the elements that Secure Boot, as implemented in EDK2, takes
                   into account is the origin of the executable images being authenticated.
                   The images could come from different storage devices, some of which may
                   be inherently trusted. For instance, if the image is loaded from the SPI
                   flash, meaning it’s located on the same storage device as the rest of UEFI
                   firmware, then the platform might trust it automatically. (However, if an
                   attacker is able to alter the image on SPI flash, they could also tamper
                   with the rest of the firmware and disable Secure Boot completely. We’ll
                   discuss this attack later in “Patching PI Firmware to Disable Secure Boot”
                   on page 335.) On the other hand, if the image is loaded from an external
                   PCI device—for example, an Option ROM, special firmware loaded from
                   external peripheral devices in the preboot environment—then it would be
                   treated as untrusted and subject to a Secure Boot check.

332   Chapter 17
            Here, we outline the definitions of some of the policies that determine
       how to process images with respect to their origin. You can find these poli-
       cies in the SecurityPkg\SecurityPkg.dec file located in the EDK2 repository.
       Each policy assigns a default value to the images that meet the criteria.
           PcdOptionRomImageVerificationPolicy Defines the verification policy for
           images loaded as Option ROMs, like those from PCI devices (default
           value: 0x00000004).
           PcdRemovableMediaImageVerificationPolicy Defines the verification policy
           for images located on removable media, which includes CD-ROM, USB,
           and network (default value: 0x00000004).
           PcdFixedMediaImageVerificationPolicy Defines the verification policy
           for images located on fixed media devices, such as hard disks (default
           value: 0x00000004).
           In addition to these policies, there are two more policies that aren’t
       explicitly defined in the SecurityPkg\SecurityPkg.dec file but are used in EDK2
       Secure Boot implementation:
           SPI flash ROM policy Defines the verification policy for images
           located on SPI flash (default value: 0x00000000).
           Other origin Defines the verification policy for any images located on
           devices other than those just described (default value: 0x00000004).

Note   Keep in mind that this isn’t a comprehensive list of Secure Boot policies used for image
       authentication. Different firmware vendors can modify or extend this list with their
       custom policies.

           Here are the descriptions of the default policy values:
           0x00000000 Always trust the image regardless of whether or not it’s
           signed and regardless of whether its hash is in the db or dbx database.
           0x00000001 Never trust the image. Even images with valid signatures
           will be rejected.
           0x00000002 Allow execution when there is a security violation. The
           image will be executed even if the signature cannot be verified or if its
           hash is blacklisted in the dbx database.
           0x00000003 Defer execution when there is a security violation. In
           this case, the image isn’t rejected immediately and is loaded in memory.
           However, its execution is postponed until its authentication status is
           reevaluated.
           0x00000004 Deny execution when Secure Boot fails to authenticate
           the image using the db and dbx databases.
           0x00000005 Query the user when there is a security violation. In this
           case, if Secure Boot fails to authenticate the image, an authorized user
           may make a decision about whether to trust the image. For example,
           the user may be shown a message prompt at boot time.

                                                                  How UEFI Secure Boot Works   333
                       From the Secure Boot policy definitions, you can see that all the
                   images loaded from SPI flash are inherently trusted and aren’t subject to
                   digital signature verification at all. In all other cases, the default value of
                   0x000000004 enforces signature verification and prohibits the execution
                   of any unauthenticated code that comes as Option ROM or that is located
                   on removable, fixed, or any other media.

                   Protection Against Bootkits Using Secure Boot
                   Now that you’ve seen how Secure Boot works, let’s take a look at a specific
                   example of how it protects against bootkits that target the OS boot flow. We
                   won’t discuss bootkits that target the MBR and VBR, since, as Chapter 14
                   explained, UEFI firmware no longer uses objects like the MBR and VBR
                   (except in the UEFI compatibility mode), so traditional bootkits cannot
                   compromise UEFI-based systems.
                       As mentioned in Chapter 15, the DreamBoot bootkit was the first public
                   proof-of-concept bootkit targeting UEFI-based systems. On a UEFI system
                   without Secure Boot in place, this bootkit works as follows:

                   1.   The author of the bootkit replaces the original UEFI Windows boot-
                        loader, bootmgfw.efi, with the malicious bootloader, bootx64.efi, on the
                        boot partition.
                   2.   The malicious bootloader loads the original bootmgfw.efi, patches it to
                        get control of the Windows loader winload.efi, and executes it, as dem-
                        onstrated in Figure 17-9.

                                                 UEFI firmware

                                          Malicious UEFI OS bootloader
                                                  (bootx64.efi)

                          System is compromised
                                          Original UEFI OS bootloader
                                                 (bootmgfw.efi)
                          Patch modules

                                              Windows OS loader
                                                 (winload.efi)

                                                Windows kernel
                                                 (ntoskrnl.exe)

Figure 17-9: The flow of the DreamBoot attack
                        against the OS bootloader

334   Chapter 17
        3.   The malicious code continues patching the system modules until it
             reaches the kernel of the operating system, bypassing the kernel pro-
             tection mechanisms (such as the Kernel-Mode Code Signing Policy)
             intended to prevent unauthorized kernel-mode code execution.

             This kind of attack is possible because, by default, the OS bootloader
        is not authenticated in the UEFI boot process. UEFI firmware obtains the
        location of the OS bootloader from a UEFI variable, which for Microsoft
        Windows platforms is located at \EFI\Microsoft\Boot\bootmgfw.efi on the boot
        partition. An attacker with system privileges can easily replace or alter the
        bootloader.
             However, when Secure Boot is enabled, this attack is no longer possible.
        Since Secure Boot verifies the integrity of UEFI images executed at boot
        time, and the OS bootloader is one of the executables verified during boot,
        Secure Boot will check the bootloader’s signature against the db and dbx
        databases. The malicious bootloader isn’t signed with a proper signing key,
        so it will potentially fail the checks and will not execute (depending on the
        boot policy). This is one way in which Secure Boot protects against bootkits.

Attacking Secure Boot
        Now let’s look at some attacks that can succeed against UEFI Secure Boot.
        Because Secure Boot relies on PI firmware and PKs as the root of trust, if
        either one of these components is compromised, the whole chain of Secure
        Boot checks becomes useless. We’ll look at both bootkits and rootkits capable
        of undermining Secure Boot.
            The class of bootkits we’ll look at here relies predominantly on modifi-
        cations of SPI flash content. In modern computer systems, SPI flash is often
        used as primary firmware storage. Almost every laptop and desktop com-
        puter will store UEFI firmware in flash memory that is accessed through an
        SPI controller.
            In Chapter 15, we presented various attacks that install persistent
        UEFI rootkits on flash firmware, so we won’t go into those details again
        here, though those same attacks (SMI handler issues, S3 boot script, BIOS
        write protection, and so on) may be leveraged against Secure Boot. For the
        attacks in this section, we’ll assume the attacker is already able to modify
        the contents of flash memory containing UEFI firmware. Let’s see what
        they can do next!

        Patching PI Firmware to Disable Secure Boot
        Once an attacker is able to modify the contents of SPI flash, they can easily
        disable Secure Boot by patching the PI firmware. You saw in Figure 17-8 that
        UEFI Secure Boot is anchored in the PI firmware, so if we alter the modules
        of the PI firmware that implement Secure Boot, we can effectively disable its
        functionality.

                                                            How UEFI Secure Boot Works   335
                        To explore this process, we’ll once again use Intel’s EDK2 source code
                   (https://github.com/tianocore/edk2/) as an example implementation of UEFI.
                   You’ll find out where the Secure Boot verification functionality is imple-
                   mented and how you might corrupt it.
                        Inside the SecurityPkg/Library/DxeImageVerificationLib folder in the
                   repository, you’ll find the DxeImageVerificationLib.c source code file that
                   implements the code integrity verification functionality. Specifically, this
                   file implements the DxeImageVerificationHandler routine, which decides
                   whether a UEFI executable is trusted and should be executed or whether
                   it fails verification. Listing 17-1 shows the prototype of the routine.

                   EFI_STATUS EFI_API DxeImageVerificationHandler (
                      IN UINT32                           AuthenticationStatus, u
                      IN CONST EFI_DEVICE_PATH_PROTOCOL   *File, v
                      IN VOID                             *FileBuffer, w
                      IN UINTN                            FileSize, 
                      IN BOOLEAN                          BootPolicy 
                   );

Listing 17-1: Definition of the DxeImageVerificationHandler routine

                        As a first parameter, the routine receives the AuthenticationStatus
                   variable , which indicates whether or not the image is signed. The File
                   argument  is a pointer to the device path of the file being dispatched.
                   The FileBuffer  and FileSize  arguments provide a pointer to the UEFI
                   image and its size for verification.
                        Finally, BootPolicy  is a parameter indicating whether the request to
                   load the image being authenticated came from the UEFI boot manager and
                   is a boot selection (meaning the image is a selected OS bootloader). We dis-
                   cussed the UEFI boot manager in more detail in Chapter 14.
                        Upon completion of the verification, this routine returns one of the fol-
                   lowing values:
                       EFI_SUCCESS      Authentication has successfully passed and the image will
                       be executed.
                       EFI_ACCESS_DENIED The image is not authenticated because the platform
                       policy has dictated that the firmware may not use this image file. This
                       may happen if the firmware attempts to load an image from a removable
                       medium and the platform policy prohibits execution from removable
                       media at boot time, regardless of whether or not they are signed. In this
                       case, this routine will immediately return EFI_ACCESS_DENIED without any
                       signature verification.
                       EFI_SECURITY_VIOLATION Authentication failed either because Secure
                       Boot was unable to verify the image’s digital signature or because a
                       hash value of the executable was found in the database of prohibited
                       images (dbx). This return value indicates that the image is not trusted
                       and the platform should follow the Secure Boot policy to determine
                       whether the image may be executed.

336   Chapter 17
    EFI_OUT_RESOURCE   An error occurred during the verification process due
    to a lack of system resources (usually, not enough memory) to perform
    image authentication.
     To bypass Secure Boot checks, an attacker with write access to the SPI
flash can patch this routine to always return the EFI_SUCCESS value for what-
ever executable it takes as input. As a result, all the UEFI images will pass
authentication regardless of whether they are signed or not.

Modifying the UEFI Variables to Bypass Security Checks
Another way to attack the Secure Boot implementation is to modify the
UEFI NVRAM variables. As we discussed earlier in this chapter, Secure
Boot uses certain variables to store its configuration parameters, details
like whether Secure Boot is enabled, the PKs and KEKs, the signature data-
bases, and the platform policies. If an attacker can modify these variables,
they can disable or bypass Secure Boot verification checks.
     Indeed, most implementations of Secure Boot will store UEFI NVRAM
variables in SPI flash memory alongside the system firmware. Even though
these variables are authenticated, and changing their values from the
kernel mode by using the UEFI API requires a corresponding private key,
an attacker capable of writing to SPI flash could change their content.
     Once an attacker has access to
the UEFI NVRAM variables, they                      Attacker’s
could, for example, tamper with                    platform key
PK, KEK, db, and dbx to add custom                                       Change PK
malicious certificates, which would
allow a malicious module to bypass                 Platform key
security checks. Another option                                        Add attacker’s
would be to add the hash of the                                             KEK
malicious file to the db database and             Key exchange
remove it from the dbx database (in                     key
the case that the hash was originally                                  Add attacker’s
in the dbx database). As shown in                                     UEFI executable
                                                                            hash
Figure 17-10, by changing the PK
variable to include the attacker’s            dbx               db
public key certificate, the attacker is
able to add and remove KEKs from
the KEK UEFI variable, which, in           Figure 17-10: Attack against the UEFI
turn, gives them control over the db       Secure Boot chain of trust
and dbx signature databases, break-
ing Secure Boot protection.
     As a third option, instead of changing the PK and compromising the
underlying PKI hierarchy, an attacker could simply corrupt the PK in the
UEFI variable. In order to work, Secure Boot requires a valid PK enrolled
into the platform firmware; otherwise, protection is disabled.

                                                         How UEFI Secure Boot Works   337
                       If you’re interested in learning more about these attacks, the following
                   conference papers contain comprehensive analyses of UEFI Secure Boot
                   technology:

                   •    Corey Kallenberg et al., “Setup for Failure: Defeating Secure Boot,”
                        LegbaCore, https://papers.put.as/papers/firmware/2014/SetupForFailure​
                        -syscan-v4.pdf.
                   •    Yuriy Bulygin et al., “Summary of Attacks Against BIOS and
                        Secure Boot,” Intel Security, http://www.c7zero.info/stuff/DEFCON22​
                        -BIOSAttacks.pdf.

     Protecting Secure Boot with Verified and Measured Boot
                   As we’ve just discussed, Secure Boot alone is not capable of protecting
                   against attacks that involve changes in platform firmware. So is there any
                   protection for Secure Boot technology itself? The answer is yes. In this sec-
                   tion, we’ll focus on security technologies intended to protect system firm-
                   ware against unauthorized modifications—namely, Verified and Measured
                   Boot. Verified Boot checks that the platform firmware hasn’t been altered
                   or modified, while Measured Boot computes cryptographic hashes of cer-
                   tain components involved in the boot process and stores them in Trusted
                   Platform Module Platform Configuration Registers, or TPM PCRs.
                       Verified Boot and Measured Boot function independently, and it’s
                   possible to have platforms with only one of them enabled, or with both.
                   However, both Verified Boot and Measured Boot are part of the same
                   chain of trust (as shown in Figure 17-11).
      Launch Verified and    Verify and measure                        Verify and measure
        Measured Boot         platform firmware   Launch Secure Boot     OS bootloader

 Hardware          Verified and
                                           Platform
  root of           Measured                                 Secure Boot        OS bootloader
                                          firmware
   trust               Boot

Figure 17-11: Verified and Measured Boot flow

                        As you saw in Figure 17-8, the PI firmware is the very first piece of code
                   executed after the CPU comes out of reset. UEFI Secure Boot uncondition-
                   ally trusts the PI firmware, so it makes sense that current attacks against
                   Secure Boot rely on unauthorized modifications of it.
                        In order to protect against such attacks, the system needs a root of trust
                   outside the PI firmware. This is where Verified and Measured Boot come into
                   play. These processes execute protection mechanisms whose root of trust is
                   anchored in the hardware. Moreover, they execute before the system firm-
                   ware, which means they are able to both authenticate and measure it. We’ll
                   discuss what measurement means in this context in a moment.

338   Chapter 17
                   Verified Boot
                   When a system with Verified Boot is powered on, the hardware logic
                   launches the boot verification functionality that’s implemented in a boot
                   ROM or microcode within the CPU. This logic is immutable, which means
                   software can’t change it. Usually, Verified Boot executes a module to
                   verify the integrity of the system, ensuring that the system will execute
                   the authentic firmware without malicious modifications. To verify the firm-
                   ware, Verified Boot relies on public key cryptography; like UEFI Secure
                   Boot, it checks the digital signature of the platform firmware to ensure its
                   authenticity. After it’s been successfully authenticated, the platform firm-
                   ware is executed and proceeds to verify other firmware components (for
                   example, the Option ROMs, DXE drivers, and OS bootloaders) to main-
                   tain the proper chain of trust. That’s the Verified portion of Verified and
                   Measured Boot. Now for the Measured part.

                   Measured Boot
                   Measured Boot works by measuring the platform firmware and OS boot-
                   loaders. This means it computes the cryptographic hashes of the com-
                   ponents involved in the boot process. The hashes are stored in a set of
                   TPM PCRs. The hash values themselves don’t tell you if the measured
                   components are benign or malicious, but they do tell you whether the
                   configuration and boot components have been changed at some point. If
                   a boot component has been modified, its hash value will differ from the
                   one computed over the original version of the boot component. Thus,
                   Measured Boot will notice any modification of the boot component.
                        Later, the system software can use the hashes in these TPM PCRs to
                   ensure the system is running in a known good state without any malicious
                   modifications. The system might also use these hashes for remote attesta-
                   tion, which is when a system tries to prove to another system that it’s in a
                   trusted state.
                        Now that you know how Verified and Measured Boot work in gen-
                   eral, let’s take a look at a couple implementations of it, starting with Intel
                   BootGuard.

    Intel BootGuard
                   Intel BootGuard is Intel’s Verified and Measured Boot technology.
                   Figure 17-12 shows the boot flow on a platform with Intel BootGuard
                   enabled.

     CPU                            BootGuard     Initial boot       UEFI            OS
                   Boot ROM
initialization                        ACM            block        firmware        bootloader

Figure 17-12: The Intel BootGuard flow

                                                                        How UEFI Secure Boot Works   339
                        During initialization, before the CPU starts executing the first code
                   located at the reset vector, it executes code from the boot ROM. This code
                   performs the necessary initialization of the CPU state, then loads and exe-
                   cutes the BootGuard Authenticated Code Module (ACM).
                        The ACM is a special type of module for performing security-sensitive
                   operations and must be signed by Intel. Thus, the boot ROM code that loads
                   the ACM performs mandatory signature verification to keep the module
                   from running unless it’s signed by Intel. After successful signature verifica-
                   tion, the ACM is executed in an isolated environment in order to prevent
                   any malicious software from interfering with its execution.
                        The BootGuard ACM implements Verified and Measured Boot func-
                   tionality. This module loads the first-stage firmware loader, called the
                   initial boot block (IBB), into memory and, depending on the boot policy
                   in effect, verifies and/or measures it. The IBB is part of the firmware that
                   contains code executed at the reset vector.
                        Strictly speaking, at this point in the boot process there is no RAM.
                   The memory controller hasn’t yet been initialized, and RAM isn’t acces-
                   sible. However, the CPU configures its last-level cache so that it can be
                   used as RAM by putting it in Cache-as-RAM mode until the point in the
                   boot process when the BIOS memory reference code can configure the
                   memory controller and discover RAM.
                        The ACM transfers control to the IBB once the IBB is successfully
                   verified and/or measured. If the IBB fails verification, the ACM behaves
                   according to whatever boot policy is in effect: the system may be shut down
                   immediately or allow firmware recovery after a certain timeout.
                        The IBB then loads the rest of the UEFI firmware from SPI flash and
                   verifies and/or measures it. Once the IBB receives control, Intel BootGuard
                   is no longer responsible for maintaining the proper chain of trust, since its
                   purpose is simply to verify and measure the IBB. The IBB is responsible for
                   continuing the chain of trust up the point when UEFI Secure Boot takes
                   over the verification and measuring of firmware images.

                   Finding the ACM
                   Let’s look at the implementation details of Intel BootGuard technology
                   for desktop platforms, starting with the ACM. Since the ACM is one of the
                   first Intel BootGuard components executed when the system is powered
                   up, the first question is: how does the CPU find the ACM when it is pow-
                   ered on?
                        The exact location of the ACM is provided in a special data structure
                   called the Firmware Interface Table (FIT), stored in the firmware image. The
                   FIT is organized as an array of FIT entries, each describing the location
                   of a specific object in the firmware, such as the ACM or microcode update
                   files. Figure 17-13 shows the layout of a FIT in system memory after reset.

340   Chapter 17
                             System memory map

             0xffffffc0           FIT pointer

                                 FIT entry #N

Firmware Interface                    ...
     Table                        FIT entry #1
                                  FIT entry #0

          0x00000000

Figure 17-13: The FIT’s location in memory

    When the CPU is powered on, it reads the address of the FIT from the
memory location 0xFFFFFFC0 . Since there’s no RAM yet, when the CPU
posts a read memory transaction for the physical address 0xFFFFFFC0,
the internal chipset logic recognizes that this address belongs to a special
address range and, instead of sending this transaction to the memory
controller, decodes it. Read memory transactions for the FIT table are for-
warded to the SPI flash controller, which reads FIT from flash memory.
    We’ll take a closer look at this process by returning to the EDK2 repos­
itory. In the IntelSiliconPkg/Include/IndustryStandard/ directory, you’ll find
the FirmwareInterfaceTable.h header file, which contains some code defini-
tions related to the FIT structure. The layout of FIT entries is shown in
Listing 17-2.

typedef struct {
  UINT64 Address; u
  UINT8 Size[3]; v
  UINT8 Reserved;
  UINT16 Version; w
  UINT8 Type : 7; x
  UINT8 C_V : 1; y
  UINT8 Chksum; z
} FIRMWARE_INTERFACE_TABLE_ENTRY;

Listing 17-2: Layout of FIT entries

   As mentioned, each FIT entry describes a certain object in the firm-
ware image. The nature of each object is encoded in the FIT’s Type field.
These objects could be microcode update files, a BootGuard’s ACM, or a

                                                     How UEFI Secure Boot Works   341
                   BootGuard policy, for instance. The Address field  and Size field  pro-
                   vide the location of the object in memory: Address contains the physical
                   address of the object, and Size defines the size expressed in dwords (4-byte
                   values). The C_V field y is the checksum valid field; if it’s set to 1, the Chksum
                   field z contains a valid checksum of the object. The sum of all the bytes
                   in the component modulo 0xFF and the value in the Chksum field must be
                   zero. The Version field w contains the version number of the component in
                   binary-coded decimal format. For the FIT header entry, the value in this
                   field will indicate the revision number of the FIT data structure.
                        The header FirmwareInterfaceTable.h contains values that the Type field x
                   can take. These type values are mostly undocumented, with little informa-
                   tion available, but the definitions of FIT entry types are quite verbose, and
                   you can deduce their meanings from the context. Here are the types rel-
                   evant to BootGuard:

                   •   The FIT_TYPE_00_HEADER entry provides the total number of FIT entries in
                       the FIT table in its Size field. Its address field contains a special 8-byte
                       signature, '_FIT_ ' (there are three spaces after _FIT_).
                   •   The entry of type FIT_TYPE_02_STARTUP_ACM provides the location of the
                       BootGuard ACM, which the boot ROM code parses to locate the ACM
                       in system memory.
                   •   The entries of types FIT_TYPE_0C_BOOT_POLICY_MANIFEST (BootGuard boot
                       policy manifest) and FIT_TYPE_0B_KEY_MANIFEST (BootGuard key manifest)
                       provide BootGuard with the boot policy that’s in effect and the config-
                       uration information, which we’ll discuss shortly in “Configuring Intel
                       BootGuard” on page 343.

                        Keep in mind that the Intel BootGuard boot policy and the UEFI
                   Secure Boot policy are two different things. The first term refers to the
                   boot policy used for the Verified and Measured Boot procedures. That is,
                   Intel BootGuard boot policy is enforced by ACM and chipset logic, and
                   it includes parameters like whether BootGuard should perform Verified
                   and Measured Boot and what BootGuard should do in cases when it fails
                   to authenticate the IBB. The second term refers to UEFI Secure Boot, dis-
                   cussed earlier in this chapter, and is entirely enforced by UEFI firmware.

                   Exploring FIT
                   You can explore some FIT entries in the firmware image using UEFITool,
                   which we introduced in Chapter 15 (and which we’ll discuss more in
                   Chapter 19), and extract the ACM from the image, along with the boot
                   policy and key manifests, for further analysis. This can be useful because
                   the ACM can be used to hide malicious code. In the following example,
                   we use a firmware image obtained from a system with Intel BootGuard
                   technology enabled. (Chapter 19 provides information on how to acquire
                   a firmware from the platform.)

342   Chapter 17
                      First, load the firmware image in UEFITool by selecting File4 Open
                   Image File. After specifying the firmware image file to load, you’ll see a
                   window like the one shown in Figure 17-14.

Figure 17-14: Browsing FIT in UEFITool

                        In the lower half of the window, you can see the FIT tab that lists the
                   entries. The Type column of the FIT tab displays the type of FIT entries. We
                   are looking for FIT entries for the types BIOS ACM, BootGuard key mani-
                   fest, and BootGuard Boot Policy. Using that information, we can locate the
                   Intel BootGuard components in the firmware image and extract them for
                   further analysis. In this particular example, FIT entry #6 indicates the loca-
                   tion of the BIOS ACM; it starts at the address 0xfffc0000. FIT entries #7 and
                   #8 indicate the locations of the key and boot policy manifests; they start at
                   the addresses 0xfffc9180 and 0xfffc8100, respectively.

                   Configuring Intel BootGuard
                   Upon execution, the BootGuard BIOS ACM consumes the BootGuard key,
                   while the boot policy locates the IBB in the system memory to obtain the
                   correct public key to verify the IBB’s signature.
                       The BootGuard key manifest contains the hash of the boot policy
                   manifest (BPM), the OEM root public key, the digital signature of the
                   preceding fields (with the exception of the root public key, which isn’t
                   included in the signed data), and the security version number (a counter
                   that is incremented with every security update, intended to prevent roll-
                   back attacks).

                                                                        How UEFI Secure Boot Works   343
                        The BPM itself contains the security version number, location, and hash
                   of the IBB; the BPM public key; and digital signatures for the BPM fields
                   just listed—again, with the exception of the root public key, which may be
                   validated with the BPM public key. The location of the IBB provides the lay-
                   out of the IBB in memory. This may not be in a contiguous memory block;
                   it could consist instead of a few nonadjacent memory regions. The IBB hash
                   contains the cumulative hash value of all the memory regions occupied
                   by the IBB. Thus, the whole process of verifying the IBB’s signature is as
                   follows:

                   1.   BootGuard locates the key manifest (KM) using FIT and obtains the
                        boot policy manifest hash value and the OEM root key, which we’ll call
                        key 1. BootGuard verifies the digital signature in the KM using key 1
                        to ensure the integrity of the BPM hash value. If the verification fails,
                        BootGuard reports an error and triggers remediation actions.
                   2.   If the verification succeeds, BootGuard locates the BPM using FIT,
                        computes a hash value of the BPM, and compares it with the BPM
                        hash in the KM. If the values aren’t equal, BootGuard reports an
                        error and triggers remediation actions; otherwise, it obtains the
                        IBB hash value and location from the BPM.
                   3.   BootGuard locates the IBB in memory, computes its cumulative hash,
                        and compares it with the IBB hash value in the BPM. If the hashes
                        aren’t equal, BootGuard reports an error and triggers remediation
                        actions.
                   4.   Otherwise, BootGuard reports that the verification succeeded. If
                        Measured Boot is enabled, BootGuard also measures the IBB by
                        calculating its hash and stores the measurement in the TPM. Then
                        BootGuard transfers control to the IBB.

                        The KM is an essential structure, as it contains the OEM root public key
                   used to verify the integrity of the IBB. You might be asking, “If BootGuard’s
                   KM is stored in unprotected SPI flash along with firmware image, doesn’t
                   that mean attackers can modify it in flash to provide BootGuard with a fake
                   verification key?” To prevent an attack like this, the hash of the OEM root
                   public key is instead stored in the chipset’s field-programmable fuses. These
                   fuses can be programmed only once, at the point when the BootGuard boot
                   policy is provisioned. Once the fuses are written, it’s impossible to override
                   them. This is how the BootGuard verification key is anchored in the hard-
                   ware, making the hardware the immutable root of trust. (The BootGuard
                   boot policy is stored in chipset fuses as well, making it impossible to alter
                   the policy after the fact.)
                        If an attacker changes the BootGuard key manifest, the ACM will spot
                   the key alteration by computing its hash and comparing it with the “golden”
                   value fused into the chipset. Mismatched hashes trigger an error report
                   and remediation behavior. Figure 17-15 demonstrates the chain of trust
                   enforced by BootGuard.

344   Chapter 17
     Hardware                                                   UEFI firmware

                             Key manifest (KM)               Boot policy manifest
                                                                   (BPM)
        Field                   KM security                     BPM security
   programmable               version number                   version number
     fuses (FPFs)
   Hash of OEM              Hash of BPM public                   Hash of IBB
     root public              key (SHA256)                       (SHA256)
   key (SHA256)
                            OEM root public key                BPM public key
     BootGuard                 (RSA2048)                         (RSA2048)               Initial boot block (IBB)
     boot policy
                            Digital signature of
                                                               Location of IBB
                            KM security version
                             number + hash of
                              BPM public key                  Digital signature
                                                               of BPM security
                                                              version number +
                                                              location of IBB +
                                                                 hash of IBB

Figure 17-15: The Intel BootGuard chain of trust

                         Once the IBB is successfully verified and, if necessary, measured, it
                    executes and performs some basic chipset initialization, then loads the
                    UEFI firmware. At this point, it is the IBB’s responsibility to authenticate
                    the UEFI firmware before loading and executing it. Otherwise, the chain
                    of trust will be broken.
                         Figure 17-16 concludes this section by representing the boundaries of
                    responsibility for Secure Boot implementations.
                      Verified and
                                            CPU                 Boot             BootGuard
                     Measured Boot                                                                    IBB
                                       initialization           ROM                ACM
                    (aka BootGuard)

                      UEFI Secure                          OS                            UEFI
                         Boot                           bootloader                    firmware

                       OS Secure                    OS                                          User
                                                                       OS driver
                         Boot                      kernel                                    applications

Figure 17-16: The boundaries of responsibility for Secure Boot implementation

                                                                                      How UEFI Secure Boot Works   345
     ARM Trusted Boot Board
                   ARM has its own implementation of Verified and Measured Boot technol-
                   ogy, called the Trusted Boot Board (TBB), or simply Trusted Boot. In this sec-
                   tion, we’ll look at Trusted Boot’s design. ARM has a very particular setup,
                   known as Trust Zone security technology, that divides the execution environ-
                   ment into two parts. Before we go into the Verified and Measured Boot pro-
                   cess with ARM, we need to describe how Trust Zone works.

                   ARM Trust Zone
                   Trust Zone security technology is a hardware-implemented security feature
                   that separates the ARM execution environment into two worlds: the secure
                   world and the normal (or nonsecure) world, which coexist on the same
                   physical core, as shown in Figure 17-17. The logic implemented in the pro-
                   cessor’s hardware and firmware ensures that the secure world’s resources
                   are properly isolated and protected from software running in the non­
                   secure world.

                              Secure world                               Normal world

                             Trusted services

                                                                        User applications
                              Bootloader 1
                            (AP trusted ROM)

                                Bootloader 2                             Normal world
                          (trusted boot firmware)                       operating system

                              Bootloader 31
                          (EL3 runtime software)                     Bootloader 33 (normal
                                                                     world firmware, such as
                             Bootloader 32                              U-boot or EDK2)
                      (optional secure-EL1 payload)

                                                    Secure Monitor

Figure 17-17: The ARM Trust Zone

                        Both worlds have their own dedicated and distinct firmware and soft-
                   ware stacks: the normal world executes user applications and an OS, while
                   the secure world executes a secure OS and trusted services. The firmware
                   of these worlds consists of different bootloaders responsible for initializing
                   the world and loading the OS, which we’ll talk about in a moment. For this
                   reason, the secure and normal worlds have different firmware images.
                        Within the processor, software running in the normal world cannot
                   access code and data in the secure world directly. The access control logic

346   Chapter 17
that prevents this is implemented in the hardware, usually in the System on
Chip hardware. However, software running in the normal world can trans-
fer control to the software located in the secure world (for instance, to exe-
cute a trusted service in the secure world) using particular software called
Secure Monitor (in ARM Cortex-A) or core logic (in ARM Cortex-M). This
mechanism ensures that switches between worlds don’t violate the security
of the system.
     Together, the Trusted Boot technology and Trust Zone create the
Trusted Execution Environment, used to run software with high privi-
leges and provide an environment for security technologies like digital
rights management, cryptography and authentication primitives, and
other security-sensitive applications. In this way, an isolated, protected
environment may house the most sensitive software.

ARM Boot Loaders
Because the secure and normal worlds are kept separate, each world needs
its own set of bootloaders. Also, the boot process for each world consists of
multiple stages, which means a number of bootloaders must execute at dif-
ferent points in the boot process. Here, we’ll describe the Trusted Boot flow
for ARM application processors in general terms, beginning with the fol-
lowing list of bootloaders involved in Trusted Boot. We showed these back
in Figure 17-17:
    BL1 First-stage bootloader, located in boot ROM and executed in the
    secure world.
    BL2 Second-stage bootloader, located in flash memory, loaded and
    executed by BL1 in the secure world.
    BL31 Secure-world runtime firmware, loaded and executed by BL2.
    BL32 Optional secure-world third-stage bootloader, loaded by BL2.
    BL33 Normal-world runtime firmware, loaded and executed by BL2.
     This list isn’t a complete and accurate list of all the ARM implementa-
tions in the real world, as some manufacturers introduce additional boot-
loaders or remove some of the existing ones. In some cases, BL1 may not be
the very first code executed on the application processor when the system
comes out of reset.
     To verify the integrity of these boot components, Trusted Boot relies
on X.509 public key certificates (remember that the files in UEFI Secure
Boot’s db database were encoded with X.509). It’s worth mentioning that
all certificates are self-signed. There is no need for a certificate authority,
because the chain of trust is not established by the validity of a certificate’s
issuer but rather by the content of the certificate extensions.
     Trusted Boot uses two types of certificates: key and content certificates. It
uses key certificates first to verify the public keys that are used to sign con-
tent certificates. Then it uses the content certificates to store the hashes of
boot loader images. This relationship is illustrated in Figure 17-18.

                                                        How UEFI Secure Boot Works   347
                           Key certificate                   Content certificate     Bootloader
                                                                                       image
                        Standard certificate                Standard certificate
                          extension fields                    extension fields

                                                                                      Code
                      Non-standard certificate            Non-standard certificate
                                                                                     and data
                         extension fields                    extension fields
                         Content certificate
                                                            Hash of bootloader
                            public key

Figure 17-18: Trusted Boot key and content certificates

                       Trusted Boot authenticates an image by calculating its hash and match-
                   ing the result with the hash extracted from the content certificate.

                   Trusted Boot Flow
                   Now that you’re familiar with the foundational concepts of Trusted Boot,
                   let’s take a look at the Trusted Boot flow for an application processor, shown
                   in Figure 17-19. This will give you the full picture of how Verified Boot is
                   implemented in ARM processors and how it protects platforms from the
                   execution of untrusted code, including firmware rootkits.
                         In Figure 17-19, solid arrows denote the transfer of execution flow, and
                   dashed arrows denote the trust relationship; in other words, each element
                   trusts the element its dotted arrow points to.
                         Once the CPU is released from reset, the first piece of the code executed
                   is bootloader 1 (BL1) u. BL1 is loaded from the read-only boot ROM, which
                   means it can’t be tampered with while it’s stored there. BL1 reads the boot-
                   loader 2 (BL2) content certificate } from flash memory and checks its issuer
                   key. BL1 then computes the hash of the BL2 content certificate issuer and
                   compares it with the “golden” values stored in the secure root of trust public
                   key register (ROTPK) register ~ in the hardware. The ROTPK register and
                   boot ROM are the roots of trust, anchored in hardware for Trusted Boot. If
                   the hashes aren’t equal or verification of the BL2 content certificate signa-
                   ture fails, the system panics.
                         Once the BL2 content certificate is verified against the ROTPK, BL1
                   loads the BL2 image from flash v, computes its cryptographic hash, and
                   compares this hash value with the value obtained from the BL2 content cer-
                   tificate y.
                         Once authenticated, BL1 transfers control to BL2, which, in turn, reads
                   its trusted key certificate  from flash memory. This trusted key certificate
                   contains public keys for the verification of the firmware for both the secure
                   world  and the normal world . The key that issued the trusted key cer-
                   tificate is checked against the ROTPK register ~.
                         Next, BL2 authenticates BL31 w, which is the runtime firmware for the
                   secure world. To authenticate the BL31 image, BL2 uses the key certificate
                   and content certificate for BL31 x. BL2 verifies these key certificates by

348   Chapter 17
                      using the secure world public key obtained from the trusted key certificate.
                      The BL31 key certificate contains the BL31 content certificate public key
                      used to verify the signature of the BL32 content certificate.

                                                                     Hardware
                                                                              
                                  Hash of root of trust public key            Secure world bootloader 1 image (BL1)
     
    BL2 content certificate                                                          ?
        Issuer key: root of                                                           Secure world bootloader
          trust public key                                                                 2 image (BL2)
              (ROTPK)
                                                                      
        Hash of BL2 image               BL31 key certificate           BL31 content certificate

                                        Certificate issuer key           Certificate issuer key     ?
                                                                                                         Secure world
    Trusted key certificate           BL31 content certificate           Hash of BL31 image             bootloader 31
                                            public key                                                  image (BL31)
        Issuer key: root of
          trust public key
              (ROTPK)
                                        Optional BL32 key                Optional BL32 content
                                            certificate                        certificate
          Secure world
           public key                   Certificate issuer key           Certificate issuer key
                                                                                                     Optional secure
          Normal world                BL32 content certificate           Hash of BL32 image          world bootloader
           public key                       public key                                               32 image (BL32)

                                        BL33 key certificate           BL33 content certificate

                                        Certificate issuer key           Certificate issuer key
                                                                                                        Normal world
                                      BL33 content certificate           Hash of BL33 image             bootloader 33
                                            public key                                                  image (BL33)

Figure 17-19: Trusted Boot flow

                          Once the BL31 content certificate is verified, the hash value of the BL31
                      image stored within this BL31 certificate is used to check the integrity of the
                      BL3 image. Again, any failures result in a system panic.
                          Similarly, BL2 checks the integrity of the optional secure-world BL32
                      image using the BL32 key and content certificates.
                          The integrity of the BL33 firmware image (executed in the normal
                      world) is checked with the BL33 key and BL33 content certificates. The
                      BL33 key certificate is verified with the normal world public key obtained
                      from the trusted key certificate.
                          If all the checks pass successfully, the system proceeds by executing the
                      authenticated firmware for both the secure and normal worlds.

                                                                                          How UEFI Secure Boot Works   349
                                        AMD H a rdwa re Va lidate d Boot

                       Although not discussed in this chapter, AMD has its own implementation of
                       Verified and Measured Boot called Hardware Validated Boot (HVB). This tech-
                       nology implements functionality similar to Intel BootGuard. Based on AMD
                       Platform Security Processor technology, it has a microcontroller devoted to
                       security-related computations that runs independently of the system’s main core.

     Verified Boot vs. Firmware Rootkits
                   With all of this knowledge in hand, let’s finally see whether Verified Boot
                   can protect against firmware rootkits.
                        We know that Verified Boot takes place before any firmware is executed
                   in the boot process. This means that when Verified Boot starts verifying firm-
                   ware, any infecting firmware rootkit won’t yet be active, so the malware can’t
                   counteract the verification process. Verified Boot will detect any malicious
                   modification of firmware and prevent its execution.
                        Moreover, the root of trust for Verified Boot is anchored in the hard-
                   ware, so attackers can’t tamper with it. Intel BootGuard’s OEM root public
                   key is fused into the chipset, and ARM’s root of trust key is stored in secure
                   registers. In both cases, the boot code that triggers Verified Boot is loaded
                   from read-only memory, so malware can’t patch or modify it.
                        So, we can conclude that Verified Boot can withstand attacks from
                   firmware rootkits. However, as you might have observed, the whole tech-
                   nology is quite complex; it has many dependencies, so it could easily be
                   implemented incorrectly. This technology is only as secure as its weakest
                   component; a single flaw in the chain of trust makes it possible to bypass.
                   That means there’s a good chance attackers could find vulnerabilities in an
                   implementation of Verified Boot to exploit and install firmware rootkits.

     Conclusion
                   In this chapter, we explored three Secure Boot technologies: UEFI Secure
                   Boot, Intel BootGuard, and ARM Trusted Boot. These technologies rely on
                   a chain of trust—enforced from the very beginning of the boot process to
                   the execution of user applications—and involve an enormous number of
                   boot modules. When correctly configured and implemented, they provide
                   protection against the ever-growing number of UEFI firmware rootkits.
                   That’s why high-assurance systems must use Secure Boot, and why, these
                   days, many consumer systems enable Secure Boot by default. In the next
                   chapter, we’ll focus on forensic approaches for analyzing firmware rootkits.

350   Chapter 17
