                          18
      A p p r o a c h e s t o A n a ly z i n g
           Hidden Filesystems

           So far in this book, you’ve learned how
           bootkits penetrate and persist on the
         victim’s computer by using sophisticated
      techniques to avoid detection. One common
characteristic of these advanced threats is the use of
a custom hidden storage system for storing modules
and configuration information on the compromised
machine.
    Many of the hidden filesystems in malware are custom or altered ver-
sions of standard filesystems, meaning that performing forensic analysis on
a computer compromised with a rootkit or bootkit often requires a custom
toolset. In order to develop these tools, researchers must learn the layout of
the hidden filesystem and the algorithms used to encrypt data by perform-
ing in-depth analyses and reverse engineering.
    In this chapter, we’ll look more closely at hidden filesystems and
methods to analyze them. We’ll share our experiences of performing
long-term forensic analyses of the rootkits and bootkits described in this
                   book. We’ll also discuss approaches to retrieving data from hidden storage
                   and share solutions to common problems that arise through this kind of
                   analysis. Finally, we’ll introduce the custom HiddenFsReader tool we devel-
                   oped, whose purpose is to dump the contents of the hidden filesystems in
                   specific malware.

     Overview of Hidden Filesystems
                   Figure 18-1 illustrates an overview of the typical hidden filesystem. We
                   can see the malicious payload that communicates with the hidden storage
                   injected into the user-mode address space of a victim process. The pay-
                   load often uses the hidden storage to read and update its configuration
                   information or to store data like stolen credentials.

                         Applications                     Malware payload

                                        User-mode address space
                                        Kernel-mode address space
                                                     Malicious kernel-mode driver
                                                          Filesystem interface
                      OS filesystem driver
                                                       Physical storage interface

                                     OS storage device driver stack

                                                                           Hidden
                                      Hard drive
                                                                      filesystem area

Figure 18-1: Typical malicious hidden filesystem implementation

                        The hidden storage service is provided through the kernel-mode mod-
                   ule, and the interface exposed by the malware is visible only to the payload
                   module. This interface usually isn’t available to other software on the system
                   and cannot be accessed via standard methods such as Windows File Explorer.
                        Data stored by the malware on the hidden filesystem persists in an area
                   of the hard drive that isn’t being used by the OS in order not to conflict
                   with it. In most cases, this area is at the end of the hard drive, because there
                   is usually some unallocated space. However, in some cases, such as the
                   Rovnix bootkit discussed in Chapter 11, malware can store its hidden file-
                   system in unallocated space at the beginning of the hard drive.
                        The main goal of any researcher performing forensic analysis is to
                   retrieve this hidden stored data, so next we’ll discuss a few approaches for
                   doing so.

352   Chapter 18
Retrieving Bootkit Data from a Hidden Filesystem
        We can obtain forensic information from a bootkit-infected computer by
        retrieving the data when the infected system is offline or by reading the
        malicious data from a live infected system.
            Each approach has its pros and cons, which we’ll consider as we discuss
        the two methods.

        Retrieving Data from an Offline System
        Let’s start with getting data from the hard drive when the system is offline
        (that is, the malware is inactive). We can achieve this through an offline
        analysis of the hard drive, but another option is to boot the noninfected
        instance of the operating system using a live CD. This ensures the com-
        puter uses the noncompromised bootloader installed on the live CD, so
        the bootkit won’t be executed. This approach assumes that a bootkit has
        not been able to execute before the legitimate bootloader and cannot
        detect an attempt to boot from an external device to wipe the sensitive
        data beforehand.
             The significant advantage of this method over an online analysis is that
        you don’t need to defeat the malware’s self-defense mechanisms that pro-
        tect the hidden storage contents. As we’ll see in later sections, bypassing the
        malware’s protection isn’t a trivial task and requires certain expertise.

 Note   Once you get access to the data stored on the hard drive, you can proceed with
        dumping the image of the malicious hidden filesystem and decrypting and pars-
        ing it. Different types of malware require different approaches for decrypting and
        parsing the hidden filesystems, as we’ll discuss in the section “Parsing the Hidden
        Filesystem Image” on page 360.

             However, the downside of this method is that it requires both physical
        access to the compromised computer and the technical know-how to boot
        the computer from a live CD and dump the hidden filesystem. Meeting
        both of these requirements might be problematic.
             If analyzing on an inactive machine isn’t possible, we have to use the
        active approach.

        Reading Data on a Live System
        On a live system with an active instance of the bootkit, we need to dump
        the contents of the malicious hidden filesystem.
            Reading the malicious hidden storage on a system actively running
        malware, however, has one major difficulty: the malware may attempt to
        counteract the read attempts and forge the data being read from the hard
        drive to impede forensic analysis. Most of the rootkits we’ve discussed in this
        book—TDL3, TDL4, Rovnix, Olmasco, and so on—monitor access to the
        hard drive and block access to the regions with the malicious data.
            To be able to read malicious data from the hard drive, you have to over-
        come the malware’s self-defense mechanisms. We’ll look at some approaches

                                                       Approaches to Analyzing Hidden Filesystems    353
                   to this in a moment, but first we’ll examine the storage device driver stack
                   in Windows, and how the malware hooks into it, to better understand how
                   the malware protects the malicous data. This information is also useful for
                   understanding certain approaches to removing malicious hooks.

                   Hooking the Miniport Storage Driver
                   We touched upon the architecture of the storage device driver stack in
                   Microsoft Windows and how malware hooks into it in Chapter 1. This
                   method outlived the TDL3 and was adopted by later malware, including
                   bootkits we’ve studied in this book. Here we’ll go into more detail.
                       TDL3 hooked the miniport storage driver located at the very bottom of
                   the storage device driver stack, as indicated in Figure 18-2.

                       IRP

                                                           Filesystem drivers
                                                   (ntfs.sys, fastfat.sys, and so on)

                                                        Storage class drivers
                                                        (disk.sys, and so on)

                                                         Storage port drivers
                                                (scsiport.sys, storport.sys, and so on)

                                              SCSI       Storport      ATA           IDE
                                             miniport    miniport     miniport     miniport

                                                              Hardware

Figure 18-2: Device storage driver stack

                        Hooking into the driver stack at this level allows the malware to moni-
                   tor and modify I/O requests going to and from the hard drive, giving it
                   access to its hidden storage.
                        Hooking at the very bottom of the driver stack and directly communicat-
                   ing with the hardware also allows the malware to bypass the security software
                   that operates at the level of the filesystem or disk class driver. As we touched
                   upon in Chapter 1, when an I/O operation is performed on the hard drive,
                   the OS generates an input/output request packet (IRP)—a special data struc-
                   ture in the operating system kernel that describes I/O operation—which is
                   passed through the whole device stack from top to the bottom.

354   Chapter 18
    Security software modules responsible for monitoring hard drive I/O
operations can inspect and modify IRP packets, but because the malicious
hooks are installed at the level below security software, they’re invisible to
these security tools.
    There are several other levels a bootkit might hook, such as the user-
mode API, filesystem driver, and disk class driver, but none of them allow
the malware to be as stealthy and powerful as the miniport storage level.

The Storage Device Stack Layout
We won’t cover all possible miniport storage hooking methods in this section.
Instead, we’ll focus on the most common approaches that we’ve come across
in the course of our malware analyses.
     First, we’ll take a closer look at the storage device, shown in Figure 18-3.

  Storage miniport            Storage miniport            Storage miniport
     DEVICE_OBJECT                DRIVER_OBJECT             driver image

                             MajorFunction[0]                 Handler 0
     DriverObject
                                      ...

                             MajorFunction[N]                 Handler N

Figure 18-3: Miniport storage device organization

     The IRP goes from the top of the stack to the bottom. Each device in the
stack can either process and complete the I/O request or forward it to the
device one level below.
     The DEVICE_OBJECT  is a system data structure used by the operating
system to describe a device in the stack, and it contains a pointer  to the
corresponding DRIVER_OBJECT, another system data structure that describes a
loaded driver in the system. In this case, the DEVICE_OBJECT contains a pointer
to the miniport storage driver.
     The layout of the DRIVER_OBJECT structure is shown in Listing 18-1.

typedef struct _DRIVER_OBJECT {
   SHORT Type;
   SHORT Size;
u PDEVICE_OBJECT DeviceObject;
   ULONG Flags;
 PVOID DriverStart;
 ULONG DriverSize;
   PVOID DriverSection;
   PDRIVER_EXTENSION DriverExtension;
x UNICODE_STRING DriverName;
   PUNICODE_STRING HardwareDatabase;
   PFAST_IO_DISPATCH FastIoDispatch;
y LONG * DriverInit;
   PVOID DriverStartIo;
   PVOID DriverUnload;

                                                  Approaches to Analyzing Hidden Filesystems    355
                    LONG * MajorFunction[28];
                   } DRIVER_OBJECT, *PDRIVER_OBJECT;

Listing 18-1: The layout of the DRIVER_OBJECT structure

                        The DriverName field x contains the name of the driver described by the
                   structure; DriverStart  and DriverSize , respectively, contain the starting
                   address and size in the driver memory; DriverInit y contains a pointer to the
                   driver’s initialization routine; and DeviceObject u contains a pointer to the list
                   of DEVICE_OBJECT structures related to the driver. From the malware’s point of
                   view, the most important field is MajorFunction , which is located at the end
                   of the structure and contains the addresses of the handlers implemented in
                   the driver for various I/O operations.
                        When an I/O packet arrives at a device object, the operating system
                   checks the DriverObject field in the corresponding DEVICE_OBJECT structure to
                   get the address of DRIVER_OBJECT in memory. Once the kernel has the DRIVER​
                   _OBJECT structure, it fetches the address of a corresponding I/O handler from
                   the MajorFunction array relevant to the type of I/O operation. With this infor-
                   mation, we can identify parts of the storage device stack that can be hooked
                   by the malware. Let’s look at a couple of different methods.

                   Direct Patching of the Miniport Storage Driver Image
                   One way to hook the miniport storage driver is to directly modify the driver’s
                   image in memory. Once the malware obtains the address of the hard disk
                   miniport device object, it looks at the DriverObject to locate the correspond-
                   ing DRIVER_OBJECT structure. The malware then fetches the address of the hard
                   disk I/O handler from the MajorFunction array and patches the code at that
                   address, as shown in Figure 18-4 (the sections in gray are those modified by
                   the malware).

                       Storage miniport           Storage miniport           Storage miniport
                        DEVICE_OBJECT               DRIVER_OBJECT              driver image

                                                  MajorFunction[0]              Handler 0
                        DriverObject
                                                         ...

                                                  MajorFunction[N]             Handler N

                                                   Malicious driver

                                                   Malicious hook

Figure 18-4: Hooking the storage driver stack by patching the miniport driver

356   Chapter 18
     When the device object receives an I/O request, the malware is exe-
cuted. The malicious hook can now reject I/O operations to block access
to the protected area of the hard drive, or it can modify I/O requests to
return forged data and fool the security software.
     For example, this type of hook is used by the Gapz bootkit discussed
in Chapter 12. In the case of Gapz, the malware hooks two routines on
the hard disk miniport driver that are responsible for handling the IRP_MJ​
_INTERNAL_DEVICE_CONTROL and IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL I/O requests to protect
them from being read or overwritten.
     However, this approach is not particularly stealthy. Security software
can detect and remove the hooks by locating an image of the hooked driver
on a filesystem and mapping it into memory. It then compares the code sec-
tions of the driver loaded into the kernel to a version of the driver manually
loaded from the file, and it notes any differences in the code sections that
could indicate the presence of malicious hooks in the driver.
     The security software can then remove the malicious hooks and restore
the original code by overwriting the modified code with the code taken
from the file. This method assumes that the driver on the filesystem is gen-
uine and not modified by the malware.

DRIVER_OBJECT Modification
The hard drive miniport driver can also be hooked through the modifica-
tion of the DRIVER_OBJECT structure. As mentioned, this data structure con-
tains the location of the driver image in memory and the address of the
driver’s dispatch routines in the MajorFunction array.
     Therefore, modifying the MajorFunction array allows the malware
to install its hooks without touching the driver image in memory. For
instance, instead of patching the code directly in the image as in the
previous method, the malware could replace entries in the MajorFunction
array related to IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_DEVICE_CONTROL and IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL I/O
requests with the addresses of the malicious hooks. As a result, the operat-
ing system kernel would be redirected to the malicious code whenever it
tried to resolve the addresses of handlers in the DRIVER_OBJECT structure.
This approach is demonstrated in Figure 18-5.
     Because the driver’s image in memory remains unmodified, this
approach is stealthier than the previous method, but it isn’t invulnerable
to discovery. Security software can still detect the presence of the hooks
by locating the driver image in memory and checking the addresses of
the IRP_MJ_INTERNAL_DEVICE_CONTROL and IRP_MJ_DEVICE_CONTROL I/O requests
handlers: if these addresses don’t belong to the address range of the
miniport driver image in memory, it indicates that there are hooks in
the device stack.

                                           Approaches to Analyzing Hidden Filesystems    357
                      Storage miniport            Storage miniport            Storage miniport
                        DEVICE_OBJECT              DRIVER_OBJECT                driver image

                                                  MajorFunction[0]               Handler 0
                        DriverObject
                                                        ...

                                                  MajorFunction[N]              Handler N

                                                  Malicious driver

                                                   Malicious hook

Figure 18-5: Hooking the storage driver stack by patching the miniport DRIVER_OBJECT

                        On the other hand, removing these hooks and restoring the original
                   values of the MajorFunction array is much more difficult than with the pre-
                   vious method. With this approach, the MajorFunction array is initialized
                   by the driver itself during execution of its initialization routine, which
                   receives a pointer to the partially initialized corresponding DRIVER_OBJECT
                   structure as an input parameter and completes the initialization by filling
                   the MajorFunction array with pointers to the dispatch handlers.
                        Only the miniport driver is aware of the handler addresses. The secu-
                   rity software has no knowledge of them, making it much more difficult to
                   restore the original addresses in the DRIVER_OBJECT structure.
                        One approach that the security software may use to restore the original
                   data is to load the miniport driver image in an emulated environment, cre-
                   ate a DRIVER_OBJECT structure, and execute the driver’s entry point (the ini-
                   tialization routine) with the DRIVER_OBJECT structure passed as a parameter.
                   Upon exiting the initialization routine, the DRIVER_OBJECT should contain the
                   valid MajorFunction handlers, and the security software can use this informa-
                   tion to calculate the addresses of the I/O dispatch routines in the driver’s
                   image and restore the modified DRIVER_OBJECT structure.
                        Emulation of the driver can be tricky, however. If a driver’s initializa-
                   tion routine implements simple functionality (for example, initializing the
                   DRIVER_OBJECT structure with the valid handler addresses), this approach
                   would work, but if it implements complex functionality (such as calling sys-
                   tem services or a system API, which are harder to emulate), emulation may
                   fail and terminate before the driver initializes the data structure. In such
                   cases, the security software won’t be able to recover the addresses of the
                   original handlers and remove the malicious hooks.
                        Another approach to this problem is to generate a database of the orig-
                   inal handler addresses and use it to recover them. However, this solution

358   Chapter 18
lacks generality. It may work well for the most frequently used miniport
drivers but fail for rare or custom drivers that were not included in the
database.

DEVICE_OBJECT Modification
The last approach for hooking the miniport driver that we’ll consider in
this chapter is a logical continuation of the previous method. We know that
to execute the I/O request handler in the miniport driver, the OS kernel
must fetch the address of the DRIVER_OBJECT structure from the miniport
DEVICE_OBJECT, then fetch the handler address from the MajorFunction array,
and finally execute the handler.
     So, another way of installing the hook is to modify the DriverObject
field in the related DEVICE_OBJECT. The malware needs to create a rogue
DRIVER_OBJECT structure and initialize its MajorFunction array with the address
of the malicious hooks, after which the operating system kernel will use
the malicious DRIVER_OBJECT structure to get the address of the I/O request
handler and execute the malicious hook (Figure 18-6).

       Storage miniport           Storage miniport                  Storage miniport
        DEVICE_OBJECT               DRIVER_OBJECT                     driver image

                                  MajorFunction[0]                      Handler 0
        DriverObject
                                         ...

                                  MajorFunction[N]                     Handler N

          Malicious                Malicious driver
        DRIVER_OBJECT

      MajorFunction[0]
                                   Malicious hook

      MajorFunction[N]

Figure 18-6: Hooking the storage driver stack by hijacking miniport DRIVER_OBJECT

     This approach is used by TDL3/TDL4, Rovnix, and Olmasco, and it
has similar advantages and drawbacks as the previous approach. However,
its hooks are even harder to remove because the whole DRIVER_OBJECT is
different, meaning security software would need to make extra efforts to
locate the original DRIVER_OBJECT structure.
     This concludes our discussion of device driver stack hooking techniques.
As we’ve seen, there’s no simple generic solution for removing the malicious
hooks in order to read the malicious data from the protected areas of an
infected machine’s hard drive. Another reason for the difficulty is that there
are many different implementations of miniport storage drivers, and since
they communicate directly with the hardware, each storage device vendor
provides custom drivers for its hardware, so approaches that work for a cer-
tain class of miniport drivers will fail for others.

                                                    Approaches to Analyzing Hidden Filesystems    359
     Parsing the Hidden Filesystem Image
                   Once the rootkit’s self-defense protection is deactivated, we can read data
                   from the malicious hidden storage, which yields the image of the mali-
                   cious filesystem. The next logical step in forensic analysis is to parse the
                   hidden filesystem and extract meaningful information.
                        To be able to parse a dumped filesystem, we need to know which type
                   of malware it corresponds to. Each threat has its own implementation of the
                   hidden storage, and the only way to reconstruct its layout is to engineer the
                   malware to understand the code responsible for maintaining it. In some
                   cases, the layout of the hidden storage can change from one version to
                   another within the same malware family.
                        The malware may also encrypt or obfuscate its hidden storage to make
                   it harder to perform forensic analysis, in which case we’d need to find the
                   encryption keys.
                        Table 18-1 provides a summary of hidden filesystems related to the
                   malware families we’ve discussed in previous chapters. In this table, we con-
                   sider only the basic characteristics of the hidden filesystem, such as layout
                   type, encryption used, and whether it implements compression.

Table 18-1: Comparison of Hidden Filesystem Implementations

                   Functionality/malware   TDL4           Rovnix         Olmasco        Gapz
                   Filesystem type         Custom         FAT16          Custom         Custom
                                                          modification
                   Encryption              XOR/RC4        Custom         RC6            RC4
                                                          (XOR+ROL)      modification
                   Compression             No             Yes            No             Yes

                       As we can see, each implementation is different, creating difficulties for
                   forensic analysts and investigators.

     The HiddenFsReader Tool
                   In the course of our research on advanced malware threats, we’ve reverse
                   engineered many different malware families and have managed to gather
                   extensive information on various implementations of hidden filesystems
                   that may be very useful to the security research community. For this reason,
                   we’ve implemented a tool named HiddenFsReader (http://download.eset.com/
                   special/ESETHfsReader.exe/) that automatically looks for hidden malicious
                   containers on a computer and extracts the information contained within.
                        Figure 18-7 depicts the high-level architecture of the HiddenFsReader.

360   Chapter 18
      HiddenFileReader

     HiddenFsRecognizer

      HiddenFsDecryptor
                                  User mode

                                Kernel mode

     SelfDefenceDisabler

     LowLevelHddReader

Figure 18-7: High-level architecture of HiddenFsReader

     The HiddenFsReader consists of two components: a user-mode appli-
cation and a kernel-mode driver. The kernel-mode driver essentially
implements the functionality for disabling rootkit/bootkit self-defense
mechanisms, and the user-mode application provides the user with an
interface to gain low-level access to the hard drive. The application uses
this interface to read actual data from the hard drive, even if the system is
infected with an active instance of the malware.
     The user-mode application itself is responsible for identifying hidden
filesystems read from the hard drive, and it also implements decryption func-
tionality to obtain the plaintext data from the encrypted hidden storage.
     The following threats and their corresponding hidden filesystems
are supported in the latest release of the HiddenFsReader at the time of
writing:

•   Win32/Olmarik (TDL3/TDL3+/TDL4)
•   Win32/Olmasco (MaxXSS)
•   Win32/Sirefef (ZeroAccess)
•   Win32/Rovnix
•   Win32/Xpaj
•   Win32/Gapz
•   Win32/Flamer
•   Win32/Urelas (GBPBoot)
•   Win32/Avatar

                                                 Approaches to Analyzing Hidden Filesystems    361
                       These threats employ custom hidden filesystems to store the payload
                   and configuration data, better protecting against security software and mak-
                   ing forensic analysis harder. We haven’t discussed all of these threats in this
                   book, but you can find information on them in the list of references avail-
                   able at https://nostarch.com/rootkits/.

     Conclusion
                   The implementation of a custom hidden filesystem is common for advanced
                   threats like rootkits and bootkits. Hidden storage is used to keep configura-
                   tion information and payloads secret, rendering traditional approaches to
                   forensic analysis ineffective.
                       Forensic analysts must disable the threat’s self-defense mechanisms
                   and reverse engineer the malware. In this way, they can reconstruct the
                   hidden filesystem’s layout and identify the encryption scheme and key
                   used to protect the malicious data. This requires extra time and effort
                   on a per-threat basis, but this chapter has explored some of the possible
                   approaches to tackling these problems. In Chapter 19, we will continue
                   to explore forensic analysis of malware, focusing specifically on UEFI
                   rootkits. We will provide information on UEFI firmware acquisition and
                   analysis with respect to malware targeting UEFI firmware.

362   Chapter 18
