                                    19
                   B I O S / U E F I F o r e n si c s :
              F i r m w a r e A c q uisi t io n a n d
                   A n a ly sis A p p r o a c h es

                     Recent rootkits targeting UEFI firmware
                     have renewed interest in UEFI firmware
                   forensics. Leaks of classified information
                on state-sponsored BIOS implants, as well as
         the security breach at Hacking Team mentioned
         in Chapter 15, have demonstrated the increasingly
         stealthy and powerful capabilities of malware that tar-
         gets the BIOS and prompted the research community
         to dig deeper into firmware. We’ve already discussed some technical details
         of these BIOS threats in previous chapters. If you haven’t read Chapters 15
         and 16, we highly recommend doing so before continuing; those chapters
         cover important firmware security concepts that we assume you understand
         for this discussion.

No t e   In this chapter, we use the terms BIOS and UEFI firmware interchangeably.
                       UEFI firmware forensics is currently an emerging area of research,
                   so security researchers working in this field lack conventional tools and
                   approaches. In this chapter, we’ll cover some firmware analysis techniques,
                   including various approaches to firmware acquisition and methods of pars-
                   ing and extracting useful information.
                       We first focus on acquiring firmware, which is usually the first step of
                   a forensic analysis. We cover both a software and a hardware approach to
                   obtaining a UEFI firmware image. Next, we compare these approaches
                   and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each. We then discuss
                   the internal structure of the UEFI firmware image and how to parse it
                   in order to extract forensic artifacts. In the context of this discussion, we
                   show you how to use UEFITool, an indispensable open source firmware
                   analysis tool for browsing and modifying UEFI firmware images. Finally,
                   we discuss Chipsec, a tool with very extensive and powerful functionality,
                   and consider its applications for forensics analysis. Both tools were intro-
                   duced in Chapter 15.

     Limitations of Our Forensic Techniques
                   The material we present here does have some limitations. In modern plat-
                   forms, there are many types of firmware: UEFI firmware, Intel ME firmware,
                   hard drive controller firmware, and so on. This chapter is dedicated specifi-
                   cally to the analysis of UEFI firmware, which constitutes one of the largest
                   parts of platform firmware.
                        Note also that firmware is very platform specific; that is, each platform
                   has its own peculiarities. In this chapter, we’ll focus on UEFI firmware for
                   Intel x86 systems, which constitute the majority of desktop, laptop, and
                   server market segments.

     Why Firmware Forensics Matter
                   In Chapter 15, we saw that modern firmware is a convenient place for
                   embedding very powerful backdoors or rootkits, specifically in the BIOS.
                   This type of malware is capable of surviving OS reinstallation or hard drive
                   replacement, and it gives an attacker control over an entire platform. At the
                   time of this writing, most state-of-the-art security software doesn’t take into
                   account UEFI firmware threats at all, making them even more dangerous.
                   This gives an attacker a big opportunity to implant malware that persists
                   undetected on the target system.
                       Next, we outline a couple of specific ways attackers might use firmware
                   rootkits.

                   Attacking the Supply Chain
                   Threats targeting UEFI firmware increase the risk of supply chain
                   attacks, because attackers can install a malicious implant on a server
                   before it is delivered to the data center or to a laptop before it gets to the

364   Chapter 19
        IT department. And because these threats can impact a large number of a
        service provider’s clients by exposing all their secrets, big cloud-computing
        players like Google have recently started to use firmware forensic analysis
        techniques to ensure that their firmware isn’t compromised.

                                       Google Tita n Chip

            In 2017, Google publicly introduced Titan, a chip that protects platform firm-
            ware by establishing a hardware root of trust. Trusting your hardware con-
            figuration is important, especially when it comes to cloud security, where the
            impact of an attack is multiplied by the number of affected clients.
                 Companies that work with big clouds and data, like Amazon, Google,
            Microsoft, Facebook, and Apple, are working on developing (or have devel-
            oped) hardware to control the platform root of trust. Even if attackers use a
            firmware rootkit to compromise a platform, having an isolated root of trust will
            prevent Secure Boot attacks and firmware update attacks.

        Compromising BIOS Through Firmware Vulnerability
        Attackers can compromise the platform firmware by exploiting a vul-
        nerability in it to bypass BIOS write protection or authentication. For a
        refresher on this attack, return to Chapter 16, where we discuss different
        classes of vulnerabilities used to attack the BIOS. To detect these attacks,
        you could use the firmware forensic approaches discussed in this chapter
        to verify the integrity of a platform’s firmware or to help detect malicious
        firmware modules.

Understanding Firmware Acquisition
        The very first step in BIOS forensic analysis is the process of obtaining an
        image of the BIOS firmware to analyze. To better understand the location
        of BIOS firmware on modern platforms, refer to Figure 19-1, which demon-
        strates the architecture of a typical PC system’s chipset.
             There are two main components in the chipset: a CPU and a Platform
        Controller Hub (PCH) or South Bridge. The PCH provides a connection
        between the controllers of peripheral devices available on the platform and
        the CPU. In most modern systems based on Intel x86 architecture (includ-
        ing 64-bit platforms), the system firmware is located on a flash memory in
        the Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) bus , which is physically connected
        to the PCH. The SPI flash constitutes the main target for forensic analysis
        because it stores the firmware we want to analyze.

                                        BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   365
                                                       CPU

                                                    CPU cores
                                                                              Memory modules
                      Direct video
                                                                                 (DRAM)
                                                Integrated memory
                                                     controller

                          Disk

                          USB

                                                     Platform
                          LAN                     Controller Hub                 PCle slots
                                                  (South Bridge)

                         Audio                                      SPI bus

                                                                              Trusted Platform
                       Super I/O                     SPI flash
                                                                                Module 2.0

Figure 19-1: A block diagram of a modern Intel chipset

                       The motherboard of a PC typically has one discrete physical SPI flash
                   chip soldered onto it, but you might occasionally encounter systems with
                   multiple SPI flash chips. This happens when a single chip doesn’t have
                   enough capacity to store all the system firmware; in that case, the platform
                   vendor uses two chips. We discuss this situation later in this chapter, in
                   “Locating the SPI Flash Memory Chip” on page 376.

                                               Dua lBIOS Technology

                        DualBIOS technology also uses multiple SPI flash chips on the motherboard of
                        a computer. But unlike the approach just discussed, where multiple SPI flash
                        chips store a single firmware image, DualBIOS technology uses multiple chips
                        to store different firmware images or multiples of the same firmware image. This
                        technology provides additional protection against firmware corruption, because
                        if the firmware in one chip is corrupted, the system could boot from a second
                        chip containing an identical firmware image.

                       To acquire the firmware image stored on the SPI flash, you need to be
                   able to read the contents of the flash. Generally speaking, you can read the
                   firmware using either a software or a hardware approach. In the software
                   approach, you attempt to read the firmware image by communicating with

366   Chapter 19
        the SPI controller using software running on the host CPU. In the hardware
        approach, you physically attach a special device called an SPI programmer
        to the SPI flash, then read the firmware image directly from the SPI flash.
        We’ll cover both approaches, starting with the software method.
             Before we go into the description of the software approach, however, you
        should understand that each approach has its advantages and limitations.
        One of the benefits of dumping UEFI firmware using the software method
        is that you can do it remotely. A user of the target system can run an applica-
        tion to dump the contents of the SPI flash and send it to a forensic analyst.
        But this approach also has a major drawback: if an attacker has already com-
        promised the system firmware, he or she could interfere with the process of
        firmware acquisition by forging the data read from the SPI flash. This makes
        the software approach somewhat unreliable.
             The hardware approach doesn’t have the same drawback. Even though
        you must be physically present and it requires you to open the target sys-
        tem’s chassis, this method directly reads the contents of the powered-off
        system’s SPI flash without giving the attacker any opportunity to counterfeit
        the data (unless you’re dealing with a hardware implant, which we don’t
        cover in this book).

The Software Approach to Firmware Acquisition
        In the software approach to dumping UEFI firmware from the target sys-
        tem, you read the contents of the SPI flash from the operating system. You
        can access modern systems’ SPI controllers through registers in the PCI
        configuration space (a block of registers that specify device configuration on
        the PCI bus). These registers are memory mapped, and you can read and
        write to them using regular memory read and write operations. In this
        section, we’ll demonstrate how to locate these registers and communicate
        with the SPI controller.
             Before we proceed, you should know that the location of an SPI regis-
        ter is chipset specific, so in order to communicate with an SPI controller,
        we need to refer to the chipset dedicated to the platform we’re targeting.
        In this chapter, we’ll demonstrate how to read the SPI flash on chipsets in
        Intel’s 200 Series (the location of SPI registers can be found at https://www​
        .intel.com/content/www/us/en/chipsets/200-series-chipset-pch-datasheet-vol-2.html),
        which are the latest chipsets for desktop systems at the time of this writing.
             It’s also worth mentioning that the memory locations that correspond
        to the registers exposed via the PCI configuration space are mapped in the
        kernel-mode address space and, as a result, aren’t accessible to code run-
        ning in the user-mode address space. You would need to develop a kernel-
        mode driver to access the address range. The Chipsec tool discussed later
        in this chapter provides its own kernel-mode driver for accessing the PCI
        configuration space.

                                      BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   367
                   Locating PCI Configuration Space Registers
                   First we need to locate the memory range where the SPI controller’s reg-
                   isters are mapped. This memory range is called the Root Complex Register
                   Block (RCRB). At offset 3800h in the RCRB, you’ll find the SPI Base Address
                   Register (SPIBAR), which holds the base address of memory-mapped SPI
                   registers (see Figure 19-2).
                                                         System memory

                                                         Root Complex                SPI
                                                         Register Block         memory-mapped
                          RCBA                                                     registers

                                          Offset 3800h
                       0:31:00:F0
                                                                                     HSFS
                                                                                     HSFC
                                                                                    FADDR
                                                                                    FDATA1
                                                                                      ...
                                                            SPIBAR
                                                                                   FDATA16
                                                                                     FREG1

Figure 19-2: The location of SPI control and status registers in system memory

                                                               PCIe Bus

                        The PCI Express (PCIe) bus is a high-speed serial bus standard used on virtually
                        all modern PCs across different market segments: consumer laptops and desk-
                        tops, data center servers, and so on. The PCIe bus serves as an interconnection
                        between various components and peripheral devices in the computer. Many
                        integrated chipset devices (SPI flash, memory controller, and so forth) are repre-
                        sented as PCIe endpoints on the bus.

                        The RCRB address is stored in the Root Complex Base Address (RCBA)
                   PCI register, which is located on bus 0, device 31h, function 0. This is a
                   32-bit register, and the address of the RCRB is provided in bits 31:14. We
                   assume that the lower 14 bits of the RCRB’s address are zeros, since RCRB
                   is aligned at the boundary of 16Kb. Once we get the RCRB’s address, we
                   can obtain the SPIBAR value by reading memory at the 3800h offset. In
                   the next section, we discuss the SPI registers in more detail.

368   Chapter 19
                               SPI Fl a sh Firm wa re

     The SPI flash contains not only BIOS firmware but also other types of platform
     firmware, like Intel ME (Manageability Engine), Ethernet controller firmware,
     and vendor-specific firmware and data. The various types of firmware differ in
     their locations and access control permissions. For instance, the host OS can’t
     access Intel ME firmware, so the software approach for acquiring firmware
     won’t work for Intel ME.

Calculating SPI Configuration Register Addresses
Once we’ve obtained the SPIBAR value, which provides us with the location
of the SPI registers in memory, we can program the registers to read the con-
tents of an SPI flash. The offsets of the SPI registers may vary depending on
the platform, so the best way to determine the actual values for a given hard-
ware configuration is to look up the values in the platform chipset documen-
tation. For instance, for platforms supporting Intel’s latest CPU at the time of
this writing (Kaby Lake), we can consult the Intel 200 Series Chipset Family
Platform Controller Hub datasheet to find the location of the SPI memory-
mapped registers. The information is in the section called “Serial Peripheral
Interface.” For each SPI register, the datasheet provides its offset from the
SPIBAR value, register name, and the register default value at the platform
reset. We’ll use this datasheet as a reference in this section to determine the
addresses of the SPI registers we’re interested in.

Using the SPI Registers
Now that you know how to find the addresses of SPI registers, you can figure
out which one you’ll use to read the contents of the SPI flash. Table 19-1 lists
all the registers we’ll need to obtain an image of the SPI flash.

Table 19-1: SPI Registers for Firmware Acquisition

 Offset from SPIBAR     Register name         Register description
 04h–05h                HSFS                  Hardware sequencing flash status
 06h–07h                HSFC                  Hardware sequencing flash control register
 08h–0Bh                FADDR                 Flash address
 10h–4Fh                FDATAX                Array of flash data
 58h–5Bh                FREG1                 Flash region 1 (BIOS descriptor)

    We’ll discuss each of these registers in the following sections.

                                 BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   369
                   The FREG1 Register
                   The register we’ll start with is flash region 1 (FREG1). It provides the location
                   of the BIOS region on the SPI flash. The layout of this 32-bit-length register
                   is presented in Figure 19-3.

                                                                              
                        Reserved          Region Limit           Reserved        Region Base

                   32              28                       16              12                     0

Figure 19-3: The layout of FREG1 SPI register

                       The Region Base field v provides 24:12 bits of the base address for the
                   BIOS region in the SPI flash. Since the BIOS region is aligned at 4Kb, the
                   lowest 12 bits of the region’s base address start at 0. The Region Limit field u
                   provides 24:12 bits for the BIOS region in the SPI flash. For instance, if the
                   Region Base field contains a value of 0xaaa and Region Limit contains a
                   value of 0xbbb, then the BIOS regions spans from 0xaaa000 to 0xbbbfff on
                   the SPI flash.

                   The HSFC Register
                   The hardware sequencing flash control (HSFC) register allows us to send
                   commands to the SPI controller. (In the specification, these commands
                   are referred to as cycles.) You can see the layout of the HSFC register in
                   Figure 19-4.

                                                                                                
                        FSMIE        Reserved        FDBC            Reserved        FCYCLE        FGO

                   16           15              14               8               3             1         0

Figure 19-4: The layout of HSFC SPI register

                        We use the HSFC register to send a read/write/delete cycle to the SPI
                   flash. The 2-bit FCYCLE field w encodes the operation to perform the
                   following:
                         00 Read a block of data from the SPI flash
                         01 Write a block of data to the SPI flash
                         11 Erase a block of data on the SPI flash
                         10 Reserved
                        For read and write cycles, the FDBC field  indicates the number of
                   bytes that should be transferred to and from the SPI flash. The content of
                   this field is zero based; a value of 000000b represents 1 byte, and a value of
                   111111b represents 64 bytes. As a result, the number of bytes to transfer is
                   the value of this field plus 1.
                        The FGO field x is used to initiate the SPI flash operation. When the
                   value of this field is 1b, the SPI controller will read, write, and erase the data

370   Chapter 19
based on the values written to the FCYCLE and FDBC fields. Before setting
the FGO field, the software needs to have specified all the registers that indi-
cate the type of the operation, the amount of data, and the SPI flash address.
    The final HSFC field that deserves our attention is flash SPI SMI# enable
(FSMIE) u. When this field is set, the chipset generates a System Management
Interrupt (SMI), which leads to the execution of the SMM code. As we’ll see
in “Considering the Drawbacks of the Software Approach” on page 373, you
could use FSMIE to counteract the firmware image acquisition.

                Communic ating w ith the SPI Controlle r

      Using the HSFC register isn’t the only way to send commands to the SPI con-
      troller. Generally, there are two ways to communicate with the SPI flash: hard-
      ware sequencing and software sequencing. With the hardware-sequencing
      method we’re showing here, we let the hardware pick the SPI commands that
      get sent for read/write operations (which is exactly what the HSFC register is
      used for). Software sequencing offers us more power to choose which specific
      commands get sent to read/write operations. In this section, we use hardware
      sequencing through the HSFC register because it’s easy and it provides us with
      the functionality we need to read the BIOS firmware.

The FADDR Register
We use the flash address (FADDR) register to specify the SPI flash linear
address for read, write, and erase operations. This register is 32 bits, but
we use only the lower 24 bits to specify a linear address for the operation.
The upper 8 bits of this register are reserved and unused.

The HSFS Register
Once we’ve initiated the SPI cycle by setting the FGO field of the HSFC
register, we can determine when the cycle has finished by looking at the
hardware sequencing flash status (HSFS) register. This register is composed
of multiple fields that provide information on the status of the requested
operation. In Table 19-2, you can see the HSFS fields used to read the SPI
image.

Table 19-2: The SPI Register HSFS Fields

 Field offset       Field size     Field name            Field description
 0h                 1              FDONE                 Flash cycle done
 1h                 1              FCERR                 Flash cycle error
 2h                 1              AEL                   Access error log
 5h                 1              SCIP                  SPI cycle in progress

                                 BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   371
                         The FDONE bit is set by the chipset when the previous flash cycle (initi-
                    ated by the HSFC register’s FGO field) is complete. The FCERR and AEL
                    bits indicate that an error has occurred during the SPI flash cycle and that
                    the returned data may not contain valid values, respectively. The SCIP bit
                    indicates that the flash cycle is in progress. We set the SCIP by setting the
                    FGO bit, and the SCIP clears when the value of FDONE is 1. Based on this
                    information, we can determine that the operation we initiated has com-
                    pleted successfully when the following expression is true:

                    (FDONE == 1) && (FCERR == 0) && (AEL == 0) && (SCIP == 0)

                    The FDATAX Registers
                    The array of flash data (FDATAX) registers hold the data to be read from
                    or written to the SPI flash. Each register is 32 bits, and the total number
                    of FDATAX registers in use depends on the amount of bytes to transfer,
                    which is specified in the HSFC register’s FDBC field.

                    Reading Data from the SPI Flash
                    Now let’s put together all this information and see how to read data from
                    the SPI flash using these registers. First, we locate the Root Complex
                    Registers Block, from which we can determine the base address of SPI
                    memory-mapped registers and get access to those registers. By reading the
                    FREG1 SPI register, we can determine the location of the BIOS region on
                    the flash—that is, the BIOS starting address and BIOS limit.
                        Next, we read the BIOS region using the SPI registers just described.
                    This step is demonstrated in Figure 19-5.

                                                     SPI
  Reader
                                                  controller

               Write start address to FADDR                FADDR:                Flash linear address
                                                                       FSMIE

                                                                                                        FGO

             Write size of data to read to HSFC                HSFC:           FDBC           FCYCLE
                                                                       FSMIE

                                                                                                        FGO

               Write read command to HSFC                      HSFC:           FDBC           FCYCLE
                                                                       FSMIE

                                                                                                        FGO

              Set FGO (0x0001) bit in HSFC                     HSFC:           FDBC           FCYCLE
                                                                                             BERASE

                                                                                             FDONE
                                                                                              FCERR
                                                                                               SCIP

                                                                                               AEL

             Wait for SPI read cycle completion                HSFS:            ...

             Read data from FDATAX registers             FDATAX:                      DATA

Figure 19-5: Reading data from the SPI flash

372   Chapter 19
                          First, we set FADDR to the linear address of the flash memory region
                     that we want to read . Then we specify the total number of bytes to read
                     from flash memory by setting the FDBC field  of the flash control register.
                     (A value of 111111b would read 64 bytes per cycle.) Next we set the FCYCLE
                     field  with the 00b value, which indicates the read cycle and sets the FGO
                     bit  that starts our flash reading operation.
                          Once we set the FGO bit, we need to monitor the flash status register
                     to know when the operation is complete. We can do this by checking the
                     FDONE, FCERR, AEL, and SCIP fields . Once the read operation is fin-
                     ished, we read flash data from the FDATAX registers . The FDATAX[1]
                     register provides us with the first 4 bytes of flash memory at the target
                     address specified in the FADDR register; FDATAX[2] provides us with the
                     second 4 bytes of flash memory, and so on. By repeating these steps and
                     incrementing the FADDR value by 64 bytes in each iteration, we read the
                     whole BIOS region from the SPI flash.

                     Considering the Drawbacks of the Software Approach
                     The software approach to BIOS firmware dumping is convenient because it
                     doesn’t require you to be physically present; with this method, you can read
                     the contents of the SPI flash remotely. But it isn’t robust against an attacker
                     who has already compromised the system firmware and can execute mali-
                     cious code in SMM.
                         As we’ve noted, the HSFC register has an FSMIE bit that triggers an SMI
                     when the flash cycle completes. If an attacker has already compromised SMM
                     and is able to set the FSMIE bit before the firmware acquisition software sets
                     the FGO bit, then the attacker will receive control once the SMI is generated
                     and will be able to modify the contents of the FDATAX registers. As a result,
                     the firmware acquisition software will read forged values from FDATAX and
                     won’t be able to get an original image of the BIOS region. Figure 19-6 dem-
                     onstrates this attack.

                                                SPI
  Reader                                                                                       Attacker
                                             controller

             Write start address to FADDR

           Write size of data to read to HSFC

             Write read command to HSFC
                                                           Set FSMIE bit to 1 in HSFC               ?
            Set FGO (0x0001) bit in HSFC
                                                            Once FDONE is set to 1
                                                               SMI is triggered
                                                                                                     
           Wait for SPI read cycle completion
                                                               Write fake data to
                                                               FDATAX registers
                                                                                                     
           Read data from FDATAX registers

Figure 19-6: Subverting a software BIOS acquisition via SMI

                                                          BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   373
                        Before the reader sets the FGO bit v in the flash control register, the
                   attacker writes 1 to the register’s FSMIE bit u. Once the cycle is finished
                   and data is written back to the FDATAX registers, an SMI is triggered and
                   the attacker receives control . Then the attacker modifies the contents
                   of the FDATAX registers  to conceal the attack on the BIOS firmware.
                   After regaining control, the reader will receive fake data  and won’t
                   detect the compromised firmware.
                        This attack demonstrates that the software approach doesn’t provide
                   a 100 percent reliable solution for firmware acquisition. In the following
                   section, we’ll discuss the hardware approach to obtaining system firmware
                   for forensic analysis. Conducting forensic analysis by physically attaching
                   a device to the SPI flash avoids the possibility of the attack depicted in
                   Figure 19-6.

     The Hardware Approach to Firmware Acquisition
                   To guarantee we have acquired the actual BIOS image stored on the SPI
                   flash and not one already compromised by an attacker, we can use the
                   hardware approach. With this approach, we physically attach a device to
                   the SPI flash memory and read its contents directly. This is the best solu-
                   tion because it’s more trustworthy than the software approach. As an extra
                   benefit, this approach allows us to obtain other firmware stored on the SPI
                   flash, like ME and GBE firmware, which might not be accessible with the
                   software approach due to restrictions enforced by the SPI controller.
                        The SPI bus on modern systems allows multiple masters to communi-
                   cate with the SPI flash. For instance, on systems based on the Intel chipset,
                   there are generally three masters: the host CPU, the Intel ME, and GBE.
                   These three masters have different access rights to different regions of the
                   SPI flash. On most modern platforms, the host CPU can’t read and write to
                   the SPI flash region containing the Intel ME and GBE firmware.
                        Figure 19-7 demonstrates a typical setup for obtaining the BIOS firm-
                   ware image by reading the SPI flash.
                                                                 Host interface
                                                               (USB 2.0, UART,
                                        SPI                       and so on)
                    SPI flash with                    SPI                           Host
                      firmware                    programmer                      platform

Figure 19-7: A typical setup for dumping the SPI flash image

                       In order to read data from the flash memory, we need an additional
                   device, called an SPI programmer, which we physically attach to the SPI flash
                   memory chip on the target system. We also connect the SPI programmer via
                   a USB or UART interface to a host that we use to obtain the BIOS firmware
                   image. We would then run some particular software on the programmer
                   to make it read data from the flash memory chip and transfer the data to
                   the analyst’s computer. This might be proprietary software provided with

374   Chapter 19
a particular SPI programmer, or it could be an open source solution such
as the Flashrom tool, which is discussed later in “Reading the SPI Flash
with the FT2232 Mini Module” on page 377.

Reviewing a Lenovo ThinkPad T540p Case Study
The hardware approach is even more specific than the software approach.
It requires you to consult platform documentation in order to learn what
kind of flash memory the platform uses to store the firmware and where the
firmware is physically located in the system. In addition, there are numer-
ous flash programming devices for specific hardware we could use to read
the contents of the flash memory. We won’t discuss the various hardware
and software options available for system firmware acquisition, because
there are simply too many. Instead, we’ll go over one of the possible ways to
dump firmware from the Lenovo ThinkPad T540p using the FT2232 SPI
programmer.
     We chose this SPI programmer because of its relatively low price (about
$30) and flexibility, as well as our prior experience of working with it. As we’ve
mentioned, there are many solutions, and each has its unique features, advan-
tages, and drawbacks.

                 De diprog SF 100 ISP IC Progr a mme r

    Another device we’d like to mention is the Dediprog SF100 ISP IC Programmer
    (shown in Figure 19-8). It’s popular in the security research community, supports
    many SPI flashes, and offers extensive functionality. Minnowboard, an open
    source reference board for hardware and firmware developers, has a good
    tutorial on using Dediprog for updating firmware at https://minnowboard.org/
    tutorials/updating-firmware-via-spi-flash-programmer/.

Figure 19-8: A Dediprog SF100 ISP IC Programmer

                                BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   375
                   Locating the SPI Flash Memory Chip
                   Let’s start by physically reading the firmware image from the Lenovo
                   ThinkPad T540p platform. First, to dump the system firmware from
                   the target system, we need to find where, on the main board, the SPI
                   flash memory chips are located. To do this, we consulted the Hardware
                   Maintenance Manual (https://thinkpads.com/support/hmm/hmm_pdf/t540p​
                   _w540_hmm_en_sp40a26003_01.pdf ) for this laptop model and took apart
                   the target system’s hardware. In Figures 19-9 and 19-10, you can see the
                   locations of the two flash memory chips. Figure 19-9 shows a complete
                   image of the system board. The SPI flash chips are located in the high-
                   lighted area.

   Warning         Don’t repeat the actions described in this section unless you are 100 percent sure of
                   what you’re doing. An invalid or incorrect configuration of the tools may brick the
                   target system.

Figure 19-9: The Lenovo ThinkPad T540p mainboard with SPI flash modules

                        Figure 19-10 zooms in on the region highlighted in Figure 19-9 so you
                   can see the SPI flash chips more clearly. This laptop model uses two SOIC-8
                   flash memory modules to store the firmware—a 64Mb (8MB) one and a
                   32Mb (4MB) one. This is a very popular solution on many modern desktops
                   and laptops.

376   Chapter 19
                            SPI flash chip #1

                                             SPI flash chip #2

Figure 19-10: The location of the SPI flash modules on the mainboard of the laptop

   Since two separate chips are used to store the system firmware, we’ll
need to dump the contents of both. We’ll obtain the final firmware image by
concatenating the images from the two flash memory chips into a single file.

Reading the SPI Flash with the FT2232 Mini Module
Once we’ve identified the physical location of the chips, we can connect
the SPI programmer’s pins to the flash module on the system board. The
datasheet (http://www.ftdichip.com/Support/Documents/DataSheets/Modules/DS​
_FT2232H_Mini_Module.pdf ) for the FT2232H Mini Module shows us which
pins we should use to attach the device to the memory chip. Figure 19-11
demonstrates the layout of the pins for both the FT2232H Mini Module and
the SPI flash chip.
      The FT2232H has two sets of pins, corresponding to two channels:
Channel 2 and Channel 3. You may use either channel to read the con-
tents of the SPI flash memory. In our experiment, we use Channel 3 to
attach the FT2232H to the SPI memory chip. Figure 19-11 shows which
of the FT2232H pins we connected to the corresponding pins of the SPI
flash memory chip.
      In addition to connecting the FT2232H to the memory chip, we need
to configure it to operate in USB bus-powered mode. The FT2232H Mini
Module supports two modes of operating: USB bus-powered and self-powered.
In the bus-powered mode, the mini module takes power from the USB bus
it is attached to, and in self-powered mode, the power is provided indepen-
dently of the USB bus connection.

                                BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   377
                                    USB                                1                      5
                    Channel 2                 Channel 3                2                      6
                      1   2                    1    2                            SOIC-8
                     3    4                     3   4                  3                      7
                     5    6                     5   6                  4                      8
                     7    8                     7   8
                     9   10                     9  10
                     11 12                     11 12             Channel 3 pin        SPI flash chip pin
                     13 14                     13 14                  23                      1
                     15 16        FT2232H      15 16                  24                      2
                     17 18                     17 18                  21                      3
                     19 20                     19 20                  04                      4
                     21 22                     21 22                  25                      5
                     23 24                     23 24                  26                      6
                     25 26                     25 26                  20                      7
                                                                      01                      8

Figure 19-11: The layout of the pins for the FT2232H Mini Module and SPI flash chip

                       To help us attach our SPI programmer to the SPI chip module, we use
                   a SOIC-8 clip, as shown in Figure 19-12. This clip allows us to easily connect
                   the mini module’s pins to the corresponding pins of the flash memory chip.

Figure 19-12: Attaching the FT2232H Mini Module to the SPI flash chip

378   Chapter 19
       Once we connect all the components, we can read the contents of the
  SPI flash chip. To do this, we use an open source tool called Flashrom (https://
  www.flashrom.org/Flashrom). This tool was developed specifically for identify-
  ing, reading, writing, verifying, and erasing flash chips. It supports a large
  number of flash chips and works with many different SPI programmers,
  including the FT2232H Mini Module.
       Listing 19-1 shows the results of running Flashrom to read the contents
  of both SPI flash chips on the Lenovo ThinkPad T540p platform.

 user@host: flashrom -p ft2232_spi:type=2232H,port=B --read dump_1.bin
  flashrom v0.9.9-r1955 on Linux 4.8.0-36-generic (x86_64)
  flashrom is free software, get the source code at https://flashrom.org

  Calibrating delay loop... OK.
 Found Macronix flash chip "MX25L6436E/MX25L6445E/MX25L6465E/MX25L6473E"
  (8192 kB, SPI) on ft2232_spi.
w Reading flash... done.

  user@host: flashrom -p ft2232_spi:type=2232H,port=B --read dump_2.bin
  flashrom v0.9.9-r1955 on Linux 4.8.0-36-generic (x86_64)
  flashrom is free software, get the source code at https://flashrom.org

  Calibrating delay loop... OK.
  Found Macronix flash chip "MX25L3273E" (4096 kB, SPI) on ft2232_spi.
  Reading flash... done.

x user@host: cat dump_2.bin >> dump_1.bin

Listing 19-1: Dumping SPI flash images with the Flashrom tool

       First, we run Flashrom to dump the contents of the first SPI flash chip,
  passing it a programmer type and port number as parameters . The type
  we specify, 2232H, corresponds to our FT2232H Mini Module, and port B
  corresponds to Channel 3, the one we’re using to connect to the SPI flash
  chip. The --read parameter tells Flashrom to read the contents of the SPI
  flash memory into the dump_1.bin file. Once we run the tool, it displays the
  type of the detected SPI flash chip—in our case, Macronix MX25L6473E .
  Once Flashrom finishes reading the flash memory, it outputs a confirma-
  tion .
       After reading the first flash chip, we reconnect the clip to the second
  chip and run Flashrom again to dump the second chip’s contents into the
  dump_2.bin file. Once this operation is done, we create a complete image of
  the firmware by concatenating the two dumped images .
       We have now dumped a complete, trustworthy image of the firmware.
  Even if the BIOS is already infected and an attacker attempts to thwart our
  firmware acquisition, we’ll still obtain the actual firmware code and data.
  Next, we’ll analyze it.

                                   BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   379
     Analyzing the Firmware Image with UEFITool
                   Once we obtain a firmware image from the target system’s SPI flash, we
                   can analyze it. In this section, we’ll cover the basic components of platform
                   firmware, such as firmware volumes, volume files, and the sections neces-
                   sary for understanding the layout of the UEFI firmware in the flash image.
                   Then we’ll focus on the most important steps in the forensic analysis of
                   firmware.

        No t e     In this section, we’ll provide high-level descriptions rather than detailed definitions
                   of the data structures used, since this is too large a subject and in-depth coverage is
                   beyond the scope of this chapter. We will, however, provide references to documenta-
                   tion containing definitions and the layout of the data structures if you’d like further
                   information.

                        We’re going to revisit UEFITool (https://github.com/LongSoft/UEFITool/),
                   the open source tool for parsing, extracting, and modifying UEFI firmware
                   images that was introduced in Chapter 15, to demonstrate theoretical con-
                   cepts with the real firmware image we acquired in the previous section. The
                   ability to look inside the firmware image to browse and extract various com-
                   ponents is incredibly useful for forensic analysis. This tool doesn’t require
                   installation; once downloaded, the application is ready to be executed.

                   Getting to Know the SPI Flash Regions
                   Before we look at the firmware image, we need to go over how the infor-
                   mation stored on the SPI flash is organized. Generally, modern platforms
                   based on the Intel chipset SPI flash consist of several regions. Each region
                   is dedicated to storing firmware for a specific device available in the plat-
                   form; for instance, UEFI BIOS firmware, Intel ME firmware, and Intel GBE
                   (integrated LAN device) firmware are each stored in their own region.
                   Figure 19-13 demonstrates the layout of several regions of the SPI flash.
                    SPI flash regions

                    Descriptor region

                       GbE region

                       ME region

                      Platform data
                          region

                       EC region

                      BIOS region

Figure 19-13: Regions of the SPI flash image

380   Chapter 19
     The SPI flash in modern systems supports up to six regions, including
the descriptor region, where flash images always start. The descriptor region
contains information about the SPI flash’s layout; that is, it provides the chip-
set with information about the other regions present on the SPI flash, such
as their location and access rights. The descriptor region also dictates the
access rights of each master in the system that can communicate with the SPI
flash controller. Multiple masters are able to communicate with the controller
at the same time. We can find the complete layout of the descriptor region,
including definitions of all the data structures located in it, in the chipset
specification for the target platform.
     In this chapter, we’re primarily interested in the BIOS region, which
contains firmware executed by the CPU at the reset vector. We can extract
the location of the BIOS region from the descriptor region. Normally, BIOS
is the last region on the SPI flash, and it constitutes the main target for
forensic analysis.
     Let’s take a look at the different regions of the SPI image that we
acquired with the hardware approach.

Viewing SPI Flash Regions with UEFITool
First, launch UEFITool and select File4 Open image file. Then select the
file with the SPI image you want to analyze—we’ve supplied one you can
use with the book’s resources at https://nostarch.com/rootkits/. Figure 19-14
shows the result of this operation.

                                                                            
                                                                                         
                                                                           
                                                                       

Figure 19-14: Browsing SPI flash regions in UEFITool

                                 BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   381
                       When the firmware image loads, UEFITool automatically parses it
                   and provides this information in a tree-like structure. In Figure 19-14, the
                   tool identified that the firmware image is from a system based on the Intel
                   chipset  with only four SPI regions: descriptor, ME, GbE, and BIOS. If
                   we select the BIOS region in the Structure window, we can see information
                   about it in the Information window. UEFITool shows the following items
                   describing the region:
                       Offset v The offset of the region from the beginning of the SPI flash
                       image
                       Full size w The size of the region in bytes
                       Memory address x The address of the region mapped into the
                       physical memory
                       Compressed y Whether the region contains compressed data
                       The tool provides a convenient method for extracting individual regions
                   (and any other object shown in the structure window) from the SPI image
                   and saving them in a separate file, as shown in Figure 19-15.

Figure 19-15: Extracting a BIOS region and saving it as a separate file

                        To extract and save a region, right-click the region and select Extract
                   as is . . . in the context menu. The tool will then show a regular dialog that
                   lets you choose where you want to save your new file. Once you’ve done this,
                   check the location you chose to confirm that the operation was successful.

382   Chapter 19
Analyzing the BIOS Region
Once we’ve identified the location of the BIOS region, we can proceed
with our analysis. At a high level, the BIOS region is organized into firm-
ware volumes, which are basic storage repositories for data and code. The
exact definition of the firmware volume is provided in the EFI Firmware
Volume Specification (https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/architecture​
-and-technology/unified-extensible-firmware-interface/efi-firmware-file-volume​
-specification.html). Every volume starts with a header that provides the
necessary volume attributes, such as the type of the volume filesystem,
the volume size, and the checksum.
     Let’s examine the firmware volumes available in the BIOS we’ve
acquired. If we double-left-click the BIOS region in the UEFITool win-
dow (as in Figure 19-15), we get a list of firmware volumes available, as
shown in Figure 19-16.

                                                                    

                                                                    
                                                                                     
                                                                        
                                                                              

Figure 19-16: Browsing the firmware volumes available in the BIOS region

     There are four firmware volumes available in our BIOS region, and
you’ll also notice two regions marked Padding. The padding regions don’t
belong to any of the firmware volumes but rather represent empty space
between them, filled with either 0x00 or 0xff values depending on the erase
polarity of the SPI flash. Erase polarity determines values written to flash
memory for erase operation. If erase polarity is 1, then erased bytes of the
flash memory are set to the values of 0xff; if erase polarity is 0, then erased
bytes are set to 0x00. As a result, when erase polarity is 1, the padding
regions (the empty space) consists of 0xff values.

                                BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   383
                       In the information tab to the right of the volumes in Figure 19-16, we
                   can see the attributes of the selected volume. Here are some of the impor-
                   tant fields:
                       Offset u The offset of the firmware volume from the beginning of
                       the SPI image.
                       Signature v The signature of the firmware volume in the header.
                       This field is used to identify volumes in the BIOS regions.
                       Filesystem GUID w The identifier of the filesystem used in the
                       firmware volume. This Globally Unique Identifier (GUID) is dis-
                       played as the name of the volume in the structure window. If the
                       GUID is documented, UEFITool displays its human-readable name
                       (such as EfiFirmwareFileSystemGuid in Figure 19-16) instead of the
                       hexadecimal value.
                       Header size x The size of the firmware volume header. The volume
                       data follows the header.
                       Body size y The size of the firmware volume body—that is, the size
                       of the data stored in the volume.

                   Getting to Know the Firmware Filesystem
                   The firmware volumes are organized as a filesystem, the type of which
                   is indicated in a filesystem GUID in the firmware header. The filesystem
                   most frequently used in firmware volumes is the firmware filesystem (FFS),
                   defined in the EFI FFS specification, but firmware volumes also use other
                   filesystems, such as FAT32 or NTFS. We’ll focus on the FFS as it is the most
                   common.
                        The FFS stores all the files in the root directory and contains no provi-
                   sion for any directory hierarchy. According to the EFI FFS specification,
                   each file has an associated type, located in that file’s header, that describes
                   the data stored in that file. Here is a list of some frequently encountered file
                   types that may be useful in forensic analysis:
                       EFI_FV_FILETYPE_RAW A raw file—no assumptions should be made
                       about the data stored in the file.
                       EFI_FV_FILETYPE_FIRMWARE_VOLUME_IMAGE A file that con-
                       tains an encapsulated firmware volume. Even though FFS has no
                       provision for directory hierarchy, we can use this file type to create
                       a tree-like structure by encapsulating firmware modules in files.
                       EFI_FV_FILETYPE_SECURITY_CORE A file with code and data that
                       is executed at the Security (SEC) phase of the boot process. The SEC
                       phase is the very first phase of the UEFI boot process.
                       EFI_FV_FILETYPE_PEI_CORE An executable file that initiates the
                       Pre-EFI Initialization (PEI) phase of the boot process. The PEI phase
                       follows the SEC phase.
                       EFI_FV_FILETYPE_PEIM The PEI modules, which are files with code
                       and data executed at the PEI phase.

384   Chapter 19
    EFI_FV_FILETYPE_DXE_CORE An executable file that initiates the
    Driver Execution Environment (DXE) phase of the boot process. The DXE
    phase follows the PEI phase.
    EFI_FV_FILETYPE_DRIVER An executable file launched at the DXE
    phase.
    EFI_FV_FILETYPE_COMBINED_PEIM_DRIVER A file with code and
    data that can be executed at both the PEI and DXE phases.
    EFI_FV_FILETYPE_APPLICATION A UEFI application, which is an
    executable that can be launched at the DXE phase.
    EFI_FV_FILETYPE_FFS_PAD A padding file.
    Unlike the typical filesystems used in operating systems, where files
have human-readable filenames, FFS files are identified by GUIDs.

Getting to Know File Sections
Most firmware files stored in the FFS consist of a single part or multiple dis-
crete parts, called sections (although some files, such as EFI_FV_FILETYPE​
_RAW files, don’t contain any sections).
    There are two types of sections: leaf sections and encapsulation sec-
tions. Leaf sections directly contain data, the type of which is determined
by a section type attribute in the section header. Encapsulation sections con-
tain file sections, which may contain either leaf sections or encapsulation
sections. This means that one encapsulation section can contain a nested
encapsulation section.
    The following list describes some types of leaf sections:
    EFI_SECTION_PE32 Contains a PE image.
    EFI_SECTION_PIC Contains position-independent code (PIC).
    EFI_SECTION_TE Contains a Terse Executable (TE) image.
    EFI_SECTION_USER_INTERFACE Contains a user interface string. It
    is typically used to store a human-readable name for the file, in addi-
    tion to the file GUID.
    EFI_SECTION_FIRMWARE_VOLUME_IMAGE Contains an encapsu-
    lated firmware image.
    And here are a couple of the encapsulation sections defined in the FFS
specification:
    EFI_SECTION_COMPRESSION Contains compressed file sections.
    EFI_SECTION_GUID_DEFINED Encapsulates other sections with
    respect to an algorithm that is identified by the section GUID. This
    type is used for signed sections, for example.
    These objects constitute the contents of the UEFI firmware on modern
platforms. A forensic analyst must account for every component of the firm-
ware, whether it is a section with executable code, like PE32, TE or PIC, or a
data file with nonvolatile variables.

                                BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   385
                       To better understand the concepts presented here, see Figure 19-17,
                   which demonstrates the location of the CpuInitDxe driver in the firmware
                   volume. This driver is responsible for CPU initialization at the DXE phase.
                   We’ll go from the bottom to the top in the FFS hierarchy in order to
                   describe its location in the firmware image.

                                      
                                               
                                    
                                     

                                               
                                           
                                       
                                  
                                      

Figure 19-17: The location of the CpuInitDxe driver in the BIOS region

                        The driver’s executable image is located in the PE32 image section {.
                   This section, along with other sections that contain the driver name |,
                   version }, and dependencies z, are located in the file with the GUID
                   {62D171CB-78CD-4480-8678-C6A2A797A8DE} . The file is part of the encapsu-
                   lated firmware volume x stored in the compressed section w. The com-
                   pressed section is located in the {9E21FD93-9C72-4C15-8C4B-E77F1DB2D792}
                   file v of the firmware volume image type, which is stored in the top-level
                   firmware volume u.
                        This example is primarily intended to demonstrate the hierarchy of
                   objects that constitute the UEFI firmware, but this is just one possible
                   approach to parsing it.
                        Now that we know how the BIOS region is organized, we’ll be able to
                   navigate its hierarchy and search for various objects stored in the BIOS
                   firmware.

     Analyzing the Firmware Image with Chipsec
                   In this section, we’ll discuss firmware forensic analysis with the platform
                   security assessment framework Chipsec (https://github.com/chipsec/), intro-
                   duced in Chapter 15. In this section, we’ll explore the tool’s architecture in
                   more detail; then, we’ll analyze some firmware, providing a few examples
                   that demonstrate Chipsec’s functionality and utility.

386   Chapter 19
                        The tool provides a number of interfaces for accessing platform hard-
                   ware resources, like physical memory, PCI registers, NVRAM variables, and
                   the SPI flash. These interfaces are very useful to forensic analysts, and we’ll
                   look at them more seriously later in this section.
                        Follow the installation guide in the Chipsec manual (https://github.com/
                   chipsec/chipsec/blob/master/chipsec-manual.pdf ) to install and set up the tool.
                   The manual also covers a multitude of functionality that you can use, but in
                   this section, we’re focusing only on Chipsec’s forensic analysis capabilities.

                   Getting to Know the Chipsec Architecture
                   Figure 19-18 shows the tool’s high-level architecture.

                                Chipsec Main                                     Chipsec Util

     Python                                 HAL (hardware abstraction layer)
   application

                                                        OS helper

     Low-level
system-dependent     Windows driver        macOS driver             Linux driver            EFI native code
       code

                                                Platform hardware resources

Figure 19-18: The Chipsec tool’s architecture

                       At the bottom, we can see modules that provide access to system
                   resources, such as memory-mapped IO address ranges, PCI configuration
                   space registers, and physical memory. These are platform-dependent mod-
                   ules implemented as kernel-mode drivers and EFI native code. (Currently,
                   Chipsec provides kernel-mode drivers for Windows, Linux, and macOS.)
                   Most of the modules are written in C and are intended to execute in kernel
                   mode or in the EFI shell.

        No t e     The UEFI Shell is a UEFI application that provides a command line interface for
                   firmware, allowing us to launch UEFI applications and execute commands. We can
                   use the UEFI Shell to retrieve information on the platform, view and modify boot
                   manager variables, load UEFI drivers, and more.

                       On top of these low-level OS-dependent components is an OS-
                   independent abstraction layer called OS Helper, comprising a number
                   of modules that hide an OS-specific API for communicating with kernel-
                   mode components from the rest of the application. The modules located

                                                      BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   387
                   at this level are implemented in Python. At the bottom, these modules
                   interface with the kernel-mode components; at the top, they provide an
                   OS-independent interface for another component, the hardware abstrac-
                   tion layer (HAL).
                        The HAL further abstracts the platform’s low-level concepts, like the PCI
                   configuration registers and model-specific registers (MSRs), and it provides
                   an interface for the Chipsec components located at the levels immediately
                   above it: Chipsec Main and Chipsec Util. The HAL is also written in Python and
                   relies on OSHelper to access the platform-specific hardware resources.
                        The two remaining components, located at the top of the architecture,
                   provide the main functionality available to users. The first interface, Chipsec
                   Main, is available through the chipsec_main.py Python script in the tool’s root
                   folder. It allows us to execute tests that check the security configuration of
                   certain platform aspects, run PoCs to test for the presence of vulnerabilities
                   in system firmware, and more. The second interface, Chipsec Util, is avail-
                   able through the chipsec_util.py script. We can use it to run individual com-
                   mands and access platform hardware resources to read the SPI flash image,
                   dump the UEFI NVRAM variables, and so on.
                        We’re primarily interested in the Chipsec Util interface because it pro-
                   vides rich functionality for working with UEFI firmware.

                   Analyzing Firmware with Chipsec Util
                   You can find out the commands provided by Chipsec Util by running the
                   chipsec_util.py script, located in the root directory of the tool’s repository,
                   without specifying any arguments. Generally, commands are grouped into
                   modules based on the platform hardware resources they work with. Here
                   are some of the most useful modules:
                       acpi   Implements commands for working with Advanced Configuration
                       and Power Interface tables.
                       cpu Implements commands related to the CPU, such as reading con-
                       figuration registers and obtaining information about the CPU.
                       spi Implements a number of commands for working with the SPI flash,
                       like reading, writing, and erasing data. There is also an option for dis-
                       abling BIOS write protection on systems with unlocked write protection
                       (as discussed in Chapter 16).
                       uefi Implements commands for parsing UEFI firmware (the SPI flash
                       BIOS region) to extract executables, NVRAM variables, and the like.
                        We can run chipsec_util.py command_name, where command_name is the name
                   of the command we want to learn about, to output a description and usage
                   information for that command. For instance, Listing 19-2 displays the out-
                   put of chipsec_util.py spi.

                   ################################################################
                   ##                                                            ##
                   ## CHIPSEC: Platform Hardware Security Assessment Framework ##
                   ##                                                            ##

388   Chapter 19
  ################################################################
  [CHIPSEC] Version 1.3.3h
  [CHIPSEC] API mode: using OS native API (not using CHIPSEC kernel module)
  [CHIPSEC] Executing command 'spi' with args []

 >>> chipsec_util spi info|dump|read|write|erase|disable-wp
  [flash_address] [length] [file]

      Examples:

      >>> chipsec_util spi info
      >>> chipsec_util spi dump rom.bin
      >>> chipsec_util spi read 0x700000 0x100000 bios.bin
      >>> chipsec_util spi write 0x0 flash_descriptor.bin
      >>> chipsec_util spi disable-wp

Listing 19-2: Description of and usage information for the spi module

      This is useful when we want to know the supported options for com-
  mands with self-describing names, like info, read, write, erase, or disable-wp .
  In the upcoming examples, we’ll primarily use the spi and uefi commands
  to acquire and unpack a firmware image.

  Dumping and Parsing the SPI Flash Image
  First we’ll look at spi, which allows us to perform firmware acquisition. This
  command uses the software approach to dumping the contents of an SPI
  flash. To obtain an image of the SPI flash, we can run the following:

  chipsec_util.py spi dump path_to_file

  where path_to_file is a path to the location where we want to save the SPI
  image. Upon successful execution of this command, this file will contain
  the flash image.
       Now that we have the SPI flash image, we can parse it and extract use-
  ful information using the decode command (it’s worth mentioning that the
  decode command by itself may be used to parse an SPI flash image obtained
  through the hardware method of firmware acquisition), like so:

  chipsec_util.py decode path_to_file

  where path_to_file points to a file with an SPI flash image. Chipsec will
  parse and extract data stored in the flash image and store it in a directory.
  We can also perform this task with the uefi command and decode option,
  like this:

  chipsec_util.py uefi decode path_to_file

                                   BIOS/UEFI Forensics: Firmware Acquisition and Analysis Approaches   389
                       Once we successfully execute the command, we obtain a set of objects
                   extracted from the image, such as executable files, data files with NVRAM
                   variables, and file sections.

                   Dumping UEFI NVRAM Variables
                   Now we’ll use Chipsec to enumerate and extract UEFI variables from the
                   SPI flash image. In Chapter 17, we briefly covered how to use chipsec uefi
                   var-list to extract NVRAM variables. UEFI Secure Boot relies on NVRAM
                   variables to store configuration data like its Secure Boot policy value, plat-
                   form key, key exchange keys, and db and dbx data. Running this command
                   will produce a list of all the UEFI NVRAM variables stored in the firmware
                   image, along with their content and attributes.
                        These are just a few commands out of the Chipsec tool’s rich arsenal.
                   A comprehensive list of all Chipsec use cases would require a book of
                   its own, but if you’re interested in the tool, we suggest checking out its
                   documentation.
                        This concludes our analysis of a firmware image with Chipsec. After
                   executing these commands, we get the extracted contents of the firmware
                   image. The next step in forensic analysis would be to analyze the extracted
                   components individually, using tools specific to the type of extracted object.
                   For instance, you can analyze PEI and DXE modules using IDA Pro disas-
                   sembler, while you can browse UEFI NVRAM variables in a hex editor.
                        This list of Chipsec commands serves as a good starting point for fur-
                   ther exploration of UEFI firmware. We encourage you to play with this tool
                   and refer to the manual to learn its other capabilities and features in order
                   to deepen your knowledge of firmware forensic analysis.

     Conclusion
                   In this chapter, we discussed important approaches to UEFI firmware foren-
                   sic analysis: acquiring firmware, and parsing and extracting information
                   from a UEFI firmware image.
                        We discussed two different ways to acquire firmware—the software
                   approach and the hardware approach. The software approach is conve-
                   nient, but it doesn’t provide a completely trustworthy way of obtaining a
                   firmware image from the target system. For this reason, we recommend
                   the hardware approach, despite its higher difficulty.
                        We also demonstrated how to use two open source tools indispens-
                   able to analyzing and reverse engineering SPI flash images: UEFITool and
                   Chipsec. UEFITool provides functionality for browsing, modifying, and
                   extracting forensic data from an SPI flash image, and Chipsec is useful
                   for performing many operations required in forensic analysis. The use of
                   Chipsec also reveals how easily an attacker can modify the firmware image
                   with a malicious payload, and so we expect interest in firmware forensics to
                   significantly increase in the security industry.

390   Chapter 19
