Foreword

I should begin by confessing that I do not consider myself a world-class application pro-
gramming interface (API) designer or software engineer. I do, however, consider myself an
expert researcher in the areas of computer graphics and geometric modeling. It was in this
line of work that I first met Martin at Pixar Animation Studios.
      As a graphics researcher I was accustomed to writing mathematically sophisticated
papers. I was also formally trained as a computer scientist at a major university and had
written my share of code. Armed with this background, when I was presented with the op-
portunity to lead a group of software engineers working on a new generation of animation
software for Pixar, I figured that it couldn’t be any more difficult than research. After all,
research is, by definition, the creation of the unknown, whereas engineering is the imple-
mentation of well-understood subjects. I could not have been more wrong.
      I came to realize that software engineering was without a doubt the most difficult
challenge I had ever confronted. After more years than I care to admit, I eventually gave up
and went back to graphics research.
      I can’t tell you how much I would have benefitted from a book like API Design for Cþþ.
Many of the lessons we learned the hard way have been captured by Martin in this insightful,
easy to use book. Martin approaches the subject not from the perspective of an academic
software researcher (although he draws heavily from results and insights gained there), but
from the perspective of an in-the-trenches software engineer and manager. He has experi-
enced firsthand the importance of good software design and has emerged as an articulate
voice of what good means. In this book he presents effective strategies for achieving that goal.
      I particularly like that Martin is not focusing just on API design, but more broadly on
software life cycles, allowing him to cover topics such as versioning, strategies for backward
compatibility, and branching methodologies.
      In short, this book should be of great value to those creating or managing software
activities. It is a comprehensive collection of best practices that have proven themselves time
and time again.
     Tony DeRose
     Senior Scientist and Research Group Lead
     Pixar Animation Studios

This page intentionally left blank
