Preface

Preface to the second edition
The first edition of this book was written in 2011, right before the Cþþ11 standard was
published (it was referred to as Cþþ0x at the time). Since then, Cþþ11 has become well-
established and further revisions have appeared at a regular cadence, including Cþþ14,
Cþþ17, Cþþ20, and Cþþ23. Given all these changes to the language, I wanted to update this
book to be more relevant to today’s Cþþ engineers. So, in this second edition, I’ve included
an entirely new chapter dedicated to the new application programming interface (API) design
features that have been added to the standard over the past decade and more. I’ve also gone
through the entire text to modernize it for these updates to the standard. This includes
updating all of the code samples to use Cþþ11 syntax where possible, because I feel that’s the
minimum standard today.
      While working on such a large update, I decided to add some new chapters to cover
topics I felt were missing from the first edition. This includes a new chapter on concurrency
and multithreading, a topic that’s more relevant now since Cþþ11 introduced direct support
for this important issue. Also, because I’ve since spent several years working at Apple, I
wanted to include some of the things I learned about integrating Cþþ code with Objective-C
and Swift, because these have become important languages for writing software on the iOS
and macOS platforms.
      Finally, I added several new sections and sidebars throughout the book to augment the
original text, from discussing the SOLID principles and the Thread Safe Interface design
pattern to covering functional programming styles and how to incorporate inclusive language
in API names and documentation. Overall, this second edition represents a significant update
and modernization of the book, from front cover to back cover. I hope that this new edition
proves to be an even more invaluable resources for your software projects.

What is application programming interface design?
Writing large applications in Cþþ is a complex and tricky business. However, designing
reusable Cþþ interfaces that are robust, stable, easy to use, and durable is even more difficult.
The best way to succeed in this endeavor is to adhere to the tenets of good API design.
      An API presents a logical interface to a software component and hides the internal
details required to implement that component. It offers a high-level abstraction for a module
and promotes code reuse by allowing multiple applications to share the same functionality.
      Modern software development has become highly dependent upon APIs, from low-level
application frameworks to data format APIs and graphical user interface (GUI) frameworks. In
fact, common software engineering terms such as modular development, code reuse, com-
ponentization, dynamic link library, software frameworks, distributed computing, and
service-oriented architecture all imply the need for strong API design skills.

xvi   Preface

       Some popular C and Cþþ APIs that you may already recognize include the Cþþ
Standard Library, Boost, the Microsoft Windows API (Win32), Microsoft Foundation Classes,
libtiff, libpng, zlib, libxmlþþ, OpenGL, MySQLþþ, Qt, wxWidgets, GTKþ, KDE, SkypeKit,
Intel’s Threading Building Blocks, the Netscape Plugin API, and the Apache module API. In
addition, many of Google’s open-source projects are Cþþ, as is a lot of the code on the
GitHub website.
       APIs such as these are used in all facets of software development, from desktop ap-
plications to mobile computing, and from embedded systems to Web development. For
example, the Mozilla Firefox Web browser is built on top of more than 80 dynamic libraries,
each of which provides the implementation for one or more APIs.
       Elegant and robust API design is therefore a critical aspect of contemporary software
development. One important way in which this differs from standard application develop-
ment is the far greater need for change management. As we all know, change is an inevitable
factor in software development; new requirements, feature requests, and bug fixes cause
software to evolve in ways that were never anticipated when it was first devised. However,
changes to an API that’s shared by hundreds of end-user applications can cause major up-
heaval and ultimately may cause clients to abandon an API. The primary goal of good API
design is therefore to provide your clients with the functionality they need while causing an
minimal impact to their code (ideally zero impact) when you release a new version.

Why should you read this book?
If you write Cþþ code that another engineer relies upon, you’re an API designer and this book
has been written for you.
      Interfaces are the most important code that you write because a problem with your
interface is far more costly to fix than a bug in your implementation. For instance, an
interface change may require all of the applications based upon your code to be updated,
whereas an implementation-only change can be integrated transparently and effortlessly into
client applications when they adopt the new API version. Put in more economic terms, a
poorly designed interface can seriously reduce the long-term survival of your code. Learning
how to create high-quality interfaces is therefore an essential engineering skill, and the
central focus of this book.
      As Michi Henning noted, API design is more important today than it was 20 years ago.
This is because many more APIs have been designed in recent years. These also provide richer
and more complex functionality and are shared by more end-user applications (Henning,
2009). Nevertheless, there are no other books currently on the market that concentrate on the
topic of API design for Cþþ.
      It’s worth noting that this book is not meant to be a general Cþþ programming guide.
There are already many good examples of these on the market. I will certainly cover lots of
object-oriented design material and present many handy Cþþ tips and tricks. However, I will
focus on techniques for representing clean modular interfaces in Cþþ. By corollary, I will not
dive as deeply into the question of how to implement the code behind these interfaces, such
as specific algorithm choices or best practices limited to the code within the curly braces of
your function bodies.
      On the other hand, this book will cover the full breadth of API development, from initial
design through implementation, testing, documentation, release, versioning, maintenance,
and deprecation. I will even cover specialized API topics such as creating scripting and plugin
APIs. Although many of these topics are also relevant to software development in general, our
                                                                                     Preface    xvii

focus here will be on the implications for API design. For example, when discussing testing
strategies, I will concentrate on automated API testing techniques rather than attempting to
include end-user application testing techniques such as GUI testing, system testing, or
manual testing.
      In terms of my own credentials to write this book, I have led the development of APIs for
research code shared by several collaborating institutions, in-house animation system APIs
that have been used to make Academy Awardewinning movies, open source client/server
APIs that have been used by millions of people worldwide, and APIs for the Siri virtual as-
sistant that have been deployed to over a billion devices. Throughout all of these disparate
experiences, I have consistently witnessed the need for high-quality API design. This book
therefore presents a practical distillation of the techniques and strategies of industrial-
strength API design that have been drawn from a range of real-world experiences.

Who is the target audience?
While this book is not a beginner’s guide to Cþþ, I have made every effort to make the text
easy to read and to explain all terminology and jargon clearly. The book should therefore be
valuable to new programmers who have grasped the fundamentals of Cþþ and want to
advance their design skills, as well as senior engineers and software architects who are
seeking to gain new expertise to complement their existing talents.
      There are three specific groups of readers that I have borne in mind while writing this
book:

1. Practicing software engineers and architects. Junior and senior developers who
   are working on a specific API project and need pragmatic advice on how to pro-
   duce the most elegant and enduring design.
2. Technical managers. Program and product managers who are responsible for pro-
   ducing an API product and who want to gain greater insight into the technical is-
   sues and development processes of API design.
3. Students and educators. Computer science and software engineering students who
   are learning how to program and are seeking a thorough resource on software
   design that is informed by practical experience on large-scale projects.

Focusing on Cþþ
Although there are many generic API design methodologies that can be taught (skills that
apply equally well to any programming language or environment), ultimately an API must be
expressed in a particular programming language. It’s therefore important to understand the
language-specific features that contribute to good API design. This book is therefore focused
on the issues of designing APIs for a single language (Cþþ) rather than diluting the content to
make it applicable for all languages. Readers who wish to develop APIs for other languages,
such as Java or C#, may still gain a lot of general insight from this text, but the book is directly
targeted at Cþþ engineers who must write and maintain APIs for other engineers to consume.
      Cþþ is still one of the most widely used programming languages for large software
projects and tends to be the most popular choice for performance critical code. As a result,
there are many diverse C and Cþþ APIs available for you to use in your own applications,
xviii   Preface

some of which I listed earlier. I’ll therefore concentrate on aspects of producing good APIs in
Cþþ and include copious source code examples to illustrate these concepts better. This
means that I’ll deal with Cþþ specific topics such as templates, encapsulation, inheritance,
namespaces, operators, const correctness, memory management, concurrency, the Cþþ
Standard Library, and the pimpl idiom.
      As I noted earlier, this edition of the book includes detailed coverage of all revisions of
the Cþþ standard from Cþþ98 through Cþþ23. I’ve dedicated a chapter to covering the
relevant features for each specific revision, broken out as separate sections. That way, if
you’re using a certain compiler version, say Cþþ17, then you can easily review all of the API
features for that version of the standard without getting distracted by features that aren’t
relevant to your development environment.

Conventions
Although it is more traditional to employ the term user to mean a person who uses a software
application, such as a user of Microsoft Word or Mozilla Firefox, in the context of API design I
will apply the term to mean a software developer who is creating an application and is using
an API to achieve this. In other words, I will generally be talking about API users and not
application users. The term client will be used synonymously in this regard. Note that the
term client, in addition to referring to a human user of your API, can also refer impersonally
to other pieces of software that must call methods in your API.
      Whereas many file format extensions are used to identify Cþþ source files, such as .cpp,
.cc, .cxx, .h, .hh, and .hpp, I will standardize on the use of .cpp and .h throughout this book. I
will also use the terms module and component interchangeably to mean a single .cpp and .h
file pair (except where module is meant to refer specifically to the new modules feature of
Cþþ20). These are notably not equivalent to a class, because a component or module may
contain multiple classes. I will use the term library to refer to a physical collection, or
package, of components (i.e., library > module/component > class).
      The term method, although generally understood in the object-oriented programming
community, is not strictly a Cþþ term. It originally evolved from the Smalltalk language. The
equivalent Cþþ term is member function, although some engineers prefer the more specific
definition of virtual member function. I am not particularly concerned with the subtleties of
these terms in this book, so I will use method and member function interchangeably.
Similarly, although the term data member is the more correct Cþþ expression, I will treat the
term member variable as a synonym.
      In terms of typographical conventions, I will use a fixed-width font to typeset all source
code examples, as well as any filenames or language keywords that may appear in the text.
Also, I will prefer upper camel case for all class and function names in the examples that I
present (i.e., CamelCase instead of camelCase or snake_case). However, obviously I will pre-
serve the case for any external code that I reference, such as std::for_each(). I follow the
convention of using an m prefix in front of data members (e.g., mMemberVar) and s in front of
static variables (e.g., sStaticVar).
      The source examples within the book are often only code snippets and are not meant to
show fully functional samples. I will also often strip comments from the example code in the
book. This is done for reasons of brevity and clarity. In particular, I will often omit any
preprocessor guard statements around a header file. I will assume that the reader is aware
that every C/Cþþ header should enclose all of its content within include guard statements (or
#pragma once) and that it’s good practice to contain all of your API declarations within a
                                                                                     Preface xix

consistent namespace. In other words, it should be assumed that each header file that I
present is implicitly surrounded by code such as:

     #ifndef MY_MODULE_H
     #define MY_MODULE_H

     // required #include files...

     namespace apibook {

     // API declarations ...

     }

     #endif // MY_MODULE_H

 TIP: I will also highlight various API design tips and key concepts throughout the book. These
 callouts are provided to let you search quickly for a concept you wish to reread. Or if you are
 particularly pressed for time, you could simply scan the book for these tips and then read the
 surrounding text to gain greater insight for those topics that interest you the most.

Book website
This book also has a supporting website, https://APIBook.com/. On this site you can find
general information about the book as well as supporting material such as the complete set of
source code examples contained within the text. Feel free to download and play with these
samples yourself. They were designed to be as simple as possible while still being useful and
illustrative. I have used the cross-platform CMake build system to facilitate compiling and
linking the examples, so they should work on Windows, Mac OS X, and UNIX operating
systems.
       I will publish any information about new revisions of this book and any errata on this
website. You can also find my contact information on the website, if you have any corrections
or suggestions you want to share with me. If I make a change to the book based on your
feedback, I will attribute your contribution on the website and in the acknowledgments
section of a subsequent printing of the book.
This page intentionally left blank
