Acknowledgments

This book was significantly improved by the technical review and feedback of many of my
friends and colleagues. I’m indebted to them for taking the time to read early versions of the
manuscript and provide thoughtful insights and suggestions. Thank you, Paul Strauss, Eric
Gregory, Rycharde Hawkes, Nick Long, James Chalfant, Brett Levin, Marcus Marr, Jim
Humelsine, and Geoff Levner.
      Many readers of earlier printings of this book have also sent me feedback over the years,
most of which I’ve incorporated into this version here. I would like to thank each of them for
their valued contribution: Javier Estrada, Ivan Komarov, Dan Smith, Alexandros Gezerlis, QiFo
         daş Çalık, Markus Geimer, Roger Orr, Chris Bond, Philip Koshy, Andrea Bigagli, Jiang
Lin, Çag
Zhiqiang, William Sommerwerck, Mark Jones, Yilmaz Arslanoglu, Fernando Rozenblit, Sören
Sprößig, and Charles Garraud.
      My passion for good application programming interface design has been developed by
working with many great software engineers and managers. Working at several different or-
ganizations, I’ve been exposed to a range of design perspectives, software development
philosophies, and problem-solving approaches. Throughout these varied experiences, I’ve
had the privilege to work alongside and learn from many uniquely talented individuals,
including:

n   SRI International: Bob Bolles, Adam Cheyer, Elizabeth Churchill, David Colleen,
    Brian Davis, Michael Eriksen, Jay Feuquay, Marty A. Fischler, Aaron Heller, Lee
    Iverson, Jason Jenkins, Luc Julia, Yvan G. Leclerc, Pat Lincoln, Chris Marrin, Ray C.
    Perrault, and Brian Tierney.
n   Pixar Animation Studios: Brad Andalman, David Baraff, Ian Buono, Gordon
    Cameron, Ed Catmull, Chris Colby, Bena Currin, Gareth Davis, Tony DeRose, Mike
    Ferris, Kurt Fleischer, Sebastian Grassia, Eric Gregory, Tara Hernandez, Paul Isaacs,
    Oren Jacob, Michael Kass, Chris King, Brett Levin, Tim Milliron, Alex Mohr, Cory
    Omand, Eben Osbty, Allan Poore, Chris Shoeneman, Patrick Schork, Paul Strauss,
    Kiril Vidim?
               ce, Adam Woodbury, David Yu, Dirk van Gelder, and Brad West.
n   The Bakery Animation Studio: Sam Assadian, Sebastien Guichou, Arnauld
    Lamorlette, Thierry Lauthelier, Benoit Lepage, Geoff Levner, Nick Long, Erwan
    Maigret, and Bariş Metin.
n   Linden Lab: Nat Goodspeed, Andrew de Laix, Howard Look, Brad Kittenbrink,
    Brian McGroarty, Adam Moss, Mark Palange, Jim Purbrick, and Kent Quirk.
n   PullString: Renée Adams, Olena Anderson, Jeff Aydelotte, Shawn Blakesley,
    Michael Chann, Jeremy Cytryn, Firat Enderoglu, Michael Fitzpatrick, John Fuetsch,
    Paul Gluck, Laurel Goodhart, Lucas Ives, Patrick Ku, Maciej Kus, Brian Langner,
    Robin McDonald, Will Miller, Benjamin Morse, Daniel Sinto, Aurelio Tinio, and Ali
    Ziaei.

xxii   Acknowledgments

n   Apple: Joe DeSimpliciis, Greg James, Thomas Karatzas, Aldo Longhi, Steven Martin,
    Tim Meighen, Dan Niemeyer, Antoine Raux, and Stanley Thalhammer.
      I would especially like to acknowledge the great impact that Dr. Yvan G. Leclerc has
made on my life from my early years at SRI International. Yvan was my first manager and a
true friend. He taught me how to be a good manager of people, how to be a rigorous scientist
and engineer, and at the same time how to enjoy life to its fullest. It is a great tragedy that
incredible individuals such as Yvan are taken from us too soon.
      Many thanks must also go to Elsevier/Morgan Kaufmann Publishers for all their work
reviewing, copy editing, typesetting, and publishing this book. This work would quite literally
not exist without their backing and energy. Specifically, I want to acknowledge the contri-
bution of Todd Green, Robyn Day, André Cuello, and Melissa Revell for the first edition, as
well as Chris Katsaropoulos, Palak Gupta, Prasanna Kalyanaraman, and Gregory Harris for the
second edition.
      Most importantly, I’d like to thank my wife, Genevieve Vidanes, for supporting and
tolerating me while I spent many hours intently focused on a computer screen. Writing a
book can be a big disruption to personal and family life, but she encouraged me throughout
the process while also knowing exactly when to make me pause and take a break. Thank you,
Genevieve, for your constant love and support. I couldn’t do any of this without you on my
side.
