                                                                                                                           1
Introduction

What are APIs?
An application programming interface (API) provides an abstraction for a problem and
specifies how clients should interact with software components that implement a so-
lution to that problem. The components themselves are typically distributed as a soft-
ware library, allowing them to be used in multiple applications. In essence, APIs define
reusable building blocks that allow modular pieces of functionality to be incorporated
into end-user applications.
    An API can be written for yourself, for other engineers in your organization, or for the
development community at large. It can be as small as a single function or involve
hundreds of classes, methods, free functions, data types, enumerations, and constants.
Its implementation can be proprietary or open source. The important underlying
concept is that an API is a well-defined interface that provides a specific service to other
pieces of software.
    A modern application is typically built on top of many APIs, where some of these
can also depend upon further APIs. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.1, which shows an
example application that directly depends on the API for three libraries (Libraries 1e3),
where two of those APIs depend on the API for a further two libraries (Libraries 4e5).
For instance, an image viewing application may use an API for loading GIF images, and
that API may itself be built upon a lower-level API for compressing and decompressing
data.
    API development is ubiquitous in modern software development. Its purpose is to
provide a logical interface to the functionality of a component while also hiding any
implementation details. For example, our API for loading GIF images may simply pro-
vide a LoadImage() method that accepts a filename and returns a 2D array of pixels. All of
the file format and data compression details are hidden behind this simple interface.
This concept is also illustrated in Fig. 1.1, where client code only accesses an API via its
public interface, shown as the dark section at the top of each box.

Contracts and contractors
As an analogy, consider the task of building your own home. If you were to build a house
entirely on your own, you would need to possess a thorough understanding of archi-
tecture, plumbing, electrical wiring, carpentry, masonry, and many other trades. You
would also need to perform every task yourself and keep track of the minutest of details
for every aspect of the project, such as whether you have enough wood for your

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00023-4                                                                     1
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

                                                Application Code

                                    API                API

                                 Library 1          Library 2

                                    API                API                 API

                                 Library 4           Library 5          Library 3

FIGURE 1.1 An application that calls routines from a hierarchy of application programming interfaces (APIs). Each
box represents a software library where the dark section represents the public interface, or API, for that library
while the white section represents the hidden implementation behind that API.

floorboards or whether you have the right fasteners to fit your screws. Finally, because
you are the only person working on the project, you can perform only a single task at any
point in time and hence the total time to complete the project could be very large.
    An alternative strategy is to hire professional contractors to perform key tasks for you.
You could hire an architect to design the plans for the house, a carpenter for all your
woodwork needs, a plumber to install the water pipes and sewage system for your house,
and an electrician to set up the power systems. Taking this approach, you negotiate a
contract with each of your contractorsdtelling them what work you want done and
agreeing upon a price. They then perform that work for you. If you’re lucky, maybe you
even have a good friend who is a contractor and they offer you their services for free.
With this strategy, you are freed from the need to know everything about all aspects of
building a house and instead you can take a higher-level supervisory role to select the
best contractors for your purpose and ensure that the work of each individual contractor
is combined to produce the vision of your ideal home.
    The analogy to APIs is probably obvious: the house that you’re building equates to a
software program that you want to write, and the contractors provide APIs that abstract
each of the tasks you need to perform and hide the implementation details of the work
involved. Your task then resolves to selecting the appropriate APIs for your application
and integrating them into your software. The analogy of having skilled friends who
provide contracting services for free is meant to represent the use of freely available open
source libraries in contrast to commercial libraries that require a licensing fee. The
analogy could even be extended by having some of the contractors employing sub-
contractors, which corresponds to certain APIs depending upon other APIs to perform
their task.

                                                                 FIGURE 1.2 Using contractors to
                                                                 perform specialized tasks to build
                                                                 a house.

                               You

Architect        Electrician         Mason            Plumber

   The contractor analogy is a common one in object-oriented programming. Early
practitioners in the field talked about an object defining a binding contract for the
services or behavior that it provides. An object then implements those services when
asked to by a client program, potentially by subcontracting some of the work out to other
objects behind the scenes (Snyder, 1986; Meyer, 1987) (Fig. 1.2).

APIs in Cþþ
Strictly speaking, an API is simply a description of how to interact with a component.
That is, it provides an abstraction and a functional specification for a component. In fact,
many software engineers prefer to expand the acronym API as abstract programming
interface instead of application programming interface.
    In Cþþ, this is traditionally embodied as one or more header (.h) files plus sup-
porting documentation files. However as of Cþþ20, we also have the concept of modules
as an alternative to using headers. An implementation for a given API is often repre-
sented as a library file that can be linked into end-user applications. This can either be a
static library such as a .lib file on Windows or .a on macOS and Linux, or a dynamic
library such as a .dll file on Windows, .dylib on macOS, or .so on Linux.
    A Cþþ API will therefore generally include the following elements:
1. Headers/Modules: A collection of .h header files or module interface units that
   define the interface and allow client code to be compiled against that interface.

   Open source APIs also include the source code (.cpp files) for the API
   implementation.
2. Libraries: One or more static or dynamic library files that provide an implementa-
   tion for the API (e.g., .a, .lib, .dll, .dylib, etc. files). Clients can link their code
   against these library files to add the functionality to their applications. (I’ll go into
   more detail about the related terms library, framework, and software development
   kit [SDK] later in this chapter.)
3. Documentation: Overview information that describes how to use the API, often
   including automatically generated documentation for all the classes and functions
   in the API.
   As an example of a well-known API, Microsoft’s Windows API (often referred to as the
Win32 API) is a collection of C functions, data types, and constants that enable pro-
grammers to write applications that run on the Windows platform. This includes func-
tions for file handling, process and thread management, creating graphical user
interfaces, talking to networks, and so on.

 TIP: An API is a logical interface to a software component that hides the internal details
 required to implement it.

   The Win32 API is an example of plain C API rather than a Cþþ API. While you can use
a C API directly from a Cþþ program, a good example of a specific Cþþ API is the Cþþ
Standard Library. This contains a set of container classes, iterators for navigating over
the elements in those containers, and various algorithms that act on those containers
(Josuttis, 1999). For instance, the collection of algorithms includes high-level operations
such as std::search(), std::reverse(), std::sort(), and std::set_intersection(). The
Cþþ Standard Library therefore presents a logical interface to the task of manipulating
collections of elements without exposing any of the internal details about how each
algorithm is implemented.

What’s different about API design?
Interfaces are the most important code that a developer writes. That’s because problems
in an interface are far more costly to fix than problems in the associated implementation
code. As a result, the process of developing shared APIs demands more attention than
standard application or graphical user interface (GUI) development. Of course, both
should involve best design practices; however in the case of API development, these are

critical to its success. Specifically, there are some key differentiating factors of API
development:
  An API is an interface designed for developers, in much the same way that a GUI is
  an interface designed for end users. In fact, it’s been said that an API is a user
  interface for programmers (Arnold, 2005). As such, your API could be used by
  thousands of developers around the world, and it will undoubtedly be used in ways
  that you never intended (Tulach, 2008). You must anticipate this in your design. A
  well-designed API can be your organization’s biggest asset. Conversely a poor API
  can create a support nightmare and even turn your users toward your competitors,
  just as a buggy or difficult-to-use GUI might force an end user to switch to a
  different application.
  Multiple applications can share the same API. In Fig. 1.1, I showed that a single
  application can be composed of multiple APIs. However, any one of those APIs
  could also be reused in several other applications. This means that while problems
  in the code for any given application will affect only that one application, errors in
  an API can affect all applications that depend upon that functionality.
  You must strive for backward compatibility whenever you change an API. If you
  make an incompatible change to your interface, your clients’ code may fail to
  compile, or worse, their code could compile but behave differently or crash inter-
  mittently. Imagine the confusion and chaos that would arise if the signature of the
  printf() function in the standard C library was different for different compilers or
  platforms. The simple “Hello World” program might not look so simple any more:

      #include <stdio.h>
      #ifdef _WIN32
      #include <windows.h>
      #endif
      #ifdef __cplusplus
      #include <iostream>
      #endif

      int main(int, char *argv[])
      {
      #if __STRICT_ANSI__
          printf("Hello World\n");
      #elif defined(_WIN32)
          PrintWithFormat("Hello World\n");
      #elif defined(__PRINTF_DEPRECATED__)
          fprintf(stdout, "Hello World\n");
      #elif defined(__PRINTF_VECTOR__)
          const char *lines[2] = {"Hello World", NULL};
          printf(lines);
      #elif defined(__cplusplus)
          std::cout << "Hello World" << std::endl;
      #else
      #error No terminal output API found
      #endif
          return 0;
      }

   This may seem like a contrived example, but it’s actually not that extreme. Take a look
   at the standard header files that come with your compiler and you will find decla-
   rations that are just as convoluted and inscrutable, or perhaps worse.
  Owing to the backward compatibility requirement, it is critical to have a change
  control process in place. During the normal development process, many de-
  velopers may fix bugs or add new features to an API. Some of these may be junior
  engineers who do not fully understand all aspects of good API design. As a result,
  it’s important to hold an API review before releasing a new version of the API. This
  involves one or more senior engineers checking that all changes to the interface
  are acceptable, have been made for a valid reason, and are implemented in the
  best way to maintain backward compatibility. Many open source APIs also enforce
  a change request process to gain approval for a change before it’s added to the
  source code.
  APIs tend to live for a long time. There can be a large up-front cost to produce a
  good API because of the extra overhead of planning, design, versioning, and review
  that are necessary. However, if done well, the long-term cost can be substantially
  cheaper because you have the ability to make radical changes and improvements
  to your software without disrupting your clients. That is, your development velocity
  can be greater because of the increased flexibility that the API affords you.
  The need for good documentation is paramount when writing an API, particularly
  if you don’t provide the source code for your implementation. Users can look at
  your header files to glean how to use it, but this doesn’t define the behavior of the
  API, such as acceptable input values or error conditions. Well-written, consistent,
  and extensive documentation is therefore imperative for any good API.
  The need for automated testing is similarly very high. Of course, you should always
  test your code, but when you’re writing an API you may have hundreds of other
  developers, and thousands of their users, depending upon the correctness of your
  code. If you are making major changes to the implementation of your API, you can
  be more confident that you will not break your clients’ programs if you have a
  thorough suite of regression tests to verify that the API behavior has not changed.
   Writing good APIs is difficult. While the necessary skills are founded upon general
software design principles, they also require additional knowledge and development
processes to address the points listed earlier. However, the principles and techniques
of API design are rarely taught to engineers. Normally, these skills are gained only
through experiencedby making mistakes and learning empirically what does and does
not work (Henning, 2009). This book is an attempt to redress this situation, to distill
the strategies of industrial-strength, future-proof API design that have evolved through
years of software engineering experience into a comprehensive, practical, and acces-
sible format.

 TIP: An API describes software used by other engineers to build their applications. As such, it
 must be well-designed, documented, regression tested, and stable between releases.

Why should you use APIs?
The question of why you should care about APIs in your own software projects can be
interpreted in two ways:
1. Why should you design and write your own APIs? Or,
2. Why should you use APIs from other providers in your applications?
   I’ll tackle both perspectives in the following sections as I present the various benefits
of using APIs in your projects.

More robust code
If you’re writing a module to be used by other developers, either for fellow engineers
within your organization or for external customers of your library, then it would be a
wise investment to create an API for them to access your functionality. Doing so will
offer you the following benefits:
 ⁃ Hides implementation. By hiding the implementation details of your module, you
   gain the flexibility to change the implementation at a future date without causing
   an upheaval for your users. Without doing so, you’ll either restrict yourself in terms
   of the updates you can make to your code or you’ll force your users to rewrite their
   code to adopt new versions of your library. If you make it too onerous for your cli-
   ents to update to new versions of your software, then it’s highly likely that they will
   either not upgrade at all or look elsewhere for an API that will not be as much
   work for them to maintain. Good API design can therefore significantly affect the
   success of your business or project.
 ⁃ Increases longevity. Over time, systems that expose their implementation details
   tend to devolve into spaghetti code in which every part of the system depends
   upon the internal details of other parts of the system. As a result, the system be-
   comes fragile, rigid, immobile, and viscous (Martin, 2000). This often results in or-
   ganizations having to spend significant effort to evolve the code toward a better
   design, or simply rewrite it from scratch. By investing in good API design up-front
   and paying the incremental cost to maintain a coherent design, your software can
   survive for longer and cost less to maintain in the long run. I’ll delve much more
   deeply into this point at the start of Chapter 4.
 ⁃ Promotes modularization. An API is normally devised to address a specific task or
   use case. As such, APIs tend to define a modular grouping of functionality with a

   coherent focus. Developing an application on top of a collection of APIs promotes
   loosely coupled and modular architectures in which the behavior of one module is
   not dependent upon the internal details of another module. If you work at a large
   company, this can have direct benefits for you if you’re working on one such
   modular API. That’s because it can be clearer if a bug is due to code that you own
   or for which another team is responsible. So you can spend less time triaging bugs
   that are unrelated to your code.
 ⁃ Reduces code duplication. Code duplication is one of the cardinal sins of software
   engineering and should be stamped out whenever possible. By keeping all your
   code’s logic behind a strict interface that all clients must use, you centralize the
   behavior in a single place. Doing so means that you need to update only one place
   to change the behavior of your API for all of the clients. This can help to remove
   duplication of implementation code throughout your code base. In fact, many APIs
   are created after discovering duplicated code and deciding to consolidate it behind
   a single interface. This is a good thing.
 ⁃ Removes hardcoded assumptions. Many programs may contain hardcoded values
   that are copied throughout the code, for example, using the filename myprogram.log
   whenever data are written to a log file. Instead, APIs can be used to provide access
   to this information without replicating these constant values across the code base.
   For example, a GetLogFilename() API call could be used to replace the hardcoded
   “myprogram.log” string.
 ⁃ Easier to change the implementation. If you have hidden all the implementation
   details of your module behind its public interface, then you can change those
   implementation details without affecting any code that depends upon the API. For
   example, you might decide to change a file parsing routine to use std::string con-
   tainers instead of allocating, freeing, and reallocating your own char * buffers.
 ⁃ Easier to optimize. Similarly, with your implementation details successfully hid-
   den, you can optimize the performance of your API without requiring any changes
   to your clients’ code. For example, you could add a caching solution to a method
   that performs some computationally intensive calculation. This is possible because
   all attempts to read and write your underlying data are performed via your API, so
   it becomes much easier to know when you must invalidate your cached result and
   recomputed the new value.

Code reuse
Code reuse is the use of existing software to build new software. It’s one of the holy grails
of modern software development. APIs provide a mechanism to enable code reuse.
   In the early years of software development, it was common for a company to have to
write all code for any application they produced. If the program needed to read GIF

images or parse a text file, the company would have to write all that code in-house.
Nowadays, with the proliferation of good commercial and open source libraries, it makes
much more sense simply to reuse code that others have written. For example, there are
various open source image reading APIs and file format parsing APIs that you can
download and use in your applications today. These libraries have been refined and
debugged by many developers around the world and have been battle-tested in many
other programs.
    In essence, software development has become a lot more modular with the use of
distinct components that form the building blocks of an application and talk together via
their published APIs. The benefit of this approach is that you don’t need to understand
every detail of every software component, in the same way that for the earlier house
building analogy you can delegate many details to professional contractors. This can
translate into faster development cycles, because you can either reuse existing code or
decouple the schedule for various components. It also allows you to concentrate on your
core business logic rather than having to spend time reinventing the wheel.
    One of the difficulties in achieving code reuse, however, is that you must often come
up with a more general interface than you originally intended. That’s because other
clients may have additional expectations or requirements. Effective code reuse therefore
follows from a deep understanding of the clients of your software and designing a system
that integrates their collective interests with your own.

 SIDEBAR: Cþþ APIs and the Web
 The trend toward applications that depend upon third-party APIs is particularly popular in
 the field of cloud computing. Here, web applications rely more and more on web services
 (APIs) to provide core functionality. In the case of web mash-ups, the application itself is
 sometimes simply a repackaging of multiple existing services to provide a new service, such as
 combining the Google Maps API with a local crimes statistics database to provide a map-
 based interface to the crime data.
    In fact, it’s worth taking a few moments to highlight the importance of Cþþ API design in
 web development. A superficial analysis might conclude that server-side web development is
 confined to scripting languages such as PHP, Perl, or Python (the “P” in the popular LAMP
 acronym), or .NET languages based upon Microsoft’s Active Server Pages technology. This may
 be true for small-scale web development. However, it is noteworthy that many large-scale web
 services use a Cþþ backend to deliver optimal performance.
    In fact, Facebook developed a product called HipHop to convert their PHP code into Cþþ
 to improve the performance of their social networking site. The Figma web application also
 used Cþþ compiled to WebAssembly to optimize their website. Cþþ API design therefore has a
 role to play in scalable web service development. Additionally, if you develop your core APIs in
 Cþþ, not only can they form a high-performance web service, your code can also be reused to
 deliver your product in other forms, such as desktop or mobile phone versions.

    As an aside, one potential explanation for this shift in software development strategy
is the result of the forces of globalization (Friedman, 2007; Wolf, 2004). In effect, the
convergence of the Internet, standard network protocols, and web technologies has
created a leveling of the software playing field. This has enabled companies and in-
dividuals all over the world to create, contribute to, and compete with large complex
software projects. This form of globalization promotes an environment where com-
panies and developers anywhere in the world can forge a livelihood out of developing
software subsystems. Other organizations in different parts of the world can then build
end-user applications by assembling and augmenting these building blocks to solve
specific problems. In terms of our focus here, APIs provide the mechanism to enable this
globalization and componentization of modern software development.

Parallel development
Even if you’re writing in-house software, your fellow engineers will very likely need to
write code that uses your code. If you use good API design techniques, you can simplify
their lives, and by extension your own (because you won’t have to answer as many
questions about how your code works or how to use to it). This becomes even more
important if multiple developers are working in parallel on code that depends upon each
other.
   For example, let’s say that you are working on a string encryption algorithm that
another developer wants to use to write data out to a configuration file. One approach
would be to have the other developer wait until you’re finished your work. Then they can
use it in their file writer module. However, a far more efficient use of time would be for
the two of you to meet early on and agree upon an appropriate API. Then you can put
that API in place with placeholder functionality that your colleague can start calling
immediately, such as:

     #include <string.h>

     class StringEncryptor
     {
     public:
         /// set the key to use for the Encrypt() and Decrypt() calls
         void SetKey(const std::string &key);

          /// encrypt an input string based upon the current key
          std::string Encrypt(const std::string &str) const;

          /// decrypt a string using the current key - calling
          /// Decrypt() on a string returned by Encrypt() will
          /// return the original string for the same key.
          std::string Decrypt(const std::string &str) const;
     };

  You can then provide a simple implementation of these functions, so that at least the
module will compile and link. For example, the associated .cpp file might look like:

      void StringEncryptor::SetKey(const std::string &key)
      {
      }

      std::string StringEncryptor::Encrypt(const std::string &str)
      {
          return str;
      }

      std::string StringEncryptor::Decrypt(const std::string &str)
      {
          return str;
      }

    In this way, your colleague can use this API and proceed with the work without being
held up by your progress. For the time being, your API will not actually encrypt any
strings, but that’s just a minor implementation detail! The important point is that you
have a stable interfaceda contractdon which you both agree, and that it behaves
appropriately, such as Decrypt(Encypt("Hello")) ¼¼ "Hello". When you finish your work
and update the .cpp file with the correct implementation, your colleague’s code will
simply work without any further changes required on his or her part.
    In reality, it’s likely that there will be interface issues that you didn’t anticipate before
you started writing the code and you will probably have to iterate on the API a few times
to get it just right. However, for the most part, the two of you can work in parallel with
minimal holdups.
    This approach also encourages test-driven, or test-first, development. By stubbing out
the API early on, you can write unit tests to validate the desired functionality and run
these continuously to make sure that you haven’t broken your contract with your
colleague.
    Scaling this process up to an organizational level, your project could have separate
teams that may be remote from each other, even working to different schedules. But by
defining each team’s dependencies upfront, and creating APIs to model these, each team
can work independently and with minimal knowledge of how the other teams are
implementing their work behind the API. This efficient use of resources, and the cor-
responding reduction in redundant communication, can correlate to significant overall
cost savings for an organization.

When should you avoid APIs?
Designing and implementing an API usually requires more work than writing normal
application code. That’s because the purpose of an API is to provide a robust and stable

interface for other developers to use. As such, the level of quality, planning, documen-
tation, testing, support, and maintenance is far higher for an API than for software that’s
meant to be used only within a single application.
    As a result, if you’re writing an internal module that doesn’t require other clients to
communicate with it, then the extra overhead of creating and supporting a stable public
interface for your module may not be worth the effort. However, this is not a reason to
write sloppy code. Spending the extra time to adhere to the principles of API design will
not be wasted effort in the long run.
    On the flip side of the coin, consider that you’re a software developer who wants to
use a third-party API in your application. The previous section discussed several reasons
why you might want to reuse external APIs in your software. However, there may be
cases in which you wish to avoid using a particular API and pay the cost to implement
the code yourself, or look for an alternate solution. For example:
 ⁃ License restrictions. An API may provide everything you need for functionality, but
   the license restrictions may be prohibitive for your needs. For example, if you want
   to use an open source package that’s distributed under the GNU General Public
   License (GPL), then you are required to release any derived works under the GPL
   as well. This means that using this package in your program would require you to
   release the entire source code for your application, a constraint that may not be
   acceptable for a commercial application. Other licenses, such as the GNU Lesser
   GPL are more permissive and tend to be more common for software libraries.
   Another licensing aspect is that the dollar cost for a commercial API may be too
   high for your project, or the licensing terms may be too restrictive, such as
   requiring a license fee per developer or even per user.
 ⁃ Functionality mismatch. An API may appear to solve a problem that you have but
   may do it in a way that doesn’t match the constraints or functional requirements
   of your application. For example, perhaps you’re developing an image processing
   tool and you want to provide a Fourier transform capability. There are many
   implementations of the fast Fourier transform (FFT) available, but many of these
   are 1D algorithms, whereas you require a 2D FFT because you are dealing with 2D
   image data. Additionally, many 2D FFT algorithms work only on data sets with di-
   mensions that are a power of 2 (e.g., 256 ? 256 or 512 ? 512 pixels). Furthermore,
   perhaps the API that you found doesn’t work on the platforms that you must sup-
   port, or perhaps it doesn’t match the performance criteria that you’ve specified for
   your application.
 ⁃ Lack of source code. Although there are many open source APIs, sometimes the
   best API for your case may be a closed source offering. That is, only the header
   files for the interface are made available to you, but the underlying Cþþ source
   files are not distributed with the library. This has several important implications.
   Among these is the fact that if you encounter a bug in the library, you’re unable to
   inspect the source code to understand what might be going wrong. Reading the

   source can be a valuable technique for tracking down a bug and potentially discov-
   ering a work-around for the issue.
      Furthermore, without access to the source code for an API, you lose the ability to
   change the source to fix a bug. This means that the schedule for your software project
   could be adversely affected by unanticipated problems in a third-party API you’re
   using and by the time spent waiting for the owners of that API to address your bug
   reports and distribute a fixed patch.
 ⁃ Lack of documentation. An API may appear to fulfill a need that you have in your
   application, but if the API has poor or nonexistent documentation, then you may
   decide to look elsewhere for a solution. Perhaps it’s not obvious how to use the
   API, perhaps you cannot be sure how the API will behave under certain situations,
   or perhaps you simply don’t trust the work of an engineer who hasn’t taken the
   time to explain how their code should be used.
    While I’ve tried to play devil’s advocate here and come up with cases where you don’t
need to worry about API design, over the course of my career as a software engineer, I’ve
come to appreciate that everything is API design. For example, in a large organization
with a lot of internal code, it’s tempting to think of everything as just “the code,” because
it’s easy to change anything you want. But not all code changes should be treated
equally. If you don’t have strong API boundaries and processes in place, then treating all
of your software as one giant ball of code will quickly devolve into chaos. As Alex Martelli
phrased it, the worst API is no API at all (Martelli, 2011). If you take one thing from this
book, it should be to treat every software problem as an API design problem first and
foremost.

API examples
APIs are everywhere. Even if you’ve been programming for only a short amount of time,
the chances are that you’ve written code to use an API or two, and maybe you’ve also
written one yourself.

Layers of APIs
An API can be any size, from a single function to a large collection of classes. It can also
provide access to functionality at any architectural level, from low-level operating system
(OS) calls all the way up to GUI tool kits. The following list presents various common
APIs, many of which you’ve probably heard of already, to give you an appreciation for
how prevalent API development is:
 ⁃ OS APIs. Every OS must provide a set of standard APIs to allow programs to access
   OS-level services. For example, the POSIX API defines functions such as fork(),
   getpid(), and kill() for managing UNIX-style processes, whereas Microsoft’s

   Win32 API includes functions such as CreateProcess(), GetCurrentProcess(), and
   TerminateProcess() for managing Windows processes. These are stable low-level
   APIs that should never change; otherwise many programs could break!
 ⁃ Language APIs. The C language is supported by the C Standard Library, imple-
   mented as the libc library and associated man pages. It includes familiar functions
   such as printf(), scanf(), and fopen(). The Cþþ language also offers the Cþþ
   Standard Library, which provides an API for various container classes (e.g.,
   std::string, std::vector, std::set, and std::map), iterators (e.g., std::vec-
   tor<double>::iterator), and generic algorithms (e.g., std::sort, std::for_each, and
  std::set_union). For example, the following code snippet uses the Cþþ Standard
  Library API to iterate through all elements in a vector and print them out (although
  in modern code, using auto within a range-based for loop would be simpler):

       #include <iostream>
       #include <vector>

       void PrintVector(const std::vector<float> &vec)
       {
           std::vector<float>::const_iterator it;
           for (it = vec.begin(); it != vec.end(); ++it) {
               std::cout << *it << std::endl;
           }
       }

 ⁃ Image APIs. Gone are the days when developers needed to write their own image
   reading and writing routines. There is now a wide range of open source packages
   out there for you to download and use in your own programs. For example, there’s
   the popular libjpeg library that provides an implementation of a JPEG/JFIF decoder
   and encoder. There’s the extensive libtiff library for reading and writing various fla-
   vors of TIFF files. And there’s the libpng library for handling PNG format images.
   All of these libraries define APIs that let you write code to read and write the image
   formats without having to know anything about the underlying file formats. For
   example, the follow code snippet uses the libtiff API to find the dimensions of a
   TIFF image:

       TIFF *tif = TIFFOpen("image.tiff", "r");
       if (tif) {
           uint32 w, h;
           TIFFGetField(tif, TIFFTAG_IMAGEWIDTH, &w);
           TIFFGetField(tif, TIFFTAG_IMAGELENGTH, &h);
           printf("Image size = %d x %d pixels\n", w, h);
           TIFFClose(tif);
       }

⁃ 3D graphics APIs. The two classic real-time 3D graphics APIs are OpenGL and
  DirectX. These let you define 3D objects in terms of small primitives, such as tri-
  angles or polygons; specify the surface properties of those primitives, such as color,
  normal, and texture; and define the environment conditions, such as lights, fog,
  and clipping panes. Thanks to standard APIs such as these, game developers can
  write 3D games that will work on graphics cards old and new, from many different
  manufacturers. That’s because each graphics card manufacturer provides drivers
  that provide the implementation details behind the OpenGL or DirectX API. Before
  the widespread use of these APIs, a developer had to write a 3D application for a
  specific piece of graphics hardware, and this program would probably not work on
  another machine with different graphics hardware. These APIs also enable a host of
  higher-level scene graph APIs, such as OpenSceneGraph, OpenSG, and OGRE. The
  following code segment shows the classic example of rendering a triangle, with a
  different color for each vertex, using the OpenGL API:

     glClear(GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT);
     glBegin(GL_TRIANGLES);
         glColor3f(0.0, 0.0, 1.0);     /* blue */
         glVertex2i(0, 0);
         glColor3f(0.0, 1.0, 0.0);     /* green */
         glVertex2i(200, 200);
         glColor3f(1.0, 0.0, 0.0);     /* red */
         glVertex2i(20, 200);
     glEnd();
     glFlush();

⁃ GUI APIs. Any application that wants to open its own window needs to use a GUI
  tool kit. This is an API that provides the ability to create windows, buttons, text
  fields, dialogues, icons, menus, and so on. The API will normally also provide an
  event model, to allow the capturing of mouse and keyboard events. Some popular
  C/Cþþ GUI APIs include the wxWidgets library, Qt Company’s Qt API, GTKþ, and
  X/Motif. It used to be the case that if a company wanted to release an application
  on more than one platform, such as Windows and Mac, it would have to rewrite
  the user interface code using a different GUI API for each platform, or it would
  have to develop its own in-house cross-platform GUI tool kit. However, these days
  most modern GUI tool kits are available for multiple platforms including Windows,
  Mac, and Linux, which makes it far easier to write cross-platform applications. As a
  sample of a modern cross-platform GUI API, the following complete program
  shows a bare minimum Qt program that pops up a window with a Hello World
  button:

    #include <QApplication>
    #include <QPushButton>

    int main(int argc, char *argv[])
    {
        QApplication app(argc, argv);

         QPushButton hello("Hello world!");
         hello.resize(100, 30);

         hello.show();
         return app.exec();
    }

 SIDEBAR: Cþþ Standard Library versus Standard Template Library
 The Cþþ Standard Library is the official name of the collection of classes and functions writ-
 ten in the core language and included in the Cþþ ISO standard.
    There is also the older term Standard Template Library (STL), which refers to the library
 written by Alexander Stepanov before Cþþ was standardized.
    Parts of the STL were standardized in the Cþþ Standard Library, but it’s important to note
 that the two APIs are not the same. I will refer to the Cþþ Standard Library throughout this
 book because it’s part of the official ISO standard.

   Of course, this list is just a brief cross-section of all possible APIs that are out there.
You’ll also find APIs to let you access data over networks, to parse and generate XML or
YAML files, to help you write multithreaded programs, or to solve complex mathematical
problems. The point of the list was simply to demonstrate the breadth and depth of APIs
that have been developed to help you build your applications, and to give you a flavor for
what code based upon these APIs looks like.

 TIP: APIs are used everywhere in modern software development, from OS- and language-level
 APIs to image, audio, graphics, concurrency, network, XML, mathematics, web browsing, or
 GUI APIs.

A real-life example
The previous list of API examples was purposefully arranged by architectural level to
show the range of APIs that you might use when building an application. You will often
use APIs from several architectural levels when building a large software product. For
example, Fig. 1.3 presents an example architecture diagram for the Second Life Viewer
developed by Linden Lab. This is a large open source program that lets users interact

                                  Second Life Viewer                                Application Code

              IIComon       IIMessage           IIAudio     IIRender                Internal APIs

             OpenGL       APR           Boost       Expat    OpenSSL                Third Party APIs

                   Standard C Library             Standard Template Library         Language APIs

                          Win32 / Mac OS X / Linux Kernel API                       OS APIs

FIGURE 1.3 Architecture diagram for the second life viewer. API, application programming interface; APR, Apache
Portable runtime; OS, operating system.

with each other in an online 3D virtual world, with the ability to perform voice chat and
text messaging among users. The diagram demonstrates the use and layering of APIs in a
large Cþþ software project.
   Of note is the layer of internal APIs, by which I mean the set of modules that a
company develops in-house for a particular product, or suite of products. Although
Fig. 1.3 simply shows these as a single layer for the purpose of simplicity, the set of
internal APIs will form an additional stack of layers, from foundation-level routines that
provide an in-house string, dictionary, file IO, threading routines, and so on to APIs that
provide the core business logic of the application, all the way up to custom GUI APIs for
managing the application’s user interface.
   Obviously, Fig. 1.3 doesn’t provide an exhaustive list of all APIs that are used in this
application. It simply shows a few examples for each layer of the architecture. However,
Table 1.1 present the set of third-party dependencies for the application, to give you an
idea of how many open source and commercial closed source dependencies a
contemporary software project is built upon. When you factor in system and OS libraries
as well, this list grows even further.

Libraries, frameworks, and software development kits
I briefly introduced the term library earlier in this chapter. Here I’ll go into more details
about libraries and discuss some related terms such as framework and SDK.
    A software library is a collection of data and compiled code for one or more archi-
tectures. It’s what stores the implementation code for your API and is the artifact that
your clients link into their programs. Common types of library include static libraries
(e.g., .a or .lib), where the library code is linked directly into client code at link time, and
dynamic libraries (e.g., .so, .dll, or .dylib), where the library code is loaded and linked

Table 1.1 List of open and closed source application
               programming interfaces used by second life viewer.
               API            Description
               APR            Apache Portable runtime
               Boost          Set of portable Cþþ source libraries
               c-ares         Asynchronous DNS resolution library
               cURL           Client URL request library
               Expat          Stream-oriented XML Parser
               FMOD           Commercial audio engine and mp3 stream decoder
               FreeGLUT       Open source version of the OpenGL Utility tool kit (GLUT)
               FreeType       Font rasterization engine.
               glh_linear     Cþþ OpenGL helper library
               Jpeglib        JPEG decoder library
               KDU            Commercial Kakadu (KDU) JPEG-2000 decoder library
               Libpng         PNG image library
               Llqtwebkit     Qt’s WebKit embeddable web browser
               Ogg Vorbis     Compressed audio format library
               OpenGL         3D graphics rendering engine
               Openjpeg       Open-source JPEG-2000 library, alternative to KDU
               OpenSSL        Secure sockets layer (SSL) library
               Quicktime      Library for playing video clips
               Vivox          Commercial voice chat library
               Xmlrpc-epi     XML-RPC protocol library
               Zlib           Lossless data compression library

into client code at runtime. Most OSs have a dynamic library search path to influence
how they find these files at runtime, and compilers can embed hints into the compiled
code about where to find any dynamic library dependencies. I cover these details in
Appendix A on Libraries.
   You may choose to distribute your software only as binary library files and public
headers, or you may choose to adopt an open source model where clients can directly
build the library files themselves from your source code.
   A library file is normally accompanied by a set of header files (.h) that describe the
elements of your API (i.e., the classes, functions, templates, enums, namespaces, etc.
that make up your interface). These header files are needed for clients to compile their
code against your interface. It’s also worth noting that Cþþ20 introduced an alternative
to the use of headers with the concept of modules, which I will cover in more detail in
the chapter on Cþþ Revisions. Altogether, a library and its associated header files or
modules are often referred to as an SDK. An SDK may also include other resources to
help you use an API, such as documentation, example source code, and supporting tools.
   As an example, Apple publishes various iOS APIs for developing applications that run
on the iPhone, iPod Touch, and iPad devices. Examples include the UIKit user interface

API, the WebKit API to embed web browser functionality in your applications, and the
Core Audio API for audio services. Apple also provides the iOS SDK, which is a down-
loadable installer that contains the headers and libraries that implement the various iOS
APIs. These are the files that you compile and link against to give your programs access
to the underlying functionality of the APIs. The iOS SDK includes API documentation,
sample code, various templates for Apple’s Integrated Development Environment called
XCode, and the iPhone Simulator that lets you run iPhone apps on your desktop
computer.
    The term framework can have a few interpretations. On Apple platforms, there is a
.framework asset type that is essentially a bundle containing different versions of a library
and its associated headers. However, the term can also imply a larger collection of APIs.
For example, the Qt Framework is composed of many separate modules that offer
different APIs for different tasks. Furthermore, many engineers subscribe to the defini-
tion that the key difference between a library and a framework is that a framework uses
inversion of control. This means that the framework has some built-in behavior and that
you can register code with the framework, but it decides when to call your code. A good
example of this is a UI framework in which the framework owns the main event loop, but
you can register functions and classes to handle specific events such as button presses.
In other words, a library is a collection of functionality that you can call from your code,
whereas a framework is a collection of functionality that calls your code.

File formats and network protocols
There are several other forms of communication “contracts” that are commonly used in
computer applications. One of the most familiar is the file format. This is a way to save
in-memory data to a file on disk using a well-known layout of those data. For example,
the JPEG File Interchange Format (JFIF) is an image file format for exchanging JPEG-
encoded imagery, commonly given the .jpg or .jpeg file extension. The format of a
JFIF file header is shown in Table 1.2.
    Given the format for a data file, such as this JFIF/JPEG format, any program can read
and write image files in the format. This allows the easy interchange of image data
among different users and the proliferation of image viewers and tools that can operate
on those images.
    Similarly, client/server applications, peer-to-peer applications, and middleware ser-
vices work by sending data back and forward using an established protocol, usually over
a network socket. For example, the Subversion version control system uses a client/
server architecture in which the master repository is stored on the server and individual
clients synchronize their local clients with the server (Rooney, 2005). To make this work,
the client and the server must agree upon the format of data that are transmitted across
the network. This is known as the client/server protocol or line protocol. If the client
sends a data stream that does not conform to this protocol, then the server will not be

Table 1.2 JPEG File Interchange Format header
               specification.
               Field                  Byte size   Description
               APP0 marker            2           Always 0xFFE0
               Length                 2           Length of segment excluding APP0 marker
               Identifier              5           Always 0x4A46494600 (“JFIF\0”)
               Version                2           0x0102
               Density units          1           Units for pixel density fields, 0 ¼ no units
               X density              2           Integer horizontal pixel density
               Y density              2           Integer vertical pixel density
               Thumbnail width (w)    1           Horizontal size of embedded thumbnail
               Thumbnail height (h)   1           Vertical size of embedded thumbnail
               Thumbnail data         3?w?h       Uncompressed 24-bit RGB raster data

able to understand the message. It is therefore critical that the specification of the client/
server protocol is well-defined and that both the client and server conform to the
specification.
   Both of these cases are conceptually similar to an API in that they define a standard
interface, or specification, for information to be exchanged. Also, any changes to the
specification must consider the impact on existing clients. Despite this similarity, file
formats and line protocols are not actually APIs because they are not programming
interfaces for code that you link into your application. However, a good rule of thumb is
that whenever you have a file format or a client/server protocol, you should also have an
associated API to manage changes to that specification.

 TIP: Whenever you create a file format or client/server protocol, you should also create an API
 for it. This allows the details of the specification, and any future changes to it, to be central-
 ized and hidden.

    For example, if you specify a file format for your application’s data, you should also
write an API to allow reading and writing files in that format. For one thing, this is simply
good practice, so that knowledge of the file format is not distributed throughout your
application. More importantly, having an API allows you easily to change the file format
in the future without having to rewrite any code outside the API implementation. Finally,
if you do end up with multiple different versions of a file format, then your API can
abstract that complexity away so that it can read and write data in any version of the
format, or it can know if the format is written with a newer version of the API and take

appropriate steps. In essence, the actual format of the data on disk becomes a hidden
implementation detail with which your application does not need to be concerned. I’ll
discuss this more when talking about data-driven APIs in the Styles chapter.
   This advice applies just as well to client/server applications, in which the definition of
a common protocol, and a common API to manage that protocol, can allow the client
and server teams to work relatively independently of each other. For instance, you may
begin using user datagram protocol (UDP) as the transport layer for part of your system
but later decide to switch to transmission control protocol (TCP) (as indeed happened
with the Second Life code base). If all network access had already been abstracted
behind an appropriate API, then such a major implementation change would have little
to no impact on the rest of the system.

About this book
Now that I’ve covered the basics of what an API is, and the pros and cons of API
development, I’ll dive into details such as how to design good APIs, how to implement
them efficiently in Cþþ, and how to version them without breaking backward
compatibility. The progression of chapters in this book roughly follows the standard
evolution of an API, from initial design through implementation, versioning, docu-
mentation, and testing.
   Chapter 2: Qualities
   I begin the main text with a chapter that answers the question, what is a good API?
   This will cover a wide gamut of qualities that you should be aware of when
   designing your APIs, such as information hiding, minimal completeness, and loose
   coupling. As I do throughout the book, I illustrate these concepts with many Cþþ
   source code examples to show how they relate to your own projects.
   Chapter 3: Patterns
   The next couple of chapters tackle the question, how do you design a good API?
   Accordingly, Chapter 3 looks at some specific design patterns and idioms that are
   particularly helpful in API design. These include the pimpl idiom, Singleton,
   Factory Method, Proxy, Adapter, Façade, and Observer.
   Chapter 4: Design
   Continuing the topic of how to design a good API, Chapter 4 discusses functional
   requirement gathering and use case modeling to drive the design of a clean and
   usable interface, as well some techniques of object-oriented analysis and object-
   oriented design. This chapter includes a discussion on many of the problems that
   large software projects face. These observations are taken from real-world experi-
   ences and provide insight into the issues that arise when doing large-scale API
   development.

  Chapter 5: Styles
  The next few chapters focus on creating high-quality APIs with Cþþ. This is a deep
  and complex topic and is, of course, the specific focus of this book. I therefore begin
  by describing various styles of C and Cþþ APIs that you could adopt in your projects,
  such as flat C APIs, object-oriented APIs, template-based APIs, and data-driven APIs.
  Chapter 6: Cþþ Usage
  Next, I discuss various core Cþþ language features that can affect good API design.
  This includes numerous important issues such as good constructor and operator
  style, namespaces, pointer versus reference parameters, the use of friends, and how
  to export symbols in a dynamic library. These are best practices that you can use
  for any version of the Cþþ standard.
  Chapter 7: Cþþ Revisions
  Since the initial Cþþ98 ISO standard was published, there have been several re-
  visions to the standard, including Cþþ03, Cþþ11, Cþþ14, Cþþ17, Cþþ20, and
  Cþþ23. Most of these revisions introduced new features that can affect API design.
  This chapter focuses on each of these revisions in turn and identifies the API fea-
  tures that you can take advantage of in your own projects.
  Chapter 8: Performance
  In this chapter, I analyze performance issues in APIs and show you how to build
  high-performing APIs in Cþþ. This involves the use of const references, forward
  declares, data member clustering, and inlining. I also present various tools that can
  help you to assess the performance of your code.
  Chapter 9: Concurrency
  The initial Cþþ98 and Cþþ03 standards did not consider how code should behave
  in a multithreaded environment. With the advent of Cþþ11, the language now has
  broad support for writing concurrent and parallel code. This chapter covers topics
  such as data races, race conditions, thread safety, and reentrancy in Cþþ code.
  Chapter 10: Versioning
  With the foundations of API design in hand, I start to expand into more complex
  aspects, beginning with API versioning and how to maintain backward compati-
  bility. This is one of the most importantdand difficultdaspects of robust API
  design. Here I will define the various terms backward, forward, functional, source,
  and binary/application binary interface compatibility, and describe how to evolve
  an API with minimal impact to your clients.
  Chapter 11: Documentation
  Next, I dedicate a chapter to the topic of API documentation. An API is ill-defined
  without proper supporting documentation, so I present good techniques for

commenting and documenting your API, with specific examples using the excellent
Doxygen tool.
Chapter 12: Testing
The use of extensive testing lets you evolve an API with the confidence that you’re
not breaking your clients’ programs. Here I present various types of automated
testing, including unit, integration, and performance tests, and present examples of
good testing methodologies for you to use in your own projects. This covers topics
such as test-driven development, stub and mock objects, testing private code, and
contract programming.
Chapter 13: Objective-C and Swift
The Objective-C and Swift programming languages have become the de facto
mechanisms to develop apps for Apple’s ecosystem of products. But you may also
want to integrate your Cþþ code into these apps. I will therefore cover how
Objective-Cþþ and Cþþ code can coexist and how a Cþþ API can be accessed
from Swift code.
Chapter 14: Scripting
In addition to integrating your Cþþ code into other compiled languages, you may
wish to integrate it into different scripting languages, perhaps so that power users
of your application can write scripts to perform custom actions. I therefore talk
about how to create script bindings for a Cþþ API so that it can be called from
languages such as Python and Ruby.
Chapter 15: Extensibility
Another advanced topic is that of user extensibility: creating an API that allows
programmers to write custom Cþþ plug-ins that extend the basic functionality you
ship with the API. This can be a critical mechanism to promote adoption of your
API and to help it survive in the long term. Additionally, I cover how to create
extensible interfaces using inheritance and templates.
Appendix A: Libraries
The book concludes with an appendix on how to create static and dynamic li-
braries. You must be able to create libraries for your code to be used by others.
Also, there are interface design issues to consider when creating dynamic libraries,
such as the set of symbols that you export publicly. So I discuss the differences be-
tween static and shared libraries and demonstrate how you can make your
compiler produce these libraries to allow the reuse of your code in other
applications.
This page intentionally left blank
