                                                                                                                           2
Qualities
This chapter aims to answer the question, what are the basic qualities of a good appli-
cation programming interface (API)? Most developers would agree that a good API
should be elegantly designed but still highly usable. It should be a joy to use but also fade
into the background (Henning, 2009). These are fine qualitative statements, but what are
the specific design aspects that enable these? Obviously, every API is different. However,
there are certain qualities that promote high-quality API design and should be adhered
to whenever possible, as well as many that make for poor designs and should be avoided.
    There are no absolutes in API design: you cannot apply a fixed set of rules to every
situation. However, while there may be individual cases where you decide to deviate
from certain advice in this chapter, you should do so only after reasoned and considered
judgment. The guidance here should form the bedrock of your API design decisions.
    In this chapter, I will concentrate on generic, language-neutral qualities of an API,
such as information hiding, consistency, and loose coupling. I will provide a Cþþ
context for each of these concepts, but overall, the advice in this chapter should be useful
to you whether you are working on a Cþþ, Java, C#, or Python project. In later chapters, I
will deal with Cþþ specific issues, such as const correctness, namespaces, and
constructor usage.
    Many of the topics in this chapter also provide a jumping-off point into deeper
treatments later in the book. For example, whereas I mention the use of the Pimpl idiom
as a solution for hiding internal details in Cþþ, I dedicate more space to this important
topic in the following chapter on design patterns.

Model the problem domain
An API is written to solve a particular problem or perform a specific task. So, first and
foremost, the API should provide a coherent solution for that problem, and it should be
formulated in a way that models the actual domain of the problem. For example, it
should provide a good abstraction of the problem area and it should model the key
objects of that domain. Doing so can make the API easier for your users to employ and
understand because it will more closely correlate with their preexisting knowledge and
expectations.

Provide a good abstraction
An API should provide a logical abstraction for the problem that it solves. That is, it
should be formulated in terms of high-level concepts that make sense in the chosen

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00014-3                                                                     25
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

problem domain, rather than exposing low-level implementation issues. You should be
able to give your API documentation to a nonprogrammer, and that person should be
able to understand the concepts of the interface and how it’s meant to work.
    Furthermore, it should be apparent to the nontechnical reader that the group of
operations provided by the API makes sense and belongs together as a unit. Each class
should have a central purpose, and that should be reflected in the name of the class and
its methods. In fact, it’s good practice to have another person review your API early on to
make sure that it presents a logical interface to fresh eyes.
    Coming up with a good abstraction is no simple task. I dedicate most of Chapter 4 to
this complex topic. However, it should be noted that there is no single correct
abstraction for any given problem. Most APIs can be modeled in several different ways,
each of which may provide a good abstraction and a useful interface. The key point is
that there is some consistent and logical underpinning to your API.
    For example, let’s consider an API for a simple address book program. Conceptually,
an address book is a container for the details of multiple people. It seems logical, then,
that our API should provide an AddressBook object that contains a collection of Person
objects, where a Person object describes the name and address of a single contact.
Furthermore, you want to be able to perform operations such as adding a person to the
address book or removing them. These are operations that update the state of the address
book, and so logically they should be part of the AddressBook object. This initial design can
be represented visually using a notation called Unified Modeling Language (UML).
    If you’re not familiar with UML, Fig. 2.1 shows an AddressBook object that contains a
one-to-many composition of Person objects as well as two operations, AddPerson() and
DeletePerson(). The Person object contains a set of public attributes to describe a single
person’s name and address. I will refine this design in a moment, but for now it serves as
an initial logical abstraction of the problem domain.

                                                                           Person

                                                                    + firstName : string
               Address Book                                         + middleName : string
                                                       personList   + lastName : string
                                                                    + address1 : string
          + AddPerson() : boolean                                   + address2 : string
                                                             0..*   + city : string
          + DeletePerson() : boolean
                                                                    + state : string
                                                                    + zipcode : string

FIGURE 2.1 High-level Unified Modeling Language abstraction of an address book application programming
interface.

 SIDEBAR: Unified Modeling Language class diagrams
 The UML specification defines a collection of visual notations to model object-oriented soft-
 ware systems (Booch et al., 2005). In this book, I will often use the UML class diagram to de-
 pict class designs, as in Fig. 2.1. In these diagrams, a single class is represented with a box that
 is segmented into three parts:

 1. The upper section contains the class name.
 2. The middle section lists the attributes of the class.
 3. The lower section enumerates the methods of the class.

    Each of the entries in the middle and lower sections of the class box can be prefixed with a
 symbol to indicate the access level, or visibility, for that attribute or method:
    þ indicates a public class member.
    e indicates a private class member.
    # indicates a protected class member.
   Relationships between classes are illustrated with various styles of connecting lines and ar-
 rowheads. Some of the common relationships that are possible in a UML class diagram are:
    Association: A simple dependency between two classes in which neither owns the other,
    shown as a solid line. Association can be directional, indicated with an open arrowhead
    as >.
    Aggregation: A has-a, or whole/part, relationship in which neither class owns the other,
    shown as a line with a hollow diamond.
    Composition: A has-a relationship in which the lifetime of the part is managed by the
    whole. This is represented as a line with a filled diamond.
    Generalization: A subclass relationship between classes, shown as a line with a hollow tri-
    angle arrowhead.
    Each side of a relationship can also be annotated to define its multiplicity. This lets you
 specify whether the relationship is one-to-one, one-to-many, or many-to-many. Some common
 multiplicities include:

    0..1 ¼ Zero or one instances
    1 ¼ Exactly one instance
    0..* ¼ Zero or more instances
    1..* ¼ One or more instances

Model the key objects
An API should also model the key objects for the problem domain. This process is often
called object-oriented design or object modeling because it aims to describe the hier-
archy of objects in the specific problem domain. The goal of object modeling is to
identify the collection of major objects, the operations they provide, and how they relate
to each other.

   Once again, there is no single correct object model for a given problem domain.
Instead, the task of creating an object model should be driven by the specific re-
quirements for the API. Different demands on an API may require a different object
model to represent those demands most effectively. For example, continuing our address
book example, let’s assume that we’ve received the following requirements for our API:
1. Each person may have multiple addresses.
2. Each person may have multiple telephone numbers.
3. Telephone numbers can be validated and formatted.
4. An address book may contain multiple people with the same name.
5. An existing address book entry can be modified.
    These requirements will have a large impact on the object model for the API. Our
original design in Fig. 2.1 supports only a single address per person. To support more
than one address, you could add extra fields to the Person object (e.g., HomeAddress1,
WorkAddress1), but this would be a brittle and inelegant solution. Instead, you could
introduce an object to represent an address (e.g., Address) and allow a Person object to
contain multiples of these.
    The same is true of telephone numbers: you can factor these into their own object
(e.g., TelephoneNumber) and allow the Person object to hold multiple of these. Another
reason to create an independent TelephoneNumber object is that we need to support op-
erations such as IsValid(), to validate a number, and GetFormattedNumber(), to return a
nicely formatted version of the number. These are operations that naturally operate on a
telephone number, not a person, which suggests that telephone numbers should be
represented by their own first-class objects.
    The requirement that multiple Person objects may hold the same name essentially means
that a person’s name cannot be used to identify a unique instance of the Person object. You
therefore need some way to identify a unique Person instance (e.g., so that you can locate and
update an existing entry in the address book). One way to satisfy this requirement would
simply be to generate a universally unique identifier (UUID) for each person. Putting all this
together, you might conclude that the key objects for our address book API are:
n   Address Book: Contains zero of more Person objects, with operations such as
    AddPerson(), DeletePerson(), and UpdatePerson().
n   Person: Fully describes the details for a single person, including zero or more ad-
    dresses and telephone numbers. Each person is differentiated by a UUID.
n   Address: Describes a single address, including an address type field such as Home
    or Work.
n   TelephoneNumber: Describes a single telephone number, including a phone type
    field such as Home or Cell. This object supports operations such as IsValid() and
    GetFormattedNumber().

   This updated object model can be represented again as a UML diagram, as shown in
Fig. 2.2.

FIGURE 2.2 Unified Modeling Language diagram of the key objects in our address book application programming
interface. UUID, universally unique identifier.

   It’s important to note that the object model for an API may need to change over time.
As new requirements are received, or new functionality is added, the optimal breakdown
of classes and methods to meet those needs may change. It’s therefore always wise to
reevaluate your object model in the light of new requirements, to assess whether your
object model would benefit from a redesign, too. For example, you may anticipate the
need for international addresses and decide to create a more general Address object to
handle this capability. However, don’t go over the top and try to create an object model
that is more general than you need. Make sure you read the upcoming section on being
minimally complete, too!

Solve the core problems
The main reason to develop an API is to solve some related set of problems. So, it must
be clear to your users how they can apply your design to achieve that goal. We just saw
how you can model the key objects for your problem domain, but the users of your API
also need to know how to create those objects and how to call the methods on those
objects to complete their tasks.
   I introduced the concept of the UML class diagram earlier to show the relationships
among different objects. Another UML diagram type is the sequence diagram. This
shows the sequential interactions between objects that produce some desired output. In
other words, it can show how your design can be used to achieve certain goals. For
example, in the address book design described previously, I introduced objects for
AddressBook, Person, and TelephoneNumber. But how would a client use these to change the
type of a person’s telephone number from a personal to a work number? Fig. 2.3 presents
one possible sequence diagram to show how you could do this.
   A sequence diagram represents the set of objects from left to right across the top of
the diagram. The first message typically starts at the top left of the diagram, such as
AddressBook::GetInstance() in our example. Each subsequent message appears below the

       FIGURE 2.3 Unified Modeling Language sequence diagram to change a telephone number type.

previous one. An object that sends a message to another object is shown as a solid line
and arrowhead (or an open arrowhead for an asynchronous message) and a return result
is shown with a dotted line and open arrowhead.
    So, Fig. 2.3 starts with a call to AddressBook::GetInstance() to get an instance of the
address book. Then you would call an AddressBook::FindPerson() method to find a spe-
cific person. You can then call GetTelephoneNumber() on that Person object to get the
personal telephone number (we’ll assume there’s only one, to keep the example simple).
And then you can call a SetType() method on the telephone number to set it to a work
phone number type. With this information, we can see that we need to add some new
functions to our objects to support this use case. This lets us build out our API to ensure
it solves the core tasks for the problem domain.
    As an aside, there are several tools that let you create these UML class and sequence
diagrams. For example, I used the Mermaid charting tool at https://mermaid.js.org/ to
create the sequence diagram in Fig. 2.3 using the following Markdown description:

   sequenceDiagram
       Client->>AddressBook: AddressBook::GetInstance()
       AddressBook-->>Client: addressBook
       Client->>AddressBook: addressBook.FindPerson(name)
       AddressBook-->>Client: person
       Client->>Person: person.GetTelephoneNumber(Personal)
       Person-->>Client: telephoneNumber
       Client->>Telephone Number: telephoneNumber.SetType(Work)

Hide implementation details
The primary reason for creating an API is to hide any implementation details so that
these can be changed later without affecting existing clients. Therefore, the most
important quality of an API is that it actually achieves this purpose. That is, any internal
detailsdthose parts that are most likely to changedmust be kept secret from the client
of the API. David L. Parnas referred to this concept as information hiding (Parnas, 1972).
    There are two main categories of techniques relating to this goal: physical and logical
hiding. Physical hiding means that the private source code is simply not made available
to users. Logical hiding entails the use of language features to limit access to certain
elements of the API.

Physical hiding: Declaration versus definition
In C and Cþþ, the words declaration and definition are precise terms with very specific
meanings. A declaration simply introduces a name and its type to the compiler without
allocating any memory for it. In contrast, a definition provides details of a type’s
structure, or allocates memory in the case of variables. (The term function prototype, as
used by C programmers, is equivalent to the term function declaration.) For example, the
following are all declarations:

   extern int i;
   class MyClass;
   void MyFunc(int value);

   whereas the following are all definitions:

   int i = 0;

   class MyClass
   {
   public:
       float x, y, z;
   };

   void MyFunc(int value)
   {
       printf("In MyFunc(%d).\n", value);
   }

 TIP: A declaration introduces the name and type of a symbol to the compiler. A definition pro-
 vides the full details for that symbol, be it a function body or a region of memory.

   In terms of classes and methods, the following code introduces a class definition with
a single method declaration:

   class MyClass
   {
   public:
       void MyMethod();
   };

   The implementation (body) of a method is provided in its definition:

   void MyClass::MyMethod()
   {
       printf("In MyMethod() of MyClass.\n");
   }

   Generally speaking, you provide declarations in your .h files and the associated
definitions in your .cpp files. However, it’s also possible to provide a definition for a
method at the point where you declare it in a .h file, e.g.,

   class MyClass
   {
   public:
       void MyMethod()
       {
           printf("In MyMethod() of MyClass.\n");
       }
   };

   This technique implicitly requests the compiler to inline the MyMethod() member
function at all points where it’s called. In terms of API design, this is therefore a bad
practice because it exposes the code for how the method has been implemented and
directly inlines the code into your clients’ programs. You should therefore strive to limit
your API headers to provide only declarations. In later chapters, I will discuss exceptions
to this rule to support templates and conscious acts of inlining.

 TIP: Physical hiding means storing internal details in a separate file (.cpp) from the public
 interface (.h).

   Note that I will sometimes inline function implementations like this in the code ex-
amples of this book. However, this is done solely for the purposes of clarity and
simplicity and should be avoided for any real-world APIs that you develop.

               INTERFACE

          public:
            Function1()                   Accessible to everyone
            Function2()

          protected:
            Function3()                   Accessible to members of this class and derived classes
            Function4()

          private:
            Function5()                   Accessible to members of this class only
            Function6()

                           FIGURE 2.4 The three access levels for Cþþ classes.

   In the later chapter on Cþþ Revisions, I will cover the concept of modules, which was
introduced in Cþþ20. This feature provides an alternative to the use of header files.
However, you can still perform physical hiding with modules by putting your declara-
tions in your module interface unit and definitions in your module implementation unit.

Logical hiding: Encapsulation
The object-oriented concept of encapsulation provides a mechanism for limiting the
access to members of an object. In Cþþ, this is implemented using the following access
control keywords for classes and structs (classes and structs are functionally equivalent,
differing only in their default access level). These access levels are illustrated in Fig. 2.4.
  Public: Members are accessible outside the class/struct. This is the default access
  level for structs.
  Private: Members are accessible only within the specific class in which they are
  defined. This is the default access level for classes.
  Protected: Members are accessible only within the specific class and any derived
  classes.

 SIDEBAR: Encapsulation in other languages
 Whereas Cþþ provides the public, private, and protected access controls for your class mem-
 bers, other object-oriented languages provide different levels of granularity. For example, in
 the Smalltalk language all instance variables are private and all methods are public, whereas
 the Java language provides public, private, protected, and package-private levels of visibility.
                                                                                                Continued

 SIDEBAR: Encapsulation in other languagesdcont'd
     Package-private in Java means that a member can be accessed only by classes within the
 same package. This is the default visibility in Java. Package-private is a great way to allow
 other classes in a JAR (Java Archive) file to access internal members without exposing them
 globally to your clients. For example, it’s particularly useful for unit tests that need to verify
 the behavior of private methods.
     Cþþ does not have the concept of package-private visibility. Instead, it uses the more
 permissive notion of friendship to allow named classes and functions to access protected and
 private members of a class. Friendship can be used to enhance encapsulation, but if used care-
 lessly it can also overexpose internal details to your clients.

   Most likely, your users will not care about respecting your public API boundary. If you
give them hooks into your internal workings that let them achieve what they want, they
will use them to get their job done. Although this may appear to be good for them,
because they were able to find a solution to their immediate problem, it may make it
more difficult for you to change those implementation details in the future and so stifle
your ability to improve and optimize your product.

 TIP: Encapsulation is the process of separating the public interface of an API from its underly-
 ing implementation.

   As an example of the lengths to which some users will go, the multiplayer first-person
shooter game Counter-Strike has been a popular target for exploitation hacks since it
appeared in around 2000. One of the most well-known of these is the wallhack. This is
essentially a modified OpenGL driver that renders walls partially or fully transparent. This
gives players the clear advantage that they can literally see through walls. Although you may
not be creating a game or targeting gamers as your clients, the moral is that users will do
whatever they can to get what they want. If some users will modify OpenGL graphics drivers to
give them an advantage in a game, there are presumably others who will use your API’s
exposed internal details so that they can deliver the functionality that their boss has requested.
   To illustrate this with a more directly applicable example, Roland Faber reports some
of the difficulties that occurred at Siemens when one group decided to rely upon the
internal details of an API from another group in the same company (Faber, 2010):

   A team outside of Europe had to provide a remote control for a user interface
   implemented in Germany. Because the automation interface was incomplete, they
   decided to use internal interfaces instead without notifying the architects. The
   system integration suffered from unexpected problems due to uncoordinated
   interface changes, and costly refactoring was unavoidable.

The following sections will therefore discuss how to use the access control features of
your programming language to provide the maximum level of information hiding for
your APIs. The later chapter on Cþþ Usage also points out some cases in which certain
Cþþ language features can affect encapsulation, such as friends and external linkage.

    TIP: Logical hiding means using the Cþþ language features of protected and private to restrict
    access to internal details.

Hide member variables
The term encapsulation is also often used to describe the bundling of data with the
methods that operate on those data. This is implemented in Cþþ by having classes that can
contain both variables and methods. However, in terms of good API design, you should
never make member variables public. If the data members form part of the logical interface
of the API, then you should instead provide getter and/or setter methods that provide
indirect access to the member variables. For example, you should avoid writing:

     class Vector3
     {
     public:
         double x, y, z;
     };

     Instead, you should prefer:

     class Vector3
     {
     public:
         double GetX() const;
         double GetY() const;
         double GetZ() const;
         void SetX(double val);
         void SetY(double val);
         void SetZ(double val);

     private:
         double mX, mY, mZ;
     };

    The latter syntax is obviously more verbose and involves more typing on your part as the
programmer, but the extra few minutes spent doing this could save you hours, or even days
further down the line should you decide to change the interface. Some of the additional benefits
of using getter/setter routines, rather than directly exposing member variables, include:
n    Validation. You can perform validation on the values to ensure that the internal
     state of the class is always valid and consistent. For example, if you have a method

    that lets clients set a new RGB color, you could check that each of the supplied
    red, green, and blue values are within the valid range (e.g., 0 to 255 or 0.0 to 1.0).
n   Lazy evaluation. Calculating the value of a variable may incur a significant cost,
    which you would prefer to avoid until necessary. By using a getter method to ac-
    cess the underlying data value, you can defer the costly calculation until the value
    is actually requested.
n   Caching. A classic optimization technique is to store the value of a frequently
    requested calculation and then directly return that value for future requests.
    For example, a machine’s total memory size can be found on Linux by parsing
    the/proc/meminfo file. Rather than performing a file read for every request to find
    the total memory size, it would be better to cache the result after the first read and
    then simply return that cached value for future requests.
n   Extra computation. If necessary, you can perform additional operations whenever
    the client tries to access a variable. For example, perhaps you always want to write
    the current state of a UserPreferences object to a configuration file on disk when-
    ever the user changes the value of a preference setting.
n   Notifications. Other modules may wish to know when a value has changed in your
    class. For example, if you are implementing a data model for a progress bar, the
    user interface code will want to know when the progress value has been updated
    so that it can update the GUI. You might therefore wish to issue a change notifica-
    tion as part of a setter method.
n   Debugging. You may want to add debugging or logging statements so that you can
    track when variables are accessed or changed by clients. Or you may wish to add
    assert statements to enforce assumptions.
n   Synchronization. You may release the first version of your API and then later find
    that you need to make it thread safe. The standard way to do this is to add mutex
    locking whenever a value is accessed. This would be possible only if you have
    wrapped the access to the data values in getter and setter methods.
n   Finer access control. If you make a member variable public, then clients can read
    and write that value as they wish. However, by using getter/setter methods, you
    can provide a finer level of read/write control. For example, you can make the
    value be read-only by not providing a setter method.
n   Maintaining invariant relationships. Some internal data values may depend upon
    each other. For example, in a car animation system you may calculate the velocity
    and acceleration of the car based upon the time it takes to travel between key
    frames. You can calculate velocity based upon the change in position over time,
    and acceleration based upon the change in velocity over time. However, if a client
    can access your internal state for this calculation, they could change the accelera-
    tion value so that it does not correlate to the car’s velocity, thus producing unex-
    pected results.
   On the other hand, if the member variables are not actually part of the logical
interfacedthat is, they represent internal details that are not relevant to the public
interfacedthen they should simply be hidden from the interface. For example, consider
the following definition for a stack of integers:

   class IntegerStack
   {
   public:
       static const int MAX_SIZE = 100;
       void Push(int val);
       int Pop();
       bool IsEmpty() const;
       int mStack[MAX_SIZE];
       int mCurSize;
   };

   Clearly this is a bad API because it exposes the way that the stack has been (poorly)
implemented as a fixed array of integers, and it reveals the internal state of the stack via
the mCurSize variable. If at some future date you decided to improve the implementation
of this class, for example by using an std::vector or std::list rather than a fixed-size
statically allocated array, then you may find this difficult to do. That’s because you’ve
exposed the existence of the mStack and mCurSize variables, and so client code could be
relying on the ability to access these variables directly. By changing your implementa-
tion, you could break your clients’ code.
   Instead, these member variables should be hidden from the start so that client code
cannot access them:

   class IntegerStack
   {
   public:
       void Push(int val);
       int Pop();
       bool IsEmpty() const;

   private:
       static const int MAX_SIZE = 100;
       int mStack[MAX_SIZE];
       int mCurSize;
   };

    I have stated that member variables should never be public, but can they be declared
as protected? If you make a variable protected, then it can be accessed directly by any
clients that subclass your class, and then exactly the same arguments apply as for the
public case. As such, you should never make your member variables protected, either. As
Alan Snyder states, inheritance severely compromises the benefits of encapsulation in
object-oriented programming languages (Snyder, 1986).

 TIP: Data members of a class should always be declared private, never public or protected.
    The only semiplausible argument for exposing member variables is for performance
reasons. Executing a Cþþ method call incurs the overhead of pushing the method’s
parameters and return address onto the call stack, as well as reserving space for any local
variables in the routine. Then when the method completes, the call stack must be un-
wound again. The cost to perform these actions may be noticeable for performance-
critical regions of code, such as within a tight loop performing operations on a large
number of objects. Code that directly accesses a public member variable may be two to
three times faster than code that has to go through getter/setter methods.
    However, even in these cases, you should never expose member variables. First, the
overhead of a method call will very likely be insignificant for practically all of your API
calls. Even if you are writing performance-critical APIs, the careful use of inlining com-
bined with a modern optimizing compiler will normally completely eradicate the method
call overhead, giving you all of the performance benefits of directly exposing member
variables. If you’re still concerned, then try timing your API with inlined getter/setters and
then with public member variables. The accompanying source code for this book includes
a sample program to do just this. See https://APIBook.com/ to download this code and try
it out yourself. I’ll also discuss this issue further in the chapter on Performance.

Hide implementation methods
In addition to hiding all member variables, you should hide all methods that don’t need
to be public. This is the principle of information hiding: segregating the stable interface
for a class from the internal design decisions used to implement it. Early studies of
several large programs found that those using information hiding techniques were four
times easier to modify than programs that didn’t (Korson and Vaishnavi, 1986). Although
your own mileage may vary, it should be clear that hiding the internal details of your API
will make for more maintainable and evolvable software.
   The key point to remember is that a class should define what to do, not how it’s done.
For example, let’s consider a class that lets you download a file from a remote http server:

   #include <stdio.h>
   #include <string>
   #include <sys/socket.h>
   #include <unistd.h>

   class URLDownloader
   {
   public:
       URLDownloader();
       bool DownloadToFile(const std::string &url,
                           const std::string &localFile);
       bool SocketConnect(const std::string &host, int port);
       void SocketDisconnect();
       bool IsSocketConnected() const;
       int GetSocket() const;
       bool SocketWrite(const char *buffer, size_t bytes);
       size_t SocketRead(char *buffer, size_t bytes);
       bool WriteBufferToFile(char *buffer,
                              const std::string &filename);

   private:
       int mSocketID;
       struct sockaddr_in mServAddr;
       bool mIsConnected;
   };

    All of the member variables have been correctly declared as private, which is a good
start. However, several implementation-specific methods have been exposed, such as
routines to open and read data from a socket and a routine to write the resulting in-
memory buffer to a file on disk. The client doesn’t need to know any of this. All the
client wants to do is specify a URL and then magically have a file created on disk with the
contents of that remote location.
    There’s also a particularly egregious method in there: GetSocket(). This is a public
method that returns access to a private member variable. By calling this method, a client
can get the underlying socket handle and could directly manipulate that socket without
the knowledge of the URLDownloader class. What’s particularly disturbing is that GetSocket()
is declared as a const method, meaning that it doesn’t modify the state of the class.
Whereas this is strictly true, the client could then use the returned integer socket handle to
modify the state of the class. The same kind of leaking of internal state can happen if you
return a non-const pointer or reference to one of your private member variables. Doing so
lets your clients modify the state of your objects without going through your API.

 TIP: Never return non-const pointers or references to private data members. This breaks
 encapsulation.

   Obviously a better design for our URLDownloader class would be to make every method
private, except for the constructor and the DownloadToFile() method. Everything else is
implementation detail. You are then free to change the implementation without
affecting any clients of the class.
   There is still something unsatisfying about this situation, though. I have hidden the
implementation details from the compiler’s point of view, but a person can still look at
the header file and see all of the internal details for your class. In fact, this is very likely
because you must distribute the header file to allow clients to compile their code against
your API. Also, you must #include all header files needed for the private members of your
class, even though they’re not dependencies of the public interface. For example, the
URLDownloader header needs to #include all of the platform-specific socket headers.
   This is an unfortunate limitation of the Cþþ language: all public, protected, and
private members of a class must appear in the declaration for that class. Ideally, the
header for our class would look like:

   #include <string>

   class URLDownloader
   {
   public:
       URLDownloader();
       bool DownloadToFile(const std::string &url,
                           const std::string &localFile);
   };

    Then all the private members could be declared somewhere else, such as in the .cpp
file. However, this is not possible with Cþþ (this is so that the size of all objects can be
known at compile time). Nevertheless, there are still ways to hide private members from
your public header files (Headington, 1995). One popular technique is called the Pimpl
idiom. This involves isolating all of a class’s private data members inside a separate
implementation class or struct in the .cpp file. The .h file then needs only to contain an
opaque pointer to this implementation class. I’ll discuss this extremely valuable tech-
nique in more detail in the Patterns chapter, coming up next.
    I strongly urge you to adopt the Pimpl idiom in your APIs so that all implementation
details can be completely hidden from your public header files. However, if you decide
against this direction, you should at least attempt to remove private methods from the
header when they are not necessary by moving them to the .cpp file and converting them
to static functions (Lakos, 1996). This can be done when the private method accesses
only public members of the class, or if it accesses no members of the class at all (such as
a routine that accepts a filename string and returns the extension for that filename).
Many engineers feel that just because a class uses a private method, it must be included
in the class declaration. However, this simply exposes more implementation details than
necessary.

 TIP: Prefer declaring private functionality as static functions within the .cpp file rather than
 exposing them in public headers as private methods. (Using the Pimpl idiom is even better,
 though).

Hide implementation classes
In addition to hiding the internal methods and variables for your classes, you
should endeavor to hide any actual classes that are purely implementation detail.
Most programmers are used to hiding methods and variables, although many
forget also to consider that not all classes are public. Indeed, some classes are needed
only for your implementation and should not be revealed as part of the public interface
of your API.
    For example, consider a simple Fireworks class: an interface that lets you specify the
location of a fireworks animation on the screen and lets you control the color, speed, and
number of fire particles. Clearly the API will need to keep track of each particle of the
firework effect, so that it can update each particle’s position per frame. This implies that
a FireParticle class should be introduced to contain the state for a single fire particle.
However, clients of the API never need to access this class; it’s purely required for the
API’s implementation.

   We could therefore use either physical or logical hiding to remove the class from the
public API. In this case, physical hiding would mean putting the implementation of the
class in a private header file (i.e., in a header file that’s not included with your set of
public API headers). Then we forward declare the class in the public header so that the
name is known to the compiler, e.g.,

   // fireworks.h (public header)
   #include <vector>

   class FireParticle;

   class Fireworks
   {
   public:
       Fireworks();

       void SetOrigin(double x, double y);
       void SetColor(float r, float g, float b);
       void SetGravity(float g);
       void SetSpeed(float s);
       void SetNumberOfParticles(int num);

       void Start();
       void Stop();
       void NextFrame(float dt);

   private:
       double mOriginX, mOriginY;
       float mRed, mGreen, mBlue;
       float mGravity;
       float mSpeed;
       bool mIsActive;
       std::vector<FireParticle *> mParticles;
   };

   // fireparticle.h (private header)
   class FireParticle
   {
   public:
       double mX, mY;
       double mVelocityX, mVelocityY;
       double mAccelerationX, mAccelerationY;
       double mLifeTime;
   };

   Alternatively, you can also use logical hiding to declare the class as private, so clients
can’t access the class from their code. This can be done by nesting it within another
class’s private section, e.g.,

   #include <vector>

   class Fireworks
   {
   public:
       Fireworks();

        void SetOrigin(double x, double y);
        void SetColor(float r, float g, float b);
        void SetGravity(float g);
        void SetSpeed(float s);
        void SetNumberOfParticles(int num);

        void Start();
        void Stop();
        void NextFrame(float dt);

   private:
       class FireParticle
       {
       public:
            double mX, mY;
            double mVelocityX, mVelocityY;
            double mAccelerationX, mAccelerationY;
            double mLifeTime;
       };

        double mOriginX, mOriginY;
        float mRed, mGreen, mBlue;
        float mGravity;
        float mSpeed;
        bool mIsActive;
        std::vector<FireParticle *> mParticles;
   };

   Notice that I didn’t use getter/setter methods for the FireParticle class. You could
certainly do so if you wanted to, but it’s not strictly necessary because the class is not
accessible from the public interface.
   Again, you could also hide the entire FireParticle symbol from appearing in the
header file so that it’s hidden even from casual inspection of the header file. I will discuss
how to do this in the next chapter.

Minimally complete
A good API should be minimally complete. That is, it should be as small as feasible, but
no smaller.
   It’s perhaps obvious that an API should be complete: that it provides clients with all
the functionality they need. However, it may be less obvious what that functionality is.
To answer this question, you should perform requirements gathering and use case
modeling early on so that you understand what the API is expected to do. You can then
assert that it delivers on those expectations. I will talk more about requirements and use
cases in the chapter on Design.

     Less obvious is the apparent contradiction for an API to be minimal. However, this is
one of the most important qualities for which you can plan, and one that has a massive
impact on the long-term maintenance and evolution of your API. In a very real sense, the
decisions you make today will constrain what you can do tomorrow. It also has a large
impact on the ease of use of the API, because a compact interface is one that can easily
fit inside the head of your users (Blanchette, 2008). I will therefore dedicate the following
sections to discuss various techniques to keep your API minimal, and why this is a good
thing.

 TIP: Remember Occam’s razor: Pluralitas non est ponenda sine necessitate (plurality should
 not be posited without necessity).

Don’t overpromise
Every public element in your API is a promiseda promise that you’ll support that
functionality for the lifetime of the API. You can break that promise, but doing so may
frustrate your clients and cause them to rewrite their code. Even worse, they may decide
to abandon your API because they have grown weary of continually having to fix their
code because you can’t keep your API stable. Or they may simply be unable to use your
API anymore because you’ve removed functionality that supported their unique use
case.
    The key point is that once you release an API and have clients using it, adding new
functionality is easy but removing functionality is really difficult. The best advice then is:
when in doubt, leave it out (Bloch, 2008; Tulach, 2008).
    This advice can be counter to the best intentions of the API designer. As an engineer,
you want to provide a flexible and general solution to the problem you’re solving. There
is a temptation to add extra levels of abstraction or generality to an API because you
think it might be useful in the future. You should resist this temptation for the following
reasons:
1. The day may never come when you need the extra generality.
2. If that day does come, you may have more knowledge about the use of your API
   and a different solution may present itself from the one you originally envisioned.
3. If you do need to add the extra functionality, it’ll be easier to add it to a simple API
   than a complex one.
  As a result, you should try to keep your APIs as simple as you can: minimize the
number of classes you expose and the number of public members in those classes. As a
bonus, this will also make your API easier to understand, easier for your users to keep a
mental model of the API in their heads, and easier for you to evolve.

 TIP: When in doubt, leave it out! Minimize the number of public classes and functions in your
 API.

Don’t repeat yourself
The don’t repeat yourself (DRY) principle is about reducing the repetition of information
in your code. It’s typically described as requiring a single, unambiguous, and authori-
tative representation for any given piece of information in a system (Hunt and Thomas,
1999).
    This general concept is also expressed by several other similar design principles, such
as the single source of truth principle, which aims to define data in only one place, and
the single responsibility principle, which states that a class should have only one reason
to change and shouldn’t be responsible for multiple unrelated tasks.
    Taken together, these principles are focused on reducing duplication by defining data
and behavior in one place. As such, they offer ways to achieve minimal completeness.
    However, it’s also worth noting that these principles can be taken to extremes if
they’re applied blindly. Trying to remove every piece of code duplication in your project
can lead to overly complex code or unnecessary coupling between classes. So as with
most rules of thumb, they should be applied thoughtfully, not rigidly. However, they can
be used to help you identify places where a better design might be possible.
    Some common ways to address code duplication are:
1. Function Refactoring: The simplest solution is just to pull out the duplicated code
   into a single function that can be called from all of the places that need the func-
   tionality. If this is part of your implementation code, then this may not even affect
   your public API.
2. Class Abstractions: This involves creating more general levels of abstractions to
   represent the concepts in your system so that shared functionality can be pushed
   further down the inheritance hierarchy. This is particularly relevant to API design if
   it concerns the set of public classes and inheritance hierarchies that you expose to
   your clients.
3. Dependency Injection: This is where the functionality is defined in a single object
   and that object is passed into the method calls where the functionality is needed.
   This may affect your API if you need to update various public API method calls to
   pass in the object.
4. Automation: In cases where duplication is unavoidable, you can define a single
   source of truth for the functionality and write automation tools to generate the
   other code from that source of truth. This lets you keep all duplicated code sec-
   tions in sync by running your automation scripts.

    We can take the address book example from earlier in this chapter to illustrate this
concept. We identified that each person in the address book may have multiple tele-
phone numbers. One solution would be just to add work and home phone numbers
directly to the person object. However, if we wanted to offer various functions to access
or format each of these phone numbers, or if we wanted to associate phone numbers
with other objects such as addresses, we can see that it may make more sense to
represent phone numbers as their own objects in the system. That way, all functionality
for manipulating phone numbers can be contained in one place.
    A good way to think about this is to ask yourself: if you needed to make a change to
how something works, would you have to update multiple places in your code to make
that change? If so, then you may want to consider refactoring your design. Again, though,
this shouldn’t be taken as a hard and fast rule. You need to consider the impact on the
simplicity and usability of your design as well. For example, perhaps you can instead
apply an automation solution behind the scenes to keep information in sync without
affecting your API design. (We’ll talk about intentional redundancy later in this chapter.)
    Martin Fowler suggested that you try to refactor code only when you repeat some-
thing a third time (Fowler et al., 1999). This is encapsulated in the acronym WET, or write
everything twice, meaning that it’s okay to duplicate something twice, but no more.
There is also another acronym called AHA, avoid hasty abstractions, which represents
the tension between refactoring duplicated code and adding more complex abstractions
to your interface. There are so many acronyms for duplicated code!
    As a final note on reducing duplication, it’s possible to interpret the DRY and related
principles to mean that there should be only one way to do something. However, that’s
not always a good goal. Consider the Standard Library container classes that let you
search for an element using a find() method. This can be used to discover if an element
exists in the container by comparing the result to the end() iterator, but the code to do
this is verbose and has the potential for you to get the logic of the comparison wrong. As
of Cþþ20, there is now the contains() method, which is much simpler to use, although
arguably it is not adding anything you couldn’t already do. However, if this new function
is just implemented in terms of existing API functions, there is still only one place to
update if a change to the behavior is needed. We will delve deeper into this idea of
convenience API calls in the next section.

Convenience APIs
Keeping an API as small as possible can be a difficult task. There’s a natural tension between
reducing the number of functions in your API and making the API easy to use for a range of
clients. This is an issue that most API designers face: whether to keep the API pure and
focused or to allow convenience wrappers. (By the term convenience wrappers, I mean utility
routines that encapsulate multiple API calls to provide simpler higher-level operations).
    On the one hand, there’s the argument that an API should provide only one way to
perform one task. This ensures that the API is minimal, singularly focused, consistent,

and easy to understand. It also reduces the complexity of the implementation, with all
the associated benefits of greater stability and easier debugging and maintenance. Grady
Booch refers to this as primitiveness, or the quality to which a method needs access to
the internal details of a class to be implemented efficiently, as opposed to nonprimitive
methods that can be entirely built on top of primitive ones, without access to any in-
ternal state (Booch et al., 2007).
    However, on the other hand, there is also the argument that an API should make
simple things easy to do. Clients should not be required to write lots of code to perform
basic tasks. Doing so can give rise to blocks of boilerplate code that get copied and
pasted to other parts of their source code, and whenever blocks of code are copied there
is the potential for code divergence and bugs. Also, you may wish to target your API to a
range of clients, from those who want lots of control and flexibility to those who just
want to perform a single task as simply as possible.
    Both goals are useful and desirable. Fortunately, they do not need to be mutually
exclusive. There are several ways you can provide higher-level convenience wrappers for
your core API’s functionality without diluting its primary purpose. The important point is
that you don’t mix your convenience API in the same classes as your core API. Instead, you
can produce supplementary classes that wrap certain public functionality of your core API.
These convenience classes should be fully isolated from your core API (e.g., in different
source files or even completely separate libraries). This has the additional benefit of
ensuring that your convenience API depends only on the public interface of your core API,
and not on any internal methods or classes. Let’s look at a real-world example of this.
    The OpenGL API provides platform-independent routines for writing 2D and 3D
applications. It operates on the level of simple primitives such as points, lines, and
polygons that are transformed, lit, and rasterized into a frame buffer. The OpenGL API is
extremely powerful, but it’s also aimed at a very low level. For example, creating a sphere
in OpenGL would involve explicitly modeling it as a surface of small flat polygons, as
demonstrated in the following code snippet:

for (int i = 0; i <= stacks; ++i) {
    GLfloat stack0 = ((i - 1.0) / stacks - 0.5) * M_PI;
    GLfloat stack1 = ((GLfloat) i / stacks - 0.5) * M_PI;
    GLfloat z0 = sin(stack0);
    GLfloat z1 = sin(stack1);
    GLfloat r0 = cos(stack0);
    GLfloat r1 = cos(stack1);

    glBegin(GL_QUAD_STRIP);
    for (int j = 0; j <= slices; ++j) {
        GLfloat slice = (j - 1.0) * 2 * M_PI / slices;
        GLfloat x = cos(slice);
        GLfloat y = sin(slice);

         glNormal3f(x * r0, y * r0, z0);
         glVertex3f(x * r0, y * r0, z0);
         glNormal3f(x * r1, y * r1, z1);
         glVertex3f(x * r1, y * r1, z1);
    }
    glEnd();
}

   However, most OpenGL implementations also include the OpenGL Utility Library
(GLU). This is an API built on top of the OpenGL API that provides higher-level func-
tions, such as mip-map generation, coordinate conversions, quadric surfaces, polygon
tessellation, and simple camera positioning. These functions are defined in a library
completely separate from the OpenGL library, and the functions all begin with the glu
prefix to differentiate them from the core OpenGL API. For example, the following code
snippet shows how easy it is to create a sphere using GLU:

   GLUquadric *qobj = gluNewQuadric();
   gluSphere(qobj, radius, slices, stacks);
   gluDeleteQuadric(qobj);

   This is a great example of how to maintain the minimal design and focus of a core API
while providing additional convenience routines that make it easier to use that API. In
fact, there are other APIs built on top of OpenGL that provide further utility classes, such
as Mark Kilgard’s OpenGL Utility Toolkit (GLUT). This API offers routines to create
various solid and wireframe geometric primitives (including the famous Utah teapot) as
well as simple window management functions and event processing. Fig. 2.5 shows the
relationships among GL, GLU, and GLUT.
   Ken Arnold refers to this concept as progressive disclosure, meaning that your API
should present the basic functionality via an easy-to-use interface while reserving
advanced functionality for a separate layer (Arnold, 2005). He notes that this concept is
often seen in GUI designs in the form of an Advanced or Export button that discloses
further complexity. In this way, you can still provide a powerful API while ensuring that
the expert use cases don’t obfuscate the basic workflows.

FIGURE 2.5 An example of a core application programming interface (API) (OpenGL) that is separated from the
convenience APIs that are layered on top of it (OpenGL Utility Library and OpenGL Utility Toolkit).

    TIP: Add convenience APIs as separate modules or libraries that sit on top of your minimal
    core API.

Add virtual functions judiciously
One subtle way that you can expose more functionality than you intended is through
inheritance: that is, by making certain member functions virtual. Doing so allows your
clients to subclass your class and reimplement any virtual methods. Although this can be
very powerful, you should be aware of the potential pitfalls:
n    You can implement seemingly innocuous changes to your base classes that have a
     detrimental impact on your clients. This can happen because you evolve the base
     class in isolation, without knowing all of the ways that your clients have built upon
     your virtual API. This is often referred to as the fragile base class problem
     (Blanchette, 2008).
n    Your clients may use your API in ways that you never intended or imagined. This
     can result in the call graph for your API executing code that you do not control
     and that may produce unexpected behavior. As an extreme example, there is
     nothing to stop a client calling delete this in an overridden method. This may even
     be a valid thing to want to do, but if you did not design your implementation to
     allow this, then your code will very likely crash.
n    Clients may extend your API in incorrect or error-prone ways. For example, you
     may have a thread-safe API but, depending upon your design, a client could over-
     ride a virtual function and provide an implementation without performing the
     appropriate mutex locking operations, opening the potential for difficult-to-debug
     race conditions. (There’s a design pattern called Thread-Safe Interface that ad-
     dresses this specific concern, which I describe in the Concurrency chapter).
n    Overridden functions may break the internal integrity of your class. For example,
     the default implementation of a virtual method may call other methods in the
     same class to update its internal state. If an overridden method does not perform
     these same calls, then the object could be left in an inconsistent state and behave
     unexpectedly or crash.
   In addition to these API-level behavioral concerns, there are the standard matters
about which you should be aware when using virtual functions in Cþþ:
n    Virtual function calls must be resolved at runtime by performing a vtable lookup,
     whereas nonvirtual function calls can be resolved at compile time. This can make
     virtual function calls slower than nonvirtual calls. In reality, this overhead may be
     negligible, particularly if your function does nontrivial work or if it is not called
     frequently.

n   The use of virtual functions increases the size of an object, typically by the size of
    a pointer to the vtable. This may be an issue if you wish to create a small object
    that requires a very large number of instances. Again, in practice this will likely be
    insignificant compared with the amount of memory consumed by your various
    member variables.
n   Adding, reordering, or removing a virtual function will break binary compatibility.
    This is because a virtual function call is typically represented as an integer offset
    into the vtable for the class. Therefore changing its order, or causing the order of
    any other virtual functions to change, means that existing code will need to be
    recompiled to ensure that it still calls the right functions.
n   Virtual functions cannot always be inlined. You may reasonably think that it does
    not make sense to declare a virtual as inline at all, because virtual functions are
    resolved at runtime whereas inlining is a compile-time optimization. However,
    there are certain constrained situations in which a compiler can inline a virtual
    function. All the same, these are far fewer than the cases in which a nonvirtual
    function can be inlined. (Remember that the inline keyword in Cþþ is merely a
    hint to the compiler).
n   Overloading is tricky with virtual functions. A symbol declared in a derived class
    will hide all symbols with the same name in the base class. Therefore, a set of
    overloaded virtual functions in a base class will be hidden by a single overriding
    function in a subclass. There are ways to get around this (Dewhurst, 2002), but it’s
    better simply to avoid overloading virtual functions.
   Ultimately, you should allow overriding only if you explicitly intend for this to be
possible. A class with no virtual functions tends to be more robust and requires less
maintenance than one with virtual functions. As a rule of thumb, if your API does not
internally call a particular method, then that method probably should not be virtual. You
should also allow subclassing only in situations where it makes sense: where the po-
tential subclasses form an is-a relationship with the base class.
   If you still decide that you want to allow subclassing, make sure that you design your
API to allow it safely. Remember the following rules:
1. Always declare your destructor to be virtual if there are any virtual functions in
   your class. This is so that subclasses can free any extra resources that they may
   have allocated.
2. Always document how methods of your class call each other. If clients want to pro-
   vide an alternative implementation for a virtual function, they will need to know
   which other methods need to be called within their implementation to preserve the
   internal integrity of the object. Or use a design pattern such as Thread-Safe
   Interface that encodes the dependency.
3. Never call virtual functions from your constructor or destructor. These calls will
   never be directed to a subclass (Meyers, 2005). This does not affect the appearance
   of your API, but it’s a good rule to know all the same.

 TIP: Avoid declaring functions as overridable (virtual) until you have a valid and compelling
 need to do so.

Easy to use
A well-designed API should make simple tasks easy and obvious. For example, it should
be possible for a client to look at the method signatures of your API and be able to glean
how to use it without any additional documentation. There have been various studies
showing that APIs that are more usable can improve the productivity of developers using
them (Clarke, 2004).
    This API usability quality follows closely from the quality of minimalism: if your API is
simple, it should be easy to understand. Similarly, it should follow the rule of least
surprise, which posits that an interface should behave in a way that most users would
expect. This is done by employing existing models and patterns so that the user can
focus on the task at hand, rather than being distracted by the novelty or involution of
your interface (Raymond, 2003).
    Of course, this is not an excuse for you to ignore the need for good supporting
documentation. In fact, it should make the task of writing documentation easier. As we
all know, a good example can go a long way. Providing sample code can greatly aid the
ease of use of your API. Good developers should be able to read example code written
using your API and understand how to apply it to their own tasks.
    The following sections will discuss various aspects and techniques to make your API
easier to understand and ultimately simpler to use. Before I do so, though, it should be
noted that an API may provide additional complex functionality for expert users that is
not so easy to use. However, this should not be done at the expense of keeping the
simple case easy.

Discoverable
A discoverable API is one in which users can work out how to use the API on their own
without any accompanying explanation or documentation. To illustrate this with a
counterexample from the field of user interface design, the Start button in Windows XP
does not provide a very discoverable interface for locating the option to shut down the
computer. Likewise, the Restart option is accessed rather unintuitively by clicking on the
Turn Off Computer button.
   Discoverability does not necessarily lead to ease of use. For example, it’s possible for
an API to be simple for a first-time user to learn but cumbersome for an expert user to
use on a regular basis. However, in general, discoverability should help you produce a
more usable interface.

   There are several ways you can promote discoverability when you design your APIs.
Devising an intuitive and logical object model is one important way, as is choosing good
names for your classes and functions. Indeed, coming up with clear, descriptive, and
appropriate names can be one of the most difficult tasks in API design. I will present
specific recommendations for class and function names in Chapter 4 when I discuss API
design techniques. Avoiding the use of abbreviations can also be a factor in discover-
ability (Blanchette, 2008), so that users don’t have to remember if your API employs
GetCurrentValue(), GetCurrValue(), GetCurValue(), or GetCurVal().

Difficult to misuse
A good API, in addition to being easy to use, should also be difficult to misuse. Scott
Meyers suggests that this is the most important general interface design guideline
(Meyers, 2004). Some of the most common ways to misuse an API include passing the
wrong arguments to a method and passing illegal values to a method. These can happen
when you have multiple arguments of the same type and the user forgets the correct
order of the arguments, or when you use an int to represent a small range of values
instead of a more constrained enum type (Bloch, 2008). For example, consider the
following method signature:

   std::string FindString(const std::string &text,
                          bool search_forward,
                          bool case_sensitive);

   It would be easy for users to forget whether the first bool argument is the search
direction or the case sensitivity flag. Passing the flags in the wrong order would result in
unexpected behavior and probably cause users to waste a few minutes debugging the
problem, until they realized that they had transposed the bool arguments. However, you
could design the method so that the compiler catches this kind of error for them, by
introducing a new enum type for each option, or preferably an enum class as of Cþþ11. For
example:

   enum class SearchDirection {
       Forward,
       Backward
   };

   enum class CaseSensitivity {
       Sensitive,
       Insensitive
   };

   std::string FindString(const std::string &text,
                          SearchDirection direction,
                          CaseSensitivity case_sensitivity);

   Not only does this mean that users can’t mix up the order of the two flags, because it
would generate a compilation error, but also the code they would write is now more self-
descriptive. Compare:

   FindString(text, true, false);

   with

   FindString(text, SearchDirection::Forward, CaseSensitivity::Insensitive);

   There are also many APIs that use integers to represent a set of options where an
enum would be a better choice. For example, the OpenCV API has a C function called
cvFlip() that accepts an integer flip_mode parameter. A value of 0 means flip around the X
axis, a value of 1 means flip around the Y axis, and a value of ?1 means flip around both
axes. An easier to use solution might have been to introduce an enum with XAxis, YAxis,
and BothAxes values.

 TIP: Prefer the use of enums over Booleans and integers to improve code readability.

    For more complex cases in which an enum is insufficient, you could even introduce
new classes to ensure that each argument has a unique type. For example, Scott Meyers
illustrates this approach with the use of a Date class that is constructed by specifying
three integers (Meyers, 2004, 2005):

   class Date
   {
   public:
       Date(int year, int month, int day);
       ...
   };

   Meyers notes that in this design clients could pass the year, month, and day values in
the wrong order, and they could also specify illegal values, such as a month of 13. To get
around these problems, he suggests the introduction of specific classes to represent a
year, month, and day value, such as:

   class Year
   {
   public:
       explicit Year(int y) :
           mYear(y)
       {}
       int GetYear() const { return mYear; }

   private:
       int mYear;
   };

   class Month
   {
   public:
       explicit Month(int m) :
           mMonth(m)
       {}
       int GetMonth() const { return mMonth; }
       static Month Jan() { return Month(1); }
       static Month Feb() { return Month(2); }
       static Month Mar() { return Month(3); }
       static Month Apr() { return Month(4); }
       static Month May() { return Month(5); }
       static Month Jun() { return Month(6); }
       static Month Jul() { return Month(7); }
       static Month Aug() { return Month(8); }
       static Month Sep() { return Month(9); }
       static Month Oct() { return Month(10); }
       static Month Nov() { return Month(11); }
       static Month Dec() { return Month(12); }

   private:
       int mMonth;
   };

   class Day
   {
   public:
       explicit Day(int d) :
           mDay(d)
       {}
       int GetDay() const { return mDay; }

   private:
       int mDay;
   };

   Now, the constructor for the Date class can be expressed in terms of these new Year,
Month, and Day classes:

   class Date
   {
   public:
       Date(const Year &y, const Month &m, const Day &d);
       ...
   };

    Using this design, clients can create a new Date object with the following unambig-
uous and easy to understand syntax. Also, any attempts to specify the values in a
different order will result in a compile-time error:

   Date birthday(Year(1976), Month::Jul(), Day(7));

 TIP: Avoid functions with multiple parameters of the same type.

   Cþþ11 introduced the concept of user-defined literals that can also be employed to
help your clients not misuse your APIs. Using this feature, you can define custom literal
suffixes for different units and provide code to convert between those different units. For
example, you can allow your clients to specify a temperature literal value as 100.0_degC or
100.0_degF and define how to convert these literals into the values your API expects. For
more details on this feature, refer to the Cþþ11 section on User Defined Literals in the
Cþþ Revisions chapter.

Consistent
A good API should apply a consistent design approach so that its conventions are easy to
remember, and therefore easy to adopt (Blanchette, 2008). This applies to all aspects of
API design such as naming conventions, parameter order, the use of standard patterns,
memory model semantics, the use of exceptions, and error handling.
   In terms of the first of these, consistent naming conventions imply the reuse of the
same words for the same concepts across the API. For example, if you have decided to
use the verb pairs Begin and End, you should not mingle the terms Start and Finish. As
another example, the Qt3 API mixes the use of abbreviations in several of its method
names, such as prevValue() and previousSibling(). This is another example of why the
use of abbreviations should be avoided wherever possible.
   The use of consistent method signatures is an equally critical design quality. If you
have several methods that accept similar argument lists, you should endeavor to keep a
consistent number and order for those arguments. To give a counterexample, I refer you
to the following C library functions:

   void bcopy(const void *s1, void *s2, size_t n);
   char *strncpy(char *restrict s1, const char *restrict s2, size_t n);

  Both functions involve copying n bytes of data from one area of memory to another.
However, the bcopy() function copies data from s1 into s2, whereas strncpy() copies

from s2 into s1. This can give rise to subtle memory errors if a developer were to decide
to switch usage between the two functions without a close reading of the respective man
pages. To be fair, there is a clue to the conflicting specifications in the function signa-
tures: note the use of the const pointer in each case. However, this could easily be missed
and won’t be caught by a compiler if the source pointer is not declared to be const.
    Also note the inconsistent use of the words copy and cpy.
    Let’s take another example from the C Standard Library. The familiar malloc() function
is used to allocate a contiguous block of memory, and the calloc() function performs the
same operation with the addition that it initializes the reserved memory with 0 bytes.
However, despite their similar purpose, they have different function signatures:

   void *calloc(size_t count, size_t size);
   void *malloc(size_t size);

    The malloc() function accepts a size in terms of bytes, whereas calloc() allocates
(count * size) bytes. In addition to being inconsistent, this violates the principle of least
surprise. As a further example, the read() and write() standard C functions accept a file
descriptor as their first parameter, whereas the fgets() and fputs() functions require the
file descriptor to be specified last (Henning, 2009). And as David Hanson so eloquently
put it, the C library function realloc() is a marvel of confusion (Hanson, 1996).

 TIP: Use consistent function naming and parameter ordering.

   These examples have been focused on a function or method level, but of course
consistency is important at a class level, too. Classes that have similar roles should offer a
similar interface. The Cþþ Standard Library is a great example of this. The std::vector,
std::set, std::map, and even std::string classes all offer a size() method to return the
number of elements in the container. They also all support the use of iterators, so that
once you know how to iterate through an std::set you can apply the same knowledge to
an std::map. This makes it easier to memorize the programming patterns of the API.
   You get this kind of consistency for free through polymorphism: by placing the shared
functionality into a common base class. However, often it doesn’t make sense for all of
your classes to inherit from a common base class, and you shouldn’t introduce a base
class purely for this purpose because it increases the complexity and class count for your
interface. Indeed, it’s noteworthy that the Cþþ Standard Library container classes do not
inherit from a common base class. Instead, you should explicitly design for this by
manually identifying the common concepts across your classes and using the same
conventions to represent these concepts in each class. This is often referred to as static
polymorphism.

   You can also make use of Cþþ templates to help you define and apply this kind of
consistency. For example, you could create a template for a 2D coordinate class and
specialize it for integers, floats, and doubles. In this way you are assured that each type of
coordinate offers the same interface. The following code sample provides a simple
example of this:

   template <class T>
   class Coord2D
   {
   public:
       Coord2D(T x, T y) :
           mX(x),
           mY(y)
       {}

        T GetX() const { return mX; }
        T GetY() const { return mY; }

        void SetX(T x) { mX = x; }
        void SetY(T y) { mY = y; }

        void Add(T dx, T dy) { mX += dx; mY += dy; }
        void Multiply(T dx, T dy) { mX *= dx; mY *= dy; }

   private:
       T mX;
       T mY;
   };

   With this template definition, you can create variables of type Coord2D<int>,
Coord2D<float>, and Coord2D<double> and all of these will have the same interface.
   A further aspect of consistency is the use of familiar patterns and standard platform
idioms. When you buy a new car, you don’t have to relearn how to drive. The concept of
using brake and accelerator pedals, a steering wheel, and a gear stick (be it manual or
automatic) is universal the world over. If you can drive one car, it’s very likely that you
can drive a similar one.
   Likewise, the easiest APIs to use are those that require minimal new learning for your
users. For example, most Cþþ developers are familiar with the Standard Library and its
use of container classes and iterators. Therefore, if you decide to write an API with a
similar purpose, it would be advantageous to mimic the patterns of the Standard Library
because other developers will then find the use of your API to be familiar and easy to
adopt.
   Finally, an important aspect of consistency is to do something in one way, not two
ways. After all, API design is about making decisions. However, sometimes there’s no
clear good way forward or you may feel compelled to incorporate conflicting feedback
from multiple sources. But if you end up providing multiple ways to do the same thing,
then the end product will be less usable and you’ll have to support those multiple de-
signs going forward (Martelli, 2011).

Orthogonal
In mathematics, two vectors are said to be orthogonal if they are perpendicular (at 90
degrees) to each other (i.e., their inner product is zero). This makes them linearly in-
dependent, meaning that there is no set of scalars that can be applied to the first vector
to produce the second vector. To take a geographic analogy, the perpendicular directions
east and north are independent of each other: no amount of walking east will take you
north. Said in slightly more computer lingo, changes to your east coordinate have no
effect on your north coordinate.
    In terms of API design, orthogonality means that methods do not have side effects.
Calling a method that sets a particular property should change only that property and
not additionally change other publicly accessible properties. As a result, making a
change to the implementation of one part of the API should have no effect on other parts
of the API (Raymond, 2003). Striving for orthogonality produces APIs with behaviors that
are more predictable and comprehensible. Furthermore, code that does not create side
effects, or relies upon the side effects of other code, is much easier to develop, test,
debug, and change because its effects are more localized and bounded (Hunt and
Thomas, 1999).

 TIP: An orthogonal API means that functions do not have side effects.

   Let’s look at a specific example. Perhaps you’ve stayed in a motel where the controls
of the shower are very unintuitive. You want to be able to set the power and the tem-
perature of the water, but instead you have a single control that seems to affect both
properties in a complex and nonobvious way. This could be modeled using the following
API:

   class CheapMotelShower
   {
   public:
       float GetTemperature() const;         // units = Fahrenheit
       float GetPower() const;               // units = percent, 0..100
       void SetPower(float p);

   private:
       float mTemperature;
       float mPower;
   };

  Just to illustrate this further, let’s consider the following implementation for the
public methods of this class:

   float CheapMotelShower::GetTemperature() const
   {
       return mTemperature;
   }

   float CheapMotelShower::GetPower() const
   {
       return mPower;
   }

   void CheapMotelShower::SetPower(float p)
   {
       if (p < 0) {
           p = 0;
       }
       if (p > 100) {
           p = 100;
       }
       mPower = p;
       mTemperature = 42.0f + sin(p / 38.0f) * 45.0f;
   }

   In this case you can see that setting the power of the water flow also affects the
temperature of the water via a nonlinear relationship. As a result, it’s not possible to
achieve certain combinations of temperature and power, and naturally the preferred
combination of hot water and full power is unattainable. Also, if you were to change the
implementation of the SetPower() method, it would have the side effect of affecting the
result of the GetTemperature() method. In a more complex system, this interdependence
may be something that we as programmers forget about, or are simply unaware of, and
so a simple change to one area of code may have a profound impact on the behavior of
other parts of the system.
   Instead, let’s consider an ideal, orthogonal interface for a shower, in which the
controls for temperature and power are independent:

   class IdealShower
   {
   public:
       float GetTemperature() const;      // units = Fahrenheit
       float GetPower() const;            // units = percent, 0..100
       void SetTemperature(float t);
       void SetPower(float p);

   private:
       float mTemperature;
       float mPower;
   };

   float IdealShower::GetTemperature() const
   {
       return mTemperature;
   }

   float IdealShower::GetPower() const
   {
       return mPower;
   }

   void IdealShower::SetTemperature(float t)
   {
       if (t < 42) {
           t = 42;
       }
       if (t > 85) {
           t = 85;
       }
       mTemperature = t;
   }

   void IdealShower::SetPower(float p)
   {
       if (p < 0) {
           p = 0;
       }
       if (p > 100) {
           p = 100;
       }
       mPower = p;
   }

   Two important factors to remember for designing orthogonal APIs are:
1. Reduce redundancy. Ensure that the same information is not represented in more
   than one way. There should be a single authoritative source for each piece of
   knowledge.
2. Increase independence. Ensure that there is no overlap of meaning in the con-
   cepts that are exposed. Any overlapping concepts should be decomposed into their
   basal components.
    Another popular interpretation of orthogonal design is that different operations can
all be applied to each available data type. This is a definition that is commonly used in
the fields of programming language and CPU design. In the latter case, an orthogonal

instruction set is one in which instructions can use any CPU register in any addressing
mode, as opposed to a nonorthogonal design in which certain instructions can use only
certain registers. Again, in terms of API design, the Standard Library provides an
excellent example of this. It offers a collection of generic algorithms and iterators that
can be used on any container. For example, the Standard Library std::count algorithm
can be applied to any of the std::vector, std::set, or std::map containers. Hence the
choice of algorithm is not dependent upon the container class being used.

Robust resource allocation
One of the trickiest aspects of programming in Cþþ is memory management. This is
particularly so for developers who are used to memory managed languages such as Java
or C#, in which objects are freed automatically by a garbage collector. By contrast, most
Cþþ bugs arise from some kind of misuse of pointers or references, such as:
  Null dereferencing: trying to use -> or * operators on a nullptr.
  Double freeing: calling delete or free() on a block of memory twice.
  Accessing invalid memory: trying to use -> or * operators on a pointer that has
  not yet been allocated or that has already been freed.
  Mixing allocators: using delete to free memory that was allocated with malloc(), or
  using free() to return memory allocated with new.
  Incorrect array deallocation: using the delete operator, instead of delete [], to free
  an array.
  Memory leaks: not freeing a block of memory when you are finished with it.
   These problems arise because it’s not possible to tell whether a plain Cþþ pointer is
referencing valid memory or if it’s pointing to unallocated or freed memory. It’s there-
fore reliant upon the programmer to track this state and ensure that the pointer is never
dereferenced incorrectly. But as we know, programmers are fallible. However, many of
these kinds of problems can be avoided through the use of managed (or smart) pointers,
such as:
1. Shared pointers. These are reference counted pointers where the reference count
   can be incremented by one when a piece of code wants to hold onto the pointer,
   and decremented by one when it is finished using the pointer. When the reference
   count reaches zero, the object pointed to by the pointer is automatically freed. This
   kind of pointer can help to avoid the problems of accessing freed memory by
   ensuring that the pointer remains valid for the period that you want to use it.
2. Weak pointers. A weak pointer contains a pointer to an object, normally a shared
   pointer, but does not contribute to the reference count for that object. If you have
   a shared pointer and a weak pointer referencing the same object, and the shared
   pointer is destroyed, the weak pointer immediately becomes null. In this way, weak
   pointers can detect whether the object being pointed to has expired: if the refer-
   ence count for the object to which it’s pointing is zero. This helps to avoid the

   dangling pointer problem where you can have a pointer that’s referencing freed
   memory.
3. Unique pointers. These pointers support ownership of single objects and automat-
   ically deallocate their objects when the pointer goes out of scope. They are some-
   times also called scoped pointers or auto pointers. Unique pointers are defined as
   owning a single object and as such they cannot be copied or shared but they can
   be moved to a new owner.
    These smart pointers are not part of the original Cþþ98 specification. However,
support for them was added in Cþþ11 with the std::shared_ptr, std::weak_ptr, and
std::unique_ptr templates.
    Employing these smart pointers can make your API much easier to use and less prone
to the kind of memory errors listed earlier. For example, the use of std::shared_ptr can
alleviate the need for users to free a dynamically created object explicitly. Instead, the
object will automatically be deleted when it’s no longer referenced. For example,
consider an API that allows you to create instances of an object via a factory method
called CreateInstance():

   #include <memory>

   using MyObjectPtr = std::shared_ptr<MyObject>;

   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       static MyObjectPtr CreateInstance();
       ~MyObject();
   };

   where the implementation of the factory method looks like:

   MyObjectPtr MyObject::CreateInstance()
   {
       return std::make_shared<MyObject>();
   }

   Given this API, a client could create instances of MyObject as:

   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       MyObjectPtr ptr = MyObject::CreateInstance();
       ptr = MyObject::CreateInstance();
       return 0;
   }

   In this example, two instances of MyObject are created, and both instances are
destroyed when the ptr variable goes out of scope (at the end of the program in this
case). If instead the CreateInstance() method simply returned a MyObject * raw pointer
type, then the destructor would never get called in the previous example. The use of
smart pointers can therefore make memory management simpler and hence make your
API easier for clients to use.
   In general, if you have a function that returns a pointer that your clients should
delete, or if you expect the client to need the pointer for longer than the life of your
object, then you should return it using a smart pointer, such as an std::shared_ptr. On
the other hand, if ownership of the pointer will be retained by your object, then you can
return a weak pointer. For example:

   // ownership of MyObject is shared with the caller
   std::shared_ptr<MyObject> GetObject() const;

   // ownership of MyObject is retained by the API
   std::weak_ptr<MyObject> GetObject() const;

 TIP: Return a dynamically allocated object using a smart pointer wherever possible.

   It’s worth noting that these kinds of memory management issues are simply a specific
case of the more general category of resource management. For instance, similar types of
problems can be encountered with the manipulation of mutex locks or file handles. We
can generalize the concepts of smart pointers to the task of resource management with
the following observation: resource allocation is object construction, and resource
deallocation is object destruction. This is often referred to with the acronym RAII
(resource acquisition is initialization).
   As an example, examine this code, which illustrates a classic synchronization bug:

   void SetName(const std::string &name)
   {
       mMutex.lock();

       if (name.empty()) {
           return;
       }
       mName = name;

       mMutex.unlock();
   }

   Obviously, this code will fail to unlock the mutex if an empty string is passed into the
method. As a result, the program will deadlock on the next attempt to call the method
because the mutex will still be locked. However, you could create a class called
ScopedMutex, whose constructor locks the mutex and whose destructor unlocks it again.
With such a class, you could rewrite this method as:

   void SetName(const std::string &name)
   {
       ScopedMutex locker(mMutex);

       if (name.empty()) {
           return;
       }

       mName = name;
   }

    Now you can be assured that the lock will be released whenever the method returns,
because the mutex will be unlocked whenever the ScopedMutex variable goes out of scope.
As a result, you do not need to check every return statement meticulously to ensure that
it has explicitly freed the lock. As a bonus, the code is also much more readable. Support
for scoped locking was adding in Cþþ11 with the std::lock_guard and std::scoped_lock
class templates.
    The take-home point in terms of API design is that if your API provides access to the
allocation and deallocation of some resource, then you should consider providing a class
to manage this, where resource allocation happens in the constructor and deallocation
happens in the destructor (and perhaps additionally through a public Release() method
so that clients have more control over when the resource is freed).

 TIP: Think of resource allocation and deallocation as object construction and destruction.

   One caveat to be aware of with RAII is that Cþþ constructors and destructors don’t
have return values, and you should also not trigger an exception in a destructor. So there
may be some cases for which RAII is not the best fit (e.g., when you want to detect an
error and retry some logic).

Platform independent
A well-designed Cþþ API should always avoid platform-specific #if/#ifdef lines in its
public headers that produce different APIs on different platforms or that produce
different APIs in debug versus release builds. If your API presents a high-level and logical

model for your problem domain, as it should, there are very few cases when that API
should be different for different platforms.
   For example, let’s take the case of an API that encapsulates the functionality offered
by a mobile phone. Some mobile phones offer built-in GPS devices that can deliver the
geographic location of the phone, but not all devices offer this capability. However, you
should never expose this situation directly through your API, such as in this example:

   class MobilePhone
   {
   public:
       bool StartCall(const std::string &number);
       bool EndCall();

   #if defined TARGET_OS_IPHONE
       bool GetGPSLocation(double &lat, double &lon);
   #endif
   };

    This poor design creates a different API on different platforms. Doing so forces the
clients of your API to introduce the same platform specificity into their own applications.
For example, in the previous case, your clients would have to guard any calls to
GetGPSLocation() with precisely the same #if conditional statement; otherwise their code
may fail to compile with an undefined symbol error on other platforms.
    Furthermore, if in a later version of the API you also add support for another device class,
say Windows Mobile, then you would have to update the #if line in your public header to
include _WIN32_WCE. Then, your clients would have to find all instances in their code where
they have embedded the TARGET_OS_IPHONE define and extend it to include _WIN32_WCE. This is
because you have unwittingly exposed the implementation details of your API.
    Instead, you should hide the fact that the function works only on certain platforms
and provide a method to determine whether the implementation offers the desired ca-
pabilities on the current platform. For example:

   class MobilePhone
   {
   public:
       bool StartCall(const std::string &number);
       bool EndCall();

        bool HasGPS() const;
        bool GetGPSLocation(double &lat, double &lon);
   };

   Now your API is consistent over all platforms and doesn’t expose the details of which
platforms support GPS coordinates. The clients can now write code to check whether the
current device supports a GPS device, by calling HasGPS(), and if so they can call

the GetGPSLocation() method to return the actual coordinate. The implementation of the
HasGPS() method might look something like:

   bool MobilePhone::HasGPS() const
   {
   #if defined TARGET_OS_IPHONE
       return true;
   #else
       return false;
   #endif
   }

    This is far superior to the original design because the platform-specific #if statement
is now hidden in the .cpp file rather than being exposed to your clients in the header file.

 TIP: Never put platform-specific #if or #ifdef statements into your public APIs. It exposes
 implementation details and makes your API behave differently on differently platforms.

   One case where maintaining platform independence can be tricky is when you’re
writing an API to interface with a platform-specific resource, such as a routine that
draws in a window and requires the appropriate window handle for the native oper-
ating system. One way to deal with this is to return the resource as a void * pointer (i.e.,
a pointer with no type). Although returning an untyped pointer is generally frowned
upon, it’s better than making your API be platform specific. As an example of this, the
OpenCV API returns operating systemedependent handles as void *, requiring clients
to cast this to the appropriate type in their application code (e.g., an HWND on Win32,
WindowRef on macOS, or Widget * on X Windows). Here’s an example of what that API
looks like:

   void *cvGetWindowHandle(const char *name);
   const char *cvGetWindowName(void *window_handle);

Loosely coupled
In 1974, Wayne Stevens, Glenford Myers, and Larry Constantine published their seminal
paper on structured software design. This paper introduced the two interrelated con-
cepts of coupling and cohesion (Stevens et al., 1974), which I will define as:

  Coupling. A measure of the strength of interconnection among software compo-
  nents: that is, the degree to which each component depends upon other compo-
  nents in the system.
  Cohesion. A measure of how coherent or strongly related the various functions of a
  single software component are.
   Good software designs tend to correlate with low (or loose) coupling and high
cohesion: that is, a design that minimizes the functional relatedness and connectedness
between different components. Achieving this goal allows components to be used, un-
derstood, and maintained independently of each other.

    TIP: Good APIs exhibit loose coupling and high cohesion.

    Steve McConnell presents a particularly effective analogy for loose coupling. Model
railroad cars use simple hook or knuckle couplers to connect cars together. These allow
easy linking of train carsdnormally just by pushing two cars togetherdwith a single
point of connection. This is therefore an example of a loosely coupled system. Imagine
how much more difficult it would be to connect the cars if you had to employ several
types of connections, perhaps involving screws and wires, or if only particular cars could
interface with certain other kinds of cars (McConnell, 2004).
    One way to think of coupling is that given two components, A and B, how much code
in B must change if A changes. There are various measures that can be used to evaluate
the degree of coupling between components:
n    Size. Relates to the number of connections between components, including the
     number of classes, methods, and arguments per method. For example, a method
     with fewer parameters is more loosely coupled to components that call it.
n    Visibility. Refers to the prominence of the connection between components. For
     example, changing a global variable to affect the state of another component indi-
     rectly is a poor level of visibility.
n    Intimacy. Refers to the directness of the connection between components. If A is
     coupled to B, and B is coupled to C, then A is indirectly coupled to C. Another
     example is that inheriting from a class is a tighter coupling than including that
     class as a member variable (composition), because inheritance also provides access
     to all protected members of the class.
n    Flexibility. Relates to the ease of changing the connections between components.
     For example, if the signature of a method in A needs to change so that B can call
     it, flexibility describes how easy it is to change that method and all dependent
     code.

    One particularly abhorrent form of tight coupling that you should always avoid is
having two components that directly or indirectly depend upon each other (i.e., a de-
pendency cycle or circular dependency). This makes it difficult or impossible to reuse a
component without including all of its circularly dependent components. I discuss this
form of tight coupling further in Chapter 4.
    In the following sections, I will present various techniques to reduce coupling be-
tween the classes and methods within your API (inter-API coupling).
    However, there is also the interesting question of how your API design decisions
affect the cohesion and coupling of your clients’ applications (intra-API coupling). Your
API is designed to solve a specific problem, and that unity of purpose should translate
well into your API being a component with high cohesion in your clients’ programs.
However, in terms of coupling, the larger your API isdthe more classes, methods, and
arguments you exposedthe more ways in which your API can be accessed and coupled
to your clients’ applications. As such, the quality of being minimally complete can also
contribute toward loose coupling. There is also the issue of how much coupling with
other components you have designed into your API. For example, the libpng library
depends upon the libz library. This coupling is exposed at compile time, via a reference
to the zlib.h header in png.h, and also at link time. This requires clients of the libpng to
be aware of the libz dependency and ensure that they also build and link against this
additional library.

Coupling by name only
If class A only needs to know the name of class B (i.e., it does not need to know the size of
class B or call any methods in the class), then class A does not need to depend upon the
full declaration of B. In these cases, you can use a forward declaration for class B rather
than including the entire interface, and so reduce the coupling between the two classes
(Lakos, 1996). For example:

   class MyObject;     // only need to know the name of MyObject

   class MyObjectHolder
   {
   public:
       MyObjectHolder();

        void SetObject(const MyObject &obj);
   };

   In this case, MyObjectHolder only uses a reference to MyObject, and as such it doesn’t
need to #include "MyObject.h" to get the full declaration of MyObject. The same would be
true if a pointer to MyObject was used instead. By using a forward declaration, the
MyObjectHolder class can be decoupled from the physical implementation of MyObject.

 TIP: Use a forward declaration for a class unless you actually need to #include its full
 definition.

Reducing class coupling
Scott Meyers recommends that whenever you have a choice, you should prefer declaring
a function as a nonmember nonfriend function rather than as a member function
(Meyers, 2000). Doing so improves encapsulation and reduces the degree of coupling of
those functions to the class. For example, consider the following class snippet that
provides a PrintName() member function to output the value of a member variable to
stdout. The function uses a public getter method, GetName(), to retrieve the current value
of the member variable:

   // myobject.h
   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       void PrintName() const;
       std::string GetName() const;
       ...

   protected:
       ...

   private:
       std::string mName;
       ...
   };

   Following Meyers’ advice, you should prefer this representation:

   // myobject.h
   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       std::string GetName() const;
       ...

   protected:
       ...

   private:
       std::string mName;
       ...
   };

   void PrintName(const MyObject &obj);

    This latter form reduces coupling because the free function PrintName() can access
only the public methods of MyObject (and only the const public methods in this particular
case), whereas in the form where PrintName() is a member function, it can also access all
of the private and protected member functions and data members of MyObject as well as
any protected members of any bases classes, if it had any. Preferring the nonmember
nonfriend form therefore means that the function is not coupled to the internal details of
the class. It is therefore far less likely to break when the internal details of MyObject are
changed (Tulach, 2008).
    This technique also contributes to more minimally complete interfaces, in which a
class contains only the minimal functionality required to implement it, whereas func-
tionality that’s built on top of its public interface is declared outside the class (as in the
example of convenience APIs I discussed earlier). It’s worth noting that this happens a
lot in the Cþþ Standard Library, where algorithms such as std::for_each() and
std::unique() are declared outside each container class.
    To convey the conceptual relatedness of MyObject and PrintName() better, you could
declare both of these within a single namespace. Alternatively, you could declare
PrintName() within its own namespace, such as MyObjectHelper, or even as a static
function within a new helper class called MyObjectHelper. As I’ve already covered in the
section on convenience APIs, this helper namespace can and should be contained in a
separate module. For example:

   // myobjecthelper.h
   namespace MyObjectHelper {

   void PrintName(const MyObject &obj);

   }

 TIP: Prefer using nonmember nonfriend functions instead of member functions to reduce
 coupling.

Intentional redundancy
Normally, good software engineering practice aims to remove redundancy: to ensure
that each significant piece of knowledge or behavior is implemented only once (Pierce,
2002). However, reuse of code implies coupling, and sometimes it’s worth the cost to add
a small degree of duplication to sever an egregious coupling relationship (Parnas, 1979).
This intentional duplication may take the form of code or data redundancy.

   As an example of code redundancy, consider two large components that are
dependent upon each other. However, when you investigate the dependency more
deeply, it turns out that it resolves to one component relying on a trivial piece of
functionality in the other, such as a function to calculate minimum or maximum.
Standard practice would be to find a lower-level home for this functionality, so that both
components may depend upon that smaller piece of functionality instead of upon each
other. However, sometimes this kind of refactoring doesn’t make sense (e.g., if the
functionality is simply not generic enough to be demoted to a lower level in the system).
Therefore, in certain cases it may make sense to duplicate the code to avoid the coupling
(Lakos, 1996).
   In terms of adding data redundancy, consider the following API for a text chat system
that logs each message sent by a user:

   #include "ChatUser.h"
   #include <string>
   #include <vector>

   class TextChatLog
   {
   public:
       bool AddMessage(const ChatUser &user, const std::string &msg);

        int GetCount() const;
        std::string GetMessage(int index);

   private:
       struct ChatEvent
       {
            ChatUser mUser;
            std::string mMessage;
            size_t mTimestamp;
       };

        std::vector<ChatEvent> mChatEvents;
   };

   This design accepts individual text chat events, taking an object that describes users
and the message that they typed. This information is augmented with the current
timestamp and added to an internal list. The GetCount() method can then be used to find
how many text chat events have occurred and the GetMessage() method will return a
formatted version of a given chat event, such as:

   Joe Blow [09:46]: What's up?

   However, the TextChatLog class is clearly coupled with the ChatUser class, which may
be a very heavy class that pulls in many other dependencies. You may therefore decide to
investigate this situation and find that TextChatLog only ever uses the name of the user.

That is, it keeps the ChatUser object around but only calls the ChatUser::GetName()
method. One solution to remove the coupling between the two classes would therefore
be simply to pass the name of the user into the TextChatLog class, as in this refactored
version:

   #include <string>
   #include <vector>

   class TextChatLog
   {
   public:
       bool AddMessage(const std::string &user, const std::string &msg);

        int GetCount() const;
        std::string GetMessage(int index);

   private:
       struct ChatEvent
       {
            std::string mUserName;
            std::string mMessage;
            size_t mTimestamp;
       };

        std::vector<ChatEvent> mChatEvents;
   };

   This creates a redundant version of the user’s name (it is now stored in the
TextChatLog as well as the ChatUser classes), but it breaks the dependency between the
two classes. It may also have the additional benefit of reducing the memory overhead of
TextChatLog, if sizeof(std::string) < sizeof(ChatUser).
   Nonetheless, even though this is an intentional duplication, it’s still duplication and
should be undertaken with great care, consideration, and excellent comments. For
example, if the chat system were updated to allow users to change their names, and it
was decided that when this happens all previous messages from that user should update
to show the new name, then you may have to revert to the original tightly coupled
version (or risk more coupling by requiring ChatUser to inform TextChatLog whenever a
name change occurs).

 TIP: Data redundancy can sometimes be justified to reduce coupling between classes.

Manager classes
A manager class is one that owns and coordinates several lower-level classes. This can be
used to break the dependency of one or more classes upon a collection of low-level

classes. This is often implemented using a Façade design pattern, which I’ll cover in the
chapter on Patterns, or a Mediator design pattern. The difference between the two is that
a Façade exposes only existing functionality in a different way whereas a Mediator adds
new functionality.
   For example, consider a structured drawing program that lets you create 2D objects,
select objects, and move them around a canvas. The program supports several kinds of
input devices to let users select and move objects, such as a mouse, tablet, and joystick. A
naive design would require both the select and move operations to know about each
kind of input device, as shown in this UML diagram (Fig. 2.6).
   Alternatively, you could introduce a manager class to coordinate access to each of the
specific input device classes. In this way, the SelectObject and MoveObject classes need
only to depend upon this single manager class, and then the manager class needs to
depend upon only the individual input device classes. This may also require creating
some form of abstraction for the underlying classes. For example, notice that MouseInput,
TabletInput, and JoystickInput each have a slightly different interface. Our manager class
could therefore put in place a generic input device interface that abstracts away the
specifics of a particular device. The improved, more loosely coupled design is shown in
Fig. 2.7.

                            SelectObject                                   MoveObject

                      + DoSelect() : void                             + DoMove() : void

       MouseInput                                TabletInput                                   JoystickInput

  + GetXCoord() : integer                   + GetXCoord() : integer                       + GetXCoord() : integer
  + GetYCoord() : integer                   + GetYCoord() : integer                       + GetYCoord() : integer
  + IsLMBDown() : boolean                   + IsPenDown() : boolean                       + IsTriggerDown() : boolean
  + IsMMBDown() : boolean
  + IsRMBDown() : boolean

          FIGURE 2.6 Multiple high-level classes, each of which is coupled to several low-level classes.

                            SelectObject                                   MoveObject

                      + DoSelect() : void                             + DoMove() : void

                                                   InputManager

                                              + GetXCoord() : integer
                                              + GetYCoord() : integer
                                              + IsButton1Down() : boolean
                                              + IsButton2Down() : boolean
                                              + IsButton3Down() : boolean

     MouseInput                                 TabletInput                                   JoystickInput

  + GetXCoord() : integer                   + GetXCoord() : integer                       + GetXCoord() : integer
  + GetYCoord() : integer                   + GetYCoord() : integer                       + GetYCoord() : integer
  + IsLMBDown() : boolean                   + IsPenDown() : boolean                       + IsTriggerDown() : boolean
  + IsMMBDown() : boolean
  + IsRMBDown() : boolean

                 FIGURE 2.7 Using a manager class to reduce coupling to lower-level classes.

   Note that this design also scales well, too. This is because more input devices can be
added to the system without introducing further dependencies for SelectObject or
MoveObject. Also, if you decided to add additional manipulation objects, such as
RotateObject and ScaleObject, they need only a single dependency on InputManager,
rather than each introducing further coupling to the underlying device classes.

 TIP: Manager classes can reduce coupling by encapsulating several lower-level classes. They
 can be implemented using the Façade or Mediator design patterns.

Callbacks, observers, and notifications
The final technique that I’ll present to reduce coupling within an API relates to the
problem of notifying other classes when some event occurs.
   Imagine an online 3D multiplayer game that allows multiple users to play against each
other. Internally, each player may be represented with a UUID such as e5b43bba-fbf2-
4f91-ac71-4f2a12d04847. However, users want to see the names of other players, not
inscrutable UUID strings. The system therefore implements a player name cache,
NameCache, to store the correspondence between the UUID and the human-readable name.
   Now, let’s say the class that manages the pregame lobby, PreGameLobby, wants to
display the name of each player. The set of operations may proceed as:
1. The PreGameLobby class calls NameCache::RequestName(),
2. The NameCache sends a request to the game server for the name of the player with
   this UUID,
3. The NameCache receives the player name information from the server, and
4. The NameCache calls PreGameLobby::SetPlayerName().
    However, in this case PreGameLobby depends upon NameCache to call the RequestName()
method, and NameCache depends upon PreGameLobby to call the SetPlayerName() method.
This is an overly brittle and tightly coupled design. Consider what would happen if the
in-game system also needed to know a player’s name to display it above the user. Would
you then extend NameCache also to call the InGame::SetPlayerName() method, further
tightening the coupling?
    A better solution would be to have the PreGameLobby and InGame classes register interest
in updates from the NameCache. Then the NameCache can notify any interested parties
without having a direct dependency upon those modules. There are several ways that
this can be done, such as callbacks, observers, and notifications. I will go into the details
of each of these in a moment, but first, here are a number of general issues to understand
when using any of these schemes:
n   Reentrancy. When writing an API that calls out to unknown user code, you have to
    consider that this code may call back into your API. In fact, the client may not
    even realize that this is happening. For example, if you are processing a queue of
    objects and you issue a callback as you process each individual object, it is
    possible that the callback will attempt to modify the state of the queue by adding
    or removing objects. At a minimum, your API should guard against this behavior
    with a coding error. However, a more elegant solution would be to allow this reen-
    trant behavior and implement your code such that it maintains a consistent state.
n   Lifetime management. Client code should have a clean way to disconnect from
    your API (i.e., to declare that they’re no longer interested in receiving updates).
    This is particularly important when the client object is deleted, because further at-
    tempts to send messages to it could cause a crash. Similarly, your API may wish to
    guard against duplicate registrations, to avoid calling the same client code multiple
    times for the same event.
n   Event ordering. The sequence of callbacks or notifications should be clear to the
    user of your API. For example, the Cocoa API does a good job of making it clear
    whether a notification is sent before or after an event by using names such as
    willChange and didChange. On the other hand, the Qt tool kit is less specific about this:
    a changed signal is sometimes sent before the object in question is actually updated.
    These points highlight the general issue that you should always make it clear to your
clients what they can and cannot dodwhat assumptions they can and cannot make
about your APIdwithin their callback code. This can be done through your API docu-
mentation, or it can be enforced more explicitly by giving the callback a limited interface
that exposes only a safe subset of all potential operations.

Callback functions
In plain C, a callback is simply a pointer to a function within module A that’s passed to
module B so that B can invoke the function in A at an appropriate time. Module B knows
nothing about module A and has no include or link dependencies upon A. This makes
callbacks particularly useful to allow low-level code to execute high-level code that it
cannot have a link dependency on. As such, callbacks are a popular technique to break
cyclic dependencies in large projects.
   It’s also sometimes useful to supply a closure with the callback function. This is a
piece of data that module A passes to B, and which module B includes in the function
callback to A. This is a way for module A to pass through some state that will be
important to receive in the callback function.
   The following header file shows how you can define a simple callback API in Cþþ11
syntax:

    #include <string>

    class ModuleB
    {
    public:
        using CallbackType = void (*)(const std::string &, void *);

        ModuleB() :
            mCallback(nullptr),
            mClosure(nullptr)
        {}

        void SetCallback(CallbackType cb, void *closure)
        {
            mCallback = cb;
            mClosure = closure;
        }

        void InvokeCallback(const std::string &name)
        {
            if (mCallback) {
                (*mCallback)(name, mClosure);
            }
        }

    private:
        CallbackType mCallback;
        void *mClosure;
    };

   (A more sophisticated example would support adding multiple callbacks to ModuleB,
perhaps storing them in an std::vector, and then invoking each registered callback in turn).
   There are a few problems with this approach. One is that for object-oriented Cþþ
programs, it’s nontrivial to use a nonstatic (instance) method as a callback. This is
because the this-pointer of the object also needs to be passed along. Cþþ11 offers a
couple of solutions for this. You can use std::bind to wrap up the method call with the
object instance. Or you can use std::function to define the callback type and then use a
lambda that captures the object. Here’s an example of the latter:

   class ModuleB
   {
   public:
       using CallbackType = std::function<void (const std::string &,
   void *)>;

        ModuleB() :
           mCallback(nullptr),
           mClosure(nullptr)
        {}

        void SetCallback(CallbackType cb, void *closure)
        {
            mCallback = cb;
            mClosure = closure;
        }

        void InvokeCallback(const std::string &name)
        {
            if (mCallback) {
                mCallback(name, mClosure);
            }
        }

   private:
       CallbackType mCallback;
       void *mClosure;
   };

   // use a lambda to pass an object instance method as a callback
   ModuleA a;
   ModuleB b;
   b.SetCallback([&a](const std::string &name, void *data){
       a.CallbackMethod(name, data);
   }, nullptr);
   b.InvokeCallback("hello world");

   Another problem with this approach is the use of the untyped void * parameter to pass
data into the callback function. If you need to work with objects, or pass state into a callback,
then it would be better to use an object-based solution such as the observer pattern.

Observers
Callback functions present a solution that work well in plain C programs, but a more
object-oriented solution is to use the concept of observers. This is a software design
pattern in which an object maintains a list of its dependent objects (observers) and
notifies them by calling one of their methods. This is a very important pattern for
minimizing coupling in API design. In fact, I have dedicated an entire section to it in the
Patterns chapter. I will defer detailed treatment of observers until then, but I will briefly
cover the topic here to offer a comparison with the earlier callback function approach.
   The general approach to implement the observer pattern is to define a base class,
often an abstract base class, which declares the callback method (or methods) that can
be called. You can then provide an implementation of this interface with your specific
callback functionality. You can also store any state that’s specific to your needs in the
data members of your observer class. For example:

   class Observable
   {
   public:
       virtual ~Observable() {}
       virtual void CallbackMethod(const std::string &name) = 0;
   };

   class MyObserver : public Observable
   {
   public:
       MyObserver(int data) :
           mData(data)
       {}

        void CallbackMethod(const std::string &name)
        {
            std::cout << name << ": " << mData << "\n";
        }

   private:
       int mData;
   };

   Then the module that registers and invokes your observer might look as follows. Note
that I store the observer object using a shared pointer so that the code is robust to the life
cycle of your observer:

   class ModuleB
   {
   public:
       void SetObserver(std::shared_ptr<Observable> cb)
       {
           mObserver = cb;
       }

       void InvokeObserver(const std::string &name)
       {
           if (mObserver) {
               mObserver->CallbackMethod(name);
           }
       }

   private:
       std::shared_ptr<Observable> mObserver;
   };

   // register an instance of Observable with ModuleB
   ModuleB b;
   b.SetObserver(std::make_shared<MyObserver>(2));
   b.InvokeObserver("hello world");

   You can also use a function object, or functor, to define your callback function. This is
simply a type that implements operator(). This has the benefit of making the object
behave more like a callback function, if that is desired. For example:

   class FunctorType
   {
   public:
       virtual ~FunctorType() {}
       virtual void operator()(const std::string &name) = 0;
   };

   class MyFunctor : public FunctorType
   {
   public:
       MyFunctor() :
           mData(0)
       {}

       void SetData(int data)
       {
           mData = data;
       }

       void operator()(const std::string &name)
       {
           std::cout << name << ": " << mData << "\n";
       }

   private:
       int mData;
   };

Notifications
Callbacks and observers tend to be created for a particular task, and the mechanism to
use them is normally defined within the objects that need to perform the actual callback.
An alternative solution is to build a centralized mechanism to send notifications, or
events, between unconnected parts of the system. The sender does not need to know
about the receiver beforehand, and so this can be used to reduce coupling between the
sender and receiver. There are several kinds of notification schemes, but one particularly
popular one is signals and slots.
    The signals and slots concept was introduced by the Qt library as a generic way to
allow any event, such as a button click or a timer event, to be sent to any interested
method to act upon it. However, there are now several alternative implementations of
signals and slots available for use in plain Cþþ code, including Boost’s boost::signals
and boost::signals2 library.
    Signals can be thought of simply as callbacks with multiple targets (slots). All slots for
a signal are called when that signal is invoked, or emitted. To give a concrete example,
the following code snippet uses boost::signal to create a signal that takes no arguments.
You then connect a simple object to the signal. Finally, you emit the signal, which causes
MySlot::operator() to be called, resulting in a message being printed to stdout:

   class MySlot
   {
   public:
       void operator()() const
       {
           std::cout << "MySlot called!" << std::endl;
       }
   };

   // Create an instance of our MySlot class
   MySlot slot;

   // Create a signal with no arguments and a void return value
   boost::signal<void()> signal;

   // Connect our slot to this signal
   signal.connect(slot);

   // Emit the signal and thereby call all of the slots
   signal();

   In practical use, a low-level class could therefore create and own a signal. It then allows
any unconnected classes to add themselves as slots to this signal. Then the low-level class
can emit its signal at any appropriate time and all connected slots will be called.

Stable, documented, and tested
A well-designed API should be stable and future-proof. In this context, stable does not
necessarily mean that the API never changes, but rather that the interface should be
versioned and should not change incompatibly from one version to the next. Related to
this, the term future-proof means that an API should be designed to be extensible so that
it can be evolved elegantly rather than changed chaotically.
    A good API should also be well-documented so that users have clear information about
the capabilities, behavior, best practices, and error conditions for the API. Finally, there
should be extensive automated tests written for the implementation of the API, so that new
changes can be made with the confidence that existing use cases have not been broken.
    These topics have been condensed into a single section at the end of the chapter not
because they are of minor concern or importance; quite the opposite, in fact. These
issues are so fundamentally important to the development of high-quality, robust, and
easy-to-use APIs that I have dedicated entire chapters to each topic.
    I’ve included this placeholder section here because I feel that a chapter on API
qualities should at least reference these important topics. However, for specific details, I
refer you to the separate chapters on Versioning, Documentation, and Testing for
complete coverage of each respective topic.
