                                                                                                                           3
Patterns
In the previous chapter, I discussed the qualities that differentiate a good application
programming interface (API) from a bad one. In the next couple of chapters, I’ll focus on
the techniques and principles of building high-quality APIs. In this chapter, I will cover
several useful design patterns and idioms that relate to Cþþ API design.
   A design pattern is a general solution to a common software design problem. The
term was made popular by the book Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-
Oriented Software, also known as the Gang of Four book (Gamma et al., 1994). That
book introduced a collection of 23 generic design patterns organized into three main
categories, which are enumerated in Table 3.1.
   Since the initial publication of the design pattern book in 1994, several more design
patterns have been added to this list, including an entire new categorization of
Concurrency design patterns. The original authors have also suggested an improved
categorization of Core, Creational, Periphery, and Other (Gamma et al., 2009).
   However, it’s not the intent of this API book to cover all of these design patterns.
There are plenty of other books on the market that focus solely on that topic. Instead, I
will concentrate on those design patterns that are of particular importance to the design
of high-quality APIs, and discuss their practical implementation in Cþþ. I will also cover
Cþþ idioms that may not be considered true generic design patterns, but which are
nevertheless important techniques for Cþþ API design. Specifically, I will go into details
for these techniques:
n    Pimpl idiom. This technique lets you completely hide internal details from your
     public header files. Essentially, it lets you move private member data and functions
     to the .cpp file. It is therefore an indispensable tool for creating well-insulated APIs.
n    Singleton and Factory Methods. These are two very common creational design
     patterns that are good to understand deeply. Singleton is useful when you want to
     enforce that only one instance of an object is ever created. It has some rather
     tricky implementation aspects in Cþþ that I’ll explore. The Factory Method pattern
     provides a generalized way to create instances of an object and can be a great way
     to hide implementation details for a derived class.
n    Proxy, Adapter, and Façade. These structural patterns describe various solutions
     for wrapping an API on top of an existing incompatible or legacy interface. This is
     often the entire goal of writing an API: to improve the interface of some poorly
     designed ball of code. The Proxy and Adapter patterns provide a one-to-one

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00019-2                                                                     81
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

Table 3.1        The 23 design patterns introduced by Gamma et al. (1994).
Creational patterns
Abstract Factory      Encapsulates a group of related factories.
Builder               Separates a complex object’s construction from its representation.
Factory Method        Lets a class defer instantiation to subclasses.
Prototype             Specifies a prototypical instance of a class that can be cloned to produce new objects.
Singleton             Ensures a class has only one instance.
Structural patterns
Adapter               Converts the interface of one class into another interface.
Bridge                Decouples an abstraction from its implementation so that both can be changed independently.
Composite             Composes objects into tree structures to represent partewhole hierarchies.
Decorator             Adds additional behavior to an existing object in a dynamic fashion.
Façade                Provides a unified higher-level interface to a set of interfaces in a subsystem.
Flyweight             Uses sharing to support large numbers of fine-grained objects efficiently.
Proxy                 Provides a surrogate or placeholder for another object to control access to it.
Behavioral patterns
Chain of              Gives more than one receiver object a chance to handle a request from a sender object.
Responsibility
Command               Encapsulates a request or operation as an object, with support for undoable operations.
Interpreter           Specifies how to represent and evaluate sentences in a language.
Iterator              Provides a way to access the elements of an aggregate object sequentially.
Mediator              Defines an object that encapsulates how a set of objects interact.
Memento               Captures an object’s internal state so that it can be restored to the same state later.
Observer              Allows a one-to-many notification of state changes between objects.
State                 Allows an object to appear to change its type when its internal state changes.
Strategy              Defines a family of algorithms, encapsulates each one, and makes them interchangeable at run
                      time.
Template Method       Defines the skeleton of an algorithm in an operation, deferring some steps to subclasses.
Visitor               Represents an operation to be performed on the elements of an object structure.

    mapping of new classes to preexisting classes, whereas the Façade provides a
    simplified interface to a larger collection of classes.
n   Observer. This behavioral pattern can be used to reduce direct dependencies be-
    tween classes. It allows conceptually unrelated classes to communicate by allowing
    one class (the observer) to register for notifications from another class (the sub-
    ject). As such, this pattern is an important aspect of designing loosely coupled
    APIs.
   In addition to covering these patterns and idioms in this chapter, I will discuss the
Thread-Safe Interface pattern in Chapter 9 (Concurrency) and the Visitor behavioral
pattern in Chapter 15 (Extensibility).

Pimpl idiom
The term pimpl was first introduced by Jeff Sumner as shorthand for pointer to imple-
mentation (Sutter, 1999). This technique can be used to avoid exposing private details in
your header files (Fig. 3.1). It’s therefore an important mechanism to help you maintain a
strong separation between your API’s interface and implementation (Sutter and
Alexandrescu, 2004). Although pimpl is not strictly a design pattern (it’s a work-around
to Cþþ specific limitations), it is an idiom that can be considered a special case of the
Bridge design pattern.
   If you change one programming habit after reading this book, I hope you’ll choose to
pimpl more API code.

 TIP: Use the pimpl idiom to keep implementation details out of your public header files.

Using pimpl
Pimpl relies on the fact that it’s possible to define a data member of a Cþþ class that is a
pointer to a forward declared type: that is, where the type has been introduced only by
name and has not yet been fully defined, thus allowing us to hide the definition of that
type within the .cpp file. This is often called an opaque pointer because the user cannot
see the details for the object being pointed to. In essence, pimpl is a way to employ both
logical and physical hiding of your private data members and functions.

                                           .h file          .cpp file

                              PUBLIC
                            INTERFACE

                       public:
                        Function1()
                        Function2()
                                                                      PRIVATE
                                                                  IMPLEMENTATION
                       protected:
                        Function3()                              public:
                                                                  PrivateFunction1()
                                                                  PrivateFunction2()
                       private:                                   PrivateData1
                        Impl *mlmpl                               PrivateData2

  FIGURE 3.1 The pimpl idiom, in which a public class has a private pointer to a hidden implementation class.
   Let’s look at an example to illustrate this. Consider the following API for an autotimer,
a named object that prints out how long it was alive when it’s destroyed:
  // autotimer.h
  #ifdef _WIN32
  #include <windows.h>
  #else
  #include <sys/time.h>
  #endif

  #include <string>

  class AutoTimer
  {
  public:
      /// Create a new timer object with a human-readable name
      explicit AutoTimer(const std::string &name);
      /// On destruction, the timer reports how long it was alive
      ~AutoTimer();

  private:
      // Return how long the object has been alive
      double GetElapsed() const;

      std::string mName;
  #ifdef _WIN32
      DWORD mStartTime;
  #else
      struct timeval mStartTime;
  #endif
  };

   This API violates a number of the important qualities I presented in the previous
chapter. For example, it includes platform-specific defines and it makes the underlying
implementation details of how the timer is stored on different platforms visible to
anyone looking at the header file. To be fair, the API does a good job of exposing only the
necessary methods as public (i.e., the constructor and destructor) and marking the
remaining methods and data members as private. However, Cþþ requires you to declare
these private members in the public header file, and this is why you have to include the
platform-specific #if directives.
   What you really want to do is to hide all of the private members in the .cpp file. Then
you wouldn’t need to include any of those bothersome platform specifics. The pimpl
idiom lets you do this by placing all of the private members into a class (or struct) that is
forward declared in the header but defined in the .cpp file. For example, you could recast
the previous header using pimpl as:

   // autotimer.h
   #include <string>

   class AutoTimer
   {
   public:
       explicit AutoTimer(const std::string &name);
       ~AutoTimer();

   private:
       class Impl;
       Impl *mImpl;
   };
   Now the API is much cleaner! There are no platform-specific preprocessor directives,
and the reader cannot see any of the class’s private members by looking at the header file.
   The implication, however, is that our AutoTimer constructor must now allocate an
object of type AutoTimer::Impl and then destroy it in its destructor. Also, all private
members must be accessed via the mImpl pointer. However, for most practical cases, the
benefit of presenting a clean implementation-free API far outweighs these costs.
   To be complete, let’s see what the underlying implementation looks like to work with
this pimpled class. The resulting .cpp file looks a little bit messy owing to the platform-
specific #ifdef lines, but the important thing is that this messiness is completely con-
tained in the .cpp file now:

 // autotimer.cpp
 #include "autotimer.h"
 #include <iostream>
 #if _WIN32
 #include <windows.h>
 #else
 #include <sys/time.h>
 #endif

 class AutoTimer::Impl
 {
 public:
     double GetElapsed() const
     {
 #ifdef _WIN32
         return (GetTickCount() - mStartTime) / 1e3;
 #else
         struct timeval end_time;
         gettimeofday(&end_time, nullptr);
         double t1 = mStartTime.tv_usec / 1e6 + mStartTime.tv_sec;
         double t2 = end_time.tv_usec / 1e6 + end_time.tv_sec;
         return t2 - t1;
 #endif
     }

     std::string mName;
 #ifdef _WIN32
     DWORD mStartTime;
 #else
     struct timeval mStartTime;
 #endif
 };

 AutoTimer::AutoTimer(const std::string &name) :
     mImpl(new AutoTimer::Impl())
 {
     mImpl->mName = name;
 #ifdef _WIN32
     mImpl->mStartTime = GetTickCount();
 #else
     gettimeofday(&mImpl->mStartTime, nullptr);
 #endif
 }

 AutoTimer::~AutoTimer()
 {
     std::cout << mImpl->mName << ": took " << mImpl->GetElapsed()
               << " secs" << std::endl;
     delete mImpl;
 }

   Here you see the definition of the AutoTimer::Impl class, containing all of the private
methods and variables that were originally exposed in the header. Note also that the
AutoTimer constructor allocates a new AutoTimer::Impl object and initializes its members,
and the destructor deallocates this object.
   In the previous design, I declared the Impl class as a private nested class within the
AutoTimer class. Declaring it as a nested class avoids polluting the global namespace with
this implementation-specific symbol, and declaring it as private means that it does not
pollute the public API of your class. However, declaring it to be private imposes the
limitation that only the methods of AutoTimer can access the members of the Impl. Other
classes or free functions in the .cpp file will not be able to access Impl. As an alternative, if
this poses too much of a limitation, you could instead declare the Impl class to be a
public nested class, as in this example:
   // autotimer.h
   class AutoTimer
   {
   public:
       explicit AutoTimer(const std::string &name);
       ~AutoTimer();

       // allow access from other classes/functions in autotimer.cpp
       class Impl;

   private:
       Impl *mImpl;
   };

 TIP: When using the pimpl idiom, prefer to use a private nested implementation class. Only
 use a public nested Impl class (or a public nonnested class) if other classes or free functions in
 the .cpp must access Impl members.

   Another design question worth considering is how much logic to locate in the Impl
class. Some options include:
1. Only private member variables,
2. Private member variables and methods, or
3. All methods of the public class, such that the public methods are simply thin
   wrappers on top of equivalent methods in the Impl class.
   Each of these options may be appropriate under different circumstances. However, in
general, I recommend option 2: putting all private member variables and private

methods in the Impl class. This lets you maintain the encapsulation of data and methods
that act upon those data and lets you avoid declaring private methods in the public
header file. Note that I adopted this design approach in our previous example by putting
the GetElapsed() method inside the Impl class. Herb Sutter notes a couple of caveats with
this approach (Sutter, 1999):
1. You can’t hide private virtual methods in the implementation class. These must
   appear in the public class so that any derived classes are able to override them.
2. You may need to add a pointer in the implementation class back to the public
   class so that the Impl class can call public methods.

Copy semantics
A Cþþ compiler will create a copy constructor and assignment operator for your class if
you don’t explicitly define them. However, these default constructors will perform only a
shallow copy of your object. This is bad for pimpled classes because it means that if a
client copies your object, then both objects will point to the same implementation ob-
ject, Impl. However, both objects will attempt to delete this same Impl object in their
destructors, which will most likely lead to a crash. There are two main options for dealing
with this:
1. Make your class uncopyable. If you don’t intend for your users to create copies of
   an object, then you can declare the object to be noncopyable. As of Cþþ11, you
   can easily do this by deleting the default compiler-generated copy constructor and
   assignment operator functions using the ¼ delete syntax. Alternatively, if you need
   a Cþþ98 solution, you can declare a copy constructor and assignment operator
   with no implementation to prevent the compiler from generating its own versions.
   Additionally, you can declare these functions as private, so that attempts to copy
   the object will generate a compile error rather than a link error.
2. Explicitly define the copy semantics. If you do want your users to be able to copy
   your pimpled objects, then you can define your own copy constructor and assign-
   ment operator. These can then perform a deep copy of your object (i.e., create a
   copy of the Impl object instead of just copying the pointer). I cover how to write
   your own constructors and operators in the Cþþ Usage chapter later in this book.
   However, an even better solution is simply to use a smart pointer for your Impl
   pointer because these already have well-defined copy semantics.
  The next code example provides an updated version of our AutoTimer API, where I’ve
made the object noncopyable by deleting the copy constructor and assignment operator.
The associated .cpp file doesn’t need to change:

  #include <string>

  class AutoTimer
  {
  public:
      explicit AutoTimer(const std::string &name);
      ~AutoTimer();

       // Make this object be non-copyable
       AutoTimer(const AutoTimer &) = delete;
       AutoTimer &operator=(const AutoTimer &) = delete;

  private:
      class Impl;
      Impl *mImpl;
  };

   In the next section, I’ll show how you can use a smart pointer to define the copy
semantics of your pimpled object explicitly and also make the memory management of
the Impl object more robust.

Pimpl and smart pointers
One of the inconvenient and error-prone aspects of pimpl is the need to allocate and
deallocate the implementation object. Every now and then you may forget to the delete the
object in your destructor, or you may introduce bugs by accessing the Impl object before
you’ve allocated it or after you’ve destroyed it. As a convention, you should therefore
ensure that the very first thing your constructor does is to allocate the Impl object (pref-
erably via its initialization list), and the very last thing your destructor does is to delete it.
   Alternatively, you could rely upon smart pointers to make this more robust. That is, you
could use a shared pointer or a unique pointer to hold the implementation object pointer.
An std::shared_ptr would allow the object to be copied without incurring the double delete
issues I identified earlier. Using a shared pointer would, of course, mean that any copy
would point to the same Impl object in memory. If you need the copied object to have a copy
of the Impl object, then you will still need to write your own copy constructor and
assignment operators (or use a copy-on-write pointer, as described in the Performance
chapter). Here’s an example of using the pimpl idiom with a shared pointer:

  #include <memory>
  #include <string>

  class AutoTimer
  {
  public:
      explicit AutoTimer(const std::string &name);
      ~AutoTimer();

  private:
      class Impl;
      std::shared_ptr<Impl> mImpl;
  };

   Alternatively, you could use an std::unique_ptr instead of an std::shared_ptr as
another way to make the object noncopyable, because a unique pointer is noncopyable
by definition.

 TIP: Think about the copy semantics of your pimpl classes, and favor the use of a shared or
 unique pointer to manage initialization and destruction of the implementation pointer.

   Using either a shared or unique pointer means that the Impl object will be auto-
matically freed when the AutoTimer object is destroyed: you no longer need to delete it
explicitly in the destructor. So the destructor of our autotimer.cpp file can now be
reduced simply to:

   AutoTimer::~AutoTimer()
   {
       std::cout << mImpl->mName << ": took " << mImpl->GetElapsed()
                 << " secs" << std::endl;
   }

Advantages of pimpl
There are many advantages to employing the pimpl idiom in your classes. These include:
  Information hiding. Private members are now completely hidden from your public
  interface. This allows you to keep your implementation details hidden (and pro-
  prietary in the case of closed-source APIs). It also means that your public header
  files are cleaner and more clearly express the true public interface. As a result, they
  can be more easily read and digested by your users. One further benefit of infor-
  mation hiding is that your users cannot as easily use dirty tactics to gain access to
  your private members, such as doing the following, which is actually legal in Cþþ
  (Lakos, 1996):
  #define private public      // make private members be public!
  #include "yourapi.h"        // can now access your private members
  #undef private              // revert to default private semantics

  Reduced coupling. As I showed in the AutoTimer example earlier, without pimpl,
  your public header files must include header files for all your private member vari-
  ables. In our example, this meant having to include windows.h or sys/time.h. This
  increases the compile-time coupling of your API on other parts of the system.

  Using pimpl, you can move those dependencies into the .cpp file and remove those
  elements of coupling.
  Faster compiles. Another implication of moving implementation-specific includes
  to the .cpp file is that the include hierarchy of your API is reduced. This can have a
  very direct effect on compile times (Lakos, 1996). I will detail the benefits of mini-
  mizing include dependencies in the Performance chapter.
  Greater binary compatibility. The size of a pimpled object never changes because
  your object is always the size of a single pointer. Any changes you make to private
  member variables (recall that member variables should always be private) will
  affect only the size of implementation class that is hidden inside of the .cpp file.
  This makes it possible to make major implementation changes without changing
  the binary representation of your object.

Disadvantages of pimpl
The primary disadvantage of the pimpl idiom is that you must now allocate and free an
additional implementation object for every object that’s created. This increases the size of
your object by the size of a pointer and may introduce a performance hit for the extra level of
pointer indirection required to access all member variables, as well as the cost for additional
calls to new and delete. If you’re concerned with the memory allocator performance, then you
may consider using the Fast Pimpl idiom (Sutter, 1999) in which you overload the new and
delete operators for your Impl class to use a more efficient small-memory fixed-size allocator.
   There is also the extra developer inconvenience of prefixing all private member accesses
with something like mImpl->. This can make the implementation code harder to read and
debug owing to the additional layer of abstraction. This becomes even more complicated
when the Impl class has a pointer back to the public class. However, these inconveniences
are not exposed to users of your API and are therefore not a concern from the point of view
of your API’s design. They are a burden that you, the developer, must shoulder for all of
your users to receive a cleaner and more efficient API. To quote a certain science officer and
his captain: “The needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few.” “Or the one.”
   One final issue to be aware of is that the compiler will no longer catch changes to
member variables within const methods. This is because member variables now live in a
separate object. Your compiler will check only that you don’t change the value of the
mImpl pointer in a const method, but not whether you change any members pointed to by
mImpl. In effect, every member function of a pimpled class could be defined as const
(except, of course, the constructor or destructor). This is demonstrated by the following
const method that legally changes a variable in the Impl object:

   void PimpledObject::ConstMethod() const
   {
       mImpl->mName = "string changed by a const method";
   }

   This can be addressed by introducing two private functions to access the Impl pointer:
one const and one nonconst. That way, the compiler will enforce that you use the const
version in a const method. If the const function also returns a const Impl pointer, then
you also get compiler const checking for your Impl methods. For example:

  // autotimer.h
  class AutoTimer
  {
  public:
      explicit AutoTimer(const std::string &name);
      ~AutoTimer();

       void ConstMember() const;
       void NonConstMember();

  private:
      class Impl;
      std::shared_ptr<Impl> GetImpl() { return mImpl; }
      std::shared_ptr<const Impl> GetConstImpl() const { return mImpl; }
      std::shared_ptr<Impl> mImpl;
  };

  // autotimer.cpp
  class AutoTimer::Impl
  {
  public:
      double GetElapsed() const;
      std::string mName;
      void ImplConstMember() const;
      void ImplNonConstMember();
  };

  Void AutoTimer::ConstMember() const
  {
      GetConstImpl()->ImplConstMember();
  }

  Void AutoTimer::NonConstMember()
  {
      GetImpl()->ImplNonConstMember();
  }

Opaque pointers in C
Although I have focused on Cþþ so far, you can create opaque pointers in plain C, too.
The concept is the same: you create a pointer to a struct that is only defined in a .c file.
The next header files demonstrate what this might look like in C:

   /* autotimer.h */
   /* declare an opaque pointer to an AutoTimer structure */
   typedef struct AutoTimer *AutoTimerPtr;

   /* functions to create and destroy the AutoTimer structure */
   AutoTimerPtr AutoTimerCreate(const char *name);
   void AutoTimerDestroy(AutoTimerPtr ptr);

  The associated .c file might then look like:

  #include "autotimer.h"
  #include <stdio.h>
  #include <stdlib.h>
  #include <string.h>

  #if _WIN32
  #include <windows.h>
  #else
  #include <sys/time.h>
  #endif

  struct AutoTimer
  {
      char *mName;
  #if _WIN32
      DWORD mStartTime;
  #else
      struct timeval mStartTime;
  #endif
  } AutoTimer;

  AutoTimerPtr AutoTimerCreate(const char *name)
  {
      AutoTimerPtr ptr = malloc(sizeof(AutoTimer));
      if (ptr) {
          ptr->mName = strdup(name);
  #if _WIN32
          ptr->mStartTime = GetTickCount();
  #else
          gettimeofday(&ptr->mStartTime, NULL);
  #endif
      }
      return ptr;
  }

  static double GetElapsed(AutoTimerPtr ptr)
  {
  #if _WIN32
      return (GetTickCount() - ptr->mStartTime) / 1e3;
  #else
      struct timeval end_time;
      gettimeofday(&end_time, nullptr);
      double t1 = ptr->mStartTime.tv_usec / 1e6 +
                  ptr->mStartTime.tv_sec;
      double t2 = end_time.tv_usec / 1e6 + end_time.tv_sec;
      return t2 - t1;
  #endif
  }

  void AutoTimerDestroy(AutoTimerPtr ptr)
  {
      if (ptr) {
          printf("%s: took %f secs\n", ptr->mName, GetElapsed(ptr));
          free(ptr->mName);
          free(ptr);
      }
  }

                                              Singleton

                                     instance : Singleton

                                   + Getlnstance() : Singleton
                                     Singleton()

           FIGURE 3.2 Unified Modeling Language (UML) diagram of the Singleton design pattern.

Singleton
The Singleton design pattern (Gamma et al., 1994) is used to ensure that a class only ever
has one instance. The pattern also provides a global point of access to that single
instance (Fig. 3.2). You can think of a singleton as a more elegant global variable.
However, it offers several advantages over the use of global variables because it:
1. Enforces that only one instance of the class can be created.
2. Provides control over the allocation and destruction of the object.
3. Allows support for thread-safe access to the object’s global state.
4. Avoids polluting the global namespace.
5. Avoids the nondeterministic initialization problem of nonlocal static constructors.
    The Singleton pattern is useful for modeling resources that are inherently singular in
nature, such as a class to access the system clock, the global clipboard, or the keyboard.
It’s also useful for creating manager classes that provide a single point of access to
multiple resources, such as a thread manager or an event manager. On the other hand,
the singleton is still essentially a way to add global variables to your system, albeit in a
more manageable fashion. It can therefore introduce global state and dependencies into
your API that are difficult to refactor later, as well as making it difficult to write unit tests
that exercise isolated parts of your code.
    I have decided to cover the concept of singletons here partly because they offer a
useful and common API design technique. However, another reason is that they are
intricate to implement robustly in Cþþ, and so it’s worth discussing some of the
implementation details. Also, many programmers tend to overuse the Singleton pattern,
so I wanted to highlight some of the disadvantages of singletons as well as provide
alternative techniques.

 TIP: A Singleton is a more elegant way to maintain global state, but you should always ques-
 tion whether you need global state.

Implementing singletons in Cþþ
The Singleton pattern involves creating a class with a static method that returns the
same instance of the class every time it’s called. This static method is often called
GetInstance(), or similar. There are several Cþþ language features to consider when
designing a singleton class:
  You don’t want clients to be able to create new instances. This can be done by
  declaring the default constructor to be private, thus preventing the compiler from
  automatically creating it as public.
  You want the singleton to be noncopyable, to enforce that a second instance
  cannot be created. As you’ve seen earlier, this can be done by declaring a private
  copy constructor and a private assignment operator, or by using the delete speci-
  fier as of Cþþ11.
  You want to prevent clients from being able to delete the singleton instance. This
  can be done by declaring the destructor to be private. (Note, however, that some
  compilers, such as Borland 5.5 and Visual Studio 6, incorrectly produce an error if
  you try to declare a destructor as private).
  The GetInstance() method could return either a pointer or a reference to the
  singleton class. However, if you return a pointer, clients could potentially delete
  the object. You should therefore prefer returning a reference.
   The general form of a singleton as of Cþþ11 can therefore be given as:
   class Singleton
   {
   public:
       static Singleton &GetInstance();

       Singleton(const Singleton &) = delete;
       Singleton &operator=(const Singleton &) = delete;

   private:
       Singleton();
       ~Singleton();
   };

   Then user code can request a reference to the singleton instance as:

   Singleton &obj = Singleton::GetInstance();

   Note that making the constructor and destructor private also means that clients
cannot create subclasses of the singleton. However, if you wish to allow this, you can, of
course, simply declare them to be protected instead.

 TIP: Declare the constructor, destructor, copy constructor, and assignment operator to be pri-
 vate (or protected) to enforce the Singleton property. Or delete the copy constructor and
 assignment operator with the delete specifier.

   In terms of implementation, one of the areas to be very careful about is how the
singleton instance is allocated. The important Cþþ initialization issue to recognize is
explained by Scott Meyers as:

   The relative order of initialization of non-local static objects in different translation
   units is undefined.
                                                                                (Meyers, 2005).

This means that it would be dangerous to initialize our singleton using a nonlocal static
variable. A nonlocal object is one that is declared outside a function or method. Static
objects include global objects, objects declared as static inside a class or function, and
objects defined at file or namespace scope. As a result, one way to initialize our singleton
would be to create a static variable inside a method of our class, as:
   Singleton &Singleton::GetInstance()
   {
       static Singleton instance;
       return instance;
   }

   One nice property of this approach is that the instance will be allocated only when the
GetInstance() method is first called. This means that if the singleton is never requested, the
object is never allocated. However, on the downside, Andrei Alexandrescu notes that this
technique relies on the standard last in first out deallocation behavior of static variables,
which can result in singletons being deallocated before they should in situations where
singletons call other singletons in their destructors. As an example of this problem,
consider two singletons: Clipboard and LogFile. When Clipboard is instantiated, it also in-
stantiates LogFile to output some diagnostic information. At program exit, LogFile is
destroyed first because it was created last, then Clipboard is destroyed. However, the
Clipboard destructor tries to call LogFile to log the fact that it is being destroyed, but LogFile
has already been freed. This will most likely result in a crash on program exit.
    In his Modern Cþþ Design book, Alexandrescu presents several solutions to this
destruction order problem, including resurrecting the singleton if it is needed after it has
been destroyed, increasing the longevity of a singleton so that it can outlive other single-
tons, and simply not deallocating the singleton (i.e., relying on the operating system to free
all allocated memory and close any file handles). If you find yourself needing to implement
one of these solutions, I refer you to this book for the details (Alexandrescu, 2001).

   Another issue to be aware of when working with singletons is that processes have
their own address space, so each process that loads a given library will have its own
instances of any static variables. Also, static variables defined within plugins that are
opened at run time with dlopen may not share the same memory address as other plugins
or even the main program, so the use of singletons in plugins can be unsafe.

Singletons and thread safety
The Cþþ98 and Cþþ03 standards did not specify how code should behave in a multi-
threaded environment. In particular, the initialization of static variables was not thread-
safe. Under these early versions of the standard, if two threads happened to call our
GetInstance() method at the same time, then the instance could be constructed twice, or
it could be used by one thread before it had been fully initialized by the other thread.
    This issue was addressed in the Cþþ11 standard, which states that only one thread
can enter the initialization of a static and that the compiler must not introduce any
deadlocks around its initialization. So the previous implementation of GetInstance() is
thread-safe as of Cþþ11.
    In the first edition of this book, I spent several pages describing thread-safe solutions
for Singletons in Cþþ03 by introducing mutex locking and considering optimizations
such as the Double Check Locking Pattern. However, at this point, Cþþ11 is well-
established, and if you want to write thread-safe code in general, you should be using
at least Cþþ11. In this edition of the book, I will therefore simply state that if you want to
have thread-safe Singletons, you should use a Cþþ11 (or later) compiler.

 TIP: If you use Singletons, you should use a Cþþ11 (or later) compiler for thread safety.

Singleton versus dependency injection
Dependency injection is a technique in which an object is passed into a class (injected),
rather than having the class create and store the object itself. Martin Fowler coined the
term in 2004 as a more specific form of the Inversion of Control concept. As a simple
example, consider this class that depends upon a database object:

   class MyClass
   {
   public:
       MyClass() :
           mDatabase(new Database("mydb", "localhost", "user", "pass"))
       {}

   private:
       Database *mDatabase;
   };

    The problem with this approach is that if the Database constructor is changed, or if
someone changes the password for the account called user in the live database, then you
will have to change MyClass to fix the problem. Also, it’s difficult to unit test this object
because the database implementation is embedded within it. And from an efficiency
point of view, every instance of MyClass will create a new Database instance. As an
alternative, you can use dependency injection to pass a preconfigured Database object
into MyClass, as:

    class MyClass
    {
    public:
        MyClass(std::shared_ptr<Database> db) :
            mDatabase(db)
        {}

    private:
        std::shared_ptr<Database> mDatabase;
    };

   In this way, MyClass no longer needs to know how to create a Database instance.
Instead, it gets passed an already constructed and configured Database object for it to
use. I’ve changed the raw pointer to a shared pointer so that the dependency can be
based on an abstract interface instead of a concrete object, and because MyClass no
longer controls the lifetime of the database object. For example, if we have a MyDatabase
concrete subclass of the abstract Database type, then the MyClass object can be created as:

   MyClass(std::make_shared<MyDatabase>());

   Or, even better, you can use a Factory Method (which I’ll discuss later in this chapter)
to create the instance, such as:

    MyClass(DatabaseFactory::Create());

     This example demonstrates constructor injection (i.e., passing the dependent object
via the constructor), but you could just as easily pass in dependencies via a setter
member function.
     Dependency injection can be viewed as a way to avoid the proliferation of singletons
by encouraging interfaces that accept the single instance as an input rather than
requesting it internally via a GetInstance() method. This also enables better unit testing
because the dependencies of an object can be substituted with stub or mock versions for
the purposes of testing (e.g., by passing in a TestDatabase instance within your test code).
I’ll discuss this further in the Testing chapter.

    TIP: Dependency injection reduces coupling between objects and makes it easier to support
    unit testing.

Singleton versus Monostate
Most of the problems that are associated with the Singleton pattern derive from the fact that
it’s designed to hold and control access to global state. However, if you don’t need to control
when the state is initialized, or if you don’t need to store state in the singleton object itself,
then there are other techniques you can use, such as the Monostate design pattern.
    The Monostate pattern allows multiple instances of a class to be created in which all
of those instances use the same static data. For instance, here’s a simple case of the
Monostate pattern:

     // monostate.h
     class Monostate
     {
     public:
         int GetTheAnswer() const { return sAnswer; }

     private:
         static int sAnswer;
     };

     // monostate.cpp
     int Monostate::sAnswer = 42;

    In this example, you can create multiple instances of the Monostate class, but all calls
to the GetTheAnswer() method will return the same result, because all instances share the
same static variable sAnswer. You could also hide the declaration of the static variable
from the header completely just by declaring it as a file-scope static variable in mono-
state.cpp instead of a private class static variable. Static members do not contribute to
the per instance size of a class, so doing this will have no physical impact on the API
other than to hide implementation details from the header.
    Some benefits of the Monostate pattern are that it:
n    Allows multiple instances to be created.
n    Offers transparent usage, because no special GetInstance() method is needed.
n    Exhibits well-defined creation and destruction semantics, by using static variables.
   As Robert C. Martin notes, Singleton enforces the structure of singularity by allowing
only one instance to be created, whereas Monostate enforces the behavior of singularity
by sharing the same data for all instances (Martin, 2002).

 TIP: Consider using Monostate instead of Singleton if you don’t need lazy initialization of
 global data or if you want the singular nature of the class to be transparent.

   As a further real-world example, the Second Life source code uses the Monostate
pattern for its LLWeb class. This example uses a version of Monostate in which all member
functions are declared static:

   class LLWeb
   {
   public:
       static void InitClass();

        /// Load the given url in the user's preferred web browser
        static void LoadURL(const std::string &url);

        /// Load the given url in the Second Life internal web browser
        static void LoadURLInternal(const std::string &url);

        /// Load the given url in the operating system's web browser
        static void LoadURLExternal(const std::string &url);

        /// Returns escaped url (eg, " " to "%20")
        static std::string EscapeURL(const std::string &url);
   };

   In this case, LLWeb is simply a manager class that provides a single access point to the
functionality for opening Web pages. The actual Web browser functionality itself is
implemented in other classes. The LLWeb class does not hold any state itself, although, of
course, internally any of the static methods could access static variables. Note that
another way to implement this would be to create an LLWeb namespace with free func-
tions within that namespace.
   One of the drawbacks with this static method version of Monostate is that you cannot
subclass any of the static methods, because static member functions cannot be virtual.
Also, because you no longer instantiate the class, you cannot write a constructor or
destructor to perform any initialization or cleanup. This is necessary in this case because
LLWeb accesses dynamically allocated global state instead of relying on static variables
that are initialized by the compiler. The creator of LLWeb got around this limitation by
introducing an initClass() static method that requires a client program to initialize the
class explicitly. A better design may have been to hide this call within the .cpp file and
invoke it lazily from each of the public static methods. However, in that case, the same
thread safety concerns I raised earlier would be applicable.

Singleton versus session state
In a recent retrospective interview, the authors of the original design patterns book
stated that the only pattern they would consider removing from the original list is
Singleton. This is because it’s essentially a way to store global data and tends to be an
indicator of poor design (Gamma et al., 2009).
    Therefore, as a final note on the topic of singletons, I urge you to really think about
whether a singleton is the correct pattern for your needs. It’s often easy to think that you
will only ever need a single instance of a given class. However, requirements change and
code evolves, and in the future you may find that you need to support multiple instances
of the class.
    For example, consider that you’re writing a simple text editor. You use a singleton to
hold the current text style (e.g., bold, italics, underlined), because the user can only ever
have one style active at one time. However, this restriction is valid only because of the
initial assumption that the program can edit only one document at a time. In a later
version of the program, you are asked to add support for multiple documents, each with
their own current text style. Now you have to refactor your code to remove the singleton.
Ultimately, singletons should be used only to model objects that are truly singular in
their nature. For example, there is only one system clipboard, so it may still be
reasonable to model the clipboard for the text editor as a singleton.
    Often, it’s useful to think about introducing a session or execution context object into
your system early on. This is a single instance that holds all of the state for your code,
rather than representing that state with multiple singletons. For example, in the text
editor example, you might introduce a Document object. This will have accessors for things
such as the current text style, but those objects do not have to be enforced as singletons.
They are just plain classes that can be accessed from the Document class as document-
>GetTextStyle(). You can start off with a single Document instance, accessible by a call
such as Document::GetCurrent(), for instance. You might even implement Document as a
singleton to begin with. However, if you later need to add support for multiple contexts
(i.e., multiple documents), then your code is in a much healthier state to support this
because you have only one singleton to refactor instead of dozens. J.B. Rainsberger refers
to this as a Toolbox Singleton, in which the application becomes the singleton, not the
individual classes (Rainsberger, 2001).

 TIP: There are several alternatives to the Singleton pattern, including dependency injection,
 the Monostate pattern, and the use of a session context.

Factory Methods
A Factory Method is a creational design pattern that allows you to create objects without
having to specify the specific Cþþ type of the object to create. In essence, a Factory
Method is a generalization of a constructor. Constructors in Cþþ have several limita-
tions, such as:
1. No return result. You cannot return a result from a constructor. This means that
   you can’t signal an error during the initialization of an object by returning a
   nullptr, for instance (although you can signal an error by throwing an exception
   within a constructor).
2. Constrained naming. A constructor is easily distinguished because it is constrained
   to have the same name as the class in which it lives. However, this also limits its
   flexibility. For example, you cannot have two constructors that both take a single
   integer argument.
3. Statically bound creation. When constructing an object, you must specify the
   name of a concrete class that’s known at compile time (e.g., you might write: Foo
   *f ¼ new Foo; where Foo is a specific type that must be known by the compiler).
   There’s no concept of dynamic binding at run time for constructors in Cþþ.
4. No virtual constructors. You can’t declare a virtual constructor in Cþþ. As I have
   just noted, you must specify the exact type of the object to be constructed at
   compile time. The compiler therefore allocates the memory for that specific type
   and then calls the default constructor for any base classes (unless you explicitly
   specify a nondefault constructor in the initialization list). It then calls the
   constructor for the specific type itself. This is also why you can’t call virtual
   methods from the constructor and expect them to call the derived override
   (because the derived class hasn’t been initialized yet).
   In contrast, Factory Methods circumvent all these limitations. At a basic level, a
Factory Method is simply a normal method call that can return an instance of a class.
However, they are often used in combination with inheritance, in which a derived class
can override the Factory Method and return an instance of that derived class. It’s also
very common to implement factories using abstract base classes (ABCs) (DeLoura, 2001).
So before I dive deeper into using Factory Methods, let’s recap what ABCs are, as well as
the related concept of interfaces.

Abstract base classes and interfaces
An ABC is a class that contains one or more pure virtual member functions. Such a class
is not concrete and therefore cannot be instantiated using the new operator. Instead, it’s
used as a base class, in which derived classes can provide an implementation for each of
the pure virtual methods.

   There is also a related term called interface. Languages such as Java have an actual
keyword called interface, but the term is less well-defined in the context of Cþþ. Some
Cþþ developers consider it to be a synonym for ABC. However, I believe it’s generally
accepted that an interface is a more specific version of an abstract class that only con-
tains pure virtual functions (i.e., it has no implementation code or state), whereas the
term ABC refers more generally to a class that can have one or more pure virtual
functions but also nonpure virtual functions, implementation code, or data members.
For example, consider the code:

  // renderer.h
  #include <string>

  class IRenderer
  {
  public:
      virtual ~IRenderer() = default;
      virtual bool LoadScene(const std::string &filename) = 0;
      virtual void SetViewportSize(int w, int h) = 0;
      virtual void SetCameraPos(double x, double y, double z) = 0;
      virtual void SetLookAt(double x, double y, double z) = 0;
      virtual void Render() = 0;
  };

    This defines an interface to describe an extremely simple 3D graphics renderer.
I’ve named the class with an I prefix to indicate that it’s an interface. An alternative
naming convention might be to use a suffix such as -able, -ible, or -ing (e.g., Renderable).
The ¼ 0 suffix on the methods declares them to be pure virtual methods, meaning that
they must be overridden in a derived class for that class to be concrete. The IRenderer
class is therefore an interface because it contains only pure virtual functions, other than
the defaulted virtual destructor.
    Note that it’s not strictly true to say that pure virtual methods provide no imple-
mentation. You can provide a default implementation for pure virtual methods in your
.cpp file. For example, you could provide an implementation for SetViewportSize() in
renderer.cpp, and then a derived class would be able to call IRenderer::SetViewportSize(),
although it would still have to override the method explicitly as well. By our previous
definition, we would then prefer to call this an ABC class rather than an interface because
it provides an implementation for one or more of the virtual functions.
    An ABC or interface is useful to describe abstract units of behaviors that can be shared
by multiple classes. They specify a contract to which all concrete derived classes must
conform. You might use an interface if you wanted to define only a set of rules for an
object to follow without defining any specific behavior. Alternatively, you would use an
ABC if you also wanted to provide a default implementation for those rules.

   As with any class that has one or more virtual methods, you should always declare the
destructor of an ABC or interface to be virtual. This code illustrates why this is important:

  class IRenderer
  {
  public:
      // no virtual destructor declared
      virtual void Render() = 0;
  };

  class RayTracer : public IRenderer
  {
  public:
      RayTracer();
      ~RayTracer();
      void Render(); // provide implementation for ABC method
  };

  int main(int, char **)
  {
      IRenderer *r = new RayTracer();
      // delete calls IRenderer::~IRenderer, not RayTraver::~RayTracer
      delete r;
  }

Simple factory example
Now that I’ve reviewed the concepts of ABCs and interfaces, let’s use them to provide a
simple Factory Method. I’ll continue with the previous renderer.h example and start by
declaring the factory for objects of type IRenderer:

  // rendererfactory.h
  #include "renderer.h"
  #include <string>

  class RendererFactory
  {
  public:
      IRenderer *CreateRenderer(const std::string &type);
  };

   That’s all there is to declaring a Factory Method: it’s just a normal method that can
return an instance of an object. Note that this method cannot return an instance of the
specific type IRenderer because that’s an abstract class and cannot be instantiated.
However, it can return instances of derived classes. Also, you can use the string argument
to CreateRenderer() to specify which derived type you want to create.
   Let’s assume that you’ve implemented three concrete derived classes of IRenderer:
OpenGLRenderer, DirectXRenderer, and MesaRenderer. Let’s further specify that you don’t

want users of your API to have any knowledge of the existence of these types: they must
be completely hidden behind the API. Based on these conditions, you can provide an
implementation of our Factory Method as:

   // rendererfactory.cpp
   #include "rendererfactory.h"
   #include "directxrenderer.h"
   #include "mesarenderer.h"
   #include "openglrenderer.h"

   IRenderer *RendererFactory::CreateRenderer(const std::string &type)
   {
       if (type == "opengl") {
           return new OpenGLRenderer;
       }

        if (type == "directx") {
            return new DirectXRenderer;
        }

        if (type == "mesa") {
            return new MesaRenderer;
        }

        return nullptr;
   }

    This Factory Method can therefore return any of the three derived classes of IRenderer,
depending upon the type string that the client passes in. This lets users decide which
derived class to create at run time, not compile time, as a normal constructor requires you
to do. This is an enormous advantage because it means that you can create different classes
based upon user input, or upon the contents of a configuration file that’s read at run time.
    Also, note that the header files for the various concrete derived classes are included
only in the factory’s .cpp file. They do not appear in the rendererfactory.h public header.
In effect, these are private header files and do not need to be distributed with your API.
As such, users can never see the private details of your different renderers, and they can’t
ever see the specific types used to implement these different renderers. Users only ever
specify a renderer via a string value, or an enum if you expect the set of renderers to be
statically defined at compile time.

 TIP: Use Factory Methods to provide more powerful class construction semantics and to hide
 subclass details.

   This example demonstrates a perfectly acceptable Factory Method. However, one
potential drawback is that it contains hardcoded knowledge of the available derived
classes. If you add a new renderer to the system, you must edit rendererfactory.cpp. This
is not terribly burdensome, and most important, it will not affect the public API.
However, it does mean that you can’t add support for new derived classes at run time.
More specifically, it means that your users can’t add new renderers to the system. I will
address these concerns by presenting an extensible object factory.

Extensible factory example
To decouple the concrete derived classes from the Factory Method and allow new derived
classes to be added at run time, you can update the factory class to maintain a map that
associates type names to object creation callbacks (Alexandrescu, 2001). You can then allow
new derived classes to be registered and unregistered using a couple of new method calls.
The ability to register new classes at run time allows this form of the Factory Method pattern
to be used to create extensible plugin interfaces for your API, as I will detail in Chapter 12.
   One further issue to note is that the factory object must now hold state. As such, it
would be best to enforce that only one factory object is ever created. This is why most
factory objects are also singletons. In the interests of simplicity, however, I will use static
methods and variables in our example here. Putting all of these points together, here’s
what our new object factory might look like:

   // rendererfactory.h
   #include "renderer.h"
   #include <functional>
   #include <map>
   #include <string>

   class RendererFactory
   {
   public:
       using CreateCallback = std::function<IRenderer *()>;

       static void RegisterRenderer(const std::string &type,
                                    CreateCallback cb);
       static void UnregisterRenderer(const std::string &type);

       static IRenderer *CreateRenderer(const std::string &type);

   private:
       using CallbackMap = std::map<std::string, CreateCallback>;
       static CallbackMap mRenderers;
   };

   For completeness, the associated .cpp file might look like:

      #include "rendererfactory.h"
      #include <iostream>

      // instantiate the static variable in RendererFactory
      RendererFactory::CallbackMap RendererFactory::mRenderers;

      void RendererFactory::RegisterRenderer(const std::string &type,
                                             CreateCallback cb)
      {
          mRenderers[type] = cb;
      }

      void RendererFactory::UnregisterRenderer(const std::string &type)
      {
          mRenderers.erase(type);
      }

      IRenderer *RendererFactory::CreateRenderer(const std::string &type)
      {
          CallbackMap::iterator it = mRenderers.find(type);
          if (it != mRenderers.end()) {
              // call the creation callback to construct this derived type
              return (it->second)();
          }

            return nullptr;
      }

    A user of your API can now register (and unregister) new renderers in your system. The
compiler will ensure that the user’s new renderer conforms to your IRenderer interface
(i.e., that it provides an implementation for all of the pure virtual methods in IRenderer).
To illustrate this, the subsequent code shows how users could define their own renderer,
register it with the object factory, then ask the factory to create an instance of it:
   class UserRenderer : public IRenderer
   {
   public:
       ~UserRenderer() = default;
       bool LoadScene(const std::string &filename) { return true; }
       void SetViewportSize(int w, int h) {}
       void SetCameraPos(double x, double y, double z) {}
       void SetLookAt(double x, double y, double z) {}
       void Render() { std::cout << "User Render" << std::endl; }
       static IRenderer *Create() { return new UserRenderer; }
   };

   int main(int, char **)
   {
       // register a new renderer
       RendererFactory::RegisterRenderer("user", UserRenderer::Create);

           // create an instance of our new renderer
           IRenderer *r = RendererFactory::CreateRenderer("user");
           r->Render();
           delete r;

           return 0;
   }

    One point worth noting here is that I added a Create() function to the UserRenderer
class. This is because the register method of the factory needs to take a callback that
returns an object. This callback doesn’t have to be part of the IRenderer class (it could be
a free function, for example). However, adding it to the IRenderer class is a good idea to
keep all of the related functionality in the same place.
    Note that in the previous extensible factory example, a renderer callback has to be
visible to the RegisterRenderer() function at run time. However, this doesn’t mean that
you have to expose the built-in renderers of your API. These can still be hidden either by
registering them within your API initialization routine or by using a hybrid of the simple
factory and the extensible factory, in which the Factory Method first checks the type
string against a few built-in names, and if none of those match it, then it checks for any
names that have been registered by the user. This hybrid approach has the potentially
desirable behavior that users cannot override your built-in classes.
    I’ll conclude the discussion of the Factory Method pattern by looking at a real-world
example in a large Cþþ API. The Visualization ToolKit (VTK) is an open source package
for manipulating and displaying scientific data (see https://vtk.org/). The base vtkObject
has a protected constructor, so it cannot be created new or on the stack. The library then
provides a vtkObjectFactory to create VTK objects. This contains a static method called
CreateInstance() that creates an object from a list of registered vtkObjectFactory sub-
classes. Those subclasses override a CreateObject() protected method to implement the
logic to create the object instance. The first time CreateInstance() is called, all shared
libraries are loaded into the current process. The key functions of the vtkObjectFactory
class are:

   class vtkObjectFactory : public vtkObject
   {
   public:
       static vtkObject *CreateInstance(const char *vtkclassname, bool
   isAbstract = false);
       static void CreateAllInstance(const char *vtkclassname,
   vtkCollection *retList);
       static void RegisterFactory(vtkObjectFactory *);
       static void UnRegisterFactory(vtkObjectFactory *);
       static void UnRegisterAllFactories();
       static vtkObjectFactoryCollection *GetRegisteredFactories();
       ...

   protected:
       virtual vtkObject *CreateObject(const char *vtkclassname);
   };

API wrapping patterns
Writing a wrapper interface that sits on top of another set of classes is a relatively
common API design task. For example, perhaps you’re working with a large legacy code

base, and rather than rearchitecting all of that code you decide to design a new cleaner
API that hides the underlying legacy code (Feathers, 2004). Or perhaps you have written
a Cþþ API and need to expose a plain C interface for certain clients. Or perhaps you have
a third-party library dependency that you want your clients to be able to access, but you
don’t want to expose that library directly to them.
   The downside of creating a wrapper API is the potential performance hit you may
experience owing to the extra level of indirection, and the overhead of any extra state
that needs to be stored at the wrapper level. However, this is often worth the cost to
expose a higher-quality or more focused API, such as in the cases mentioned earlier.
   There are several structural design patterns that deal with the task of wrapping one
interface on top of another. I will describe three of these patterns in the following sec-
tions. These are, in increasing deviation between the wrapper layer and the original
interface: Proxy, Adapter, and Façade.

The Proxy pattern
The Proxy design pattern provides a one-to-one forwarding interface to another class.
Calling FunctionA() in the proxy class will cause it to call FunctionA() in the original class
(Fig. 3.3). That is, the proxy class and the original class have the same interface. This can
be thought of as a single-component wrapper, to use the terminology of Lakos (1996):
that is, a single class in the proxy API maps to a single class in the original API.
    This pattern is often implemented by making the proxy class store a copy of, or more
likely a pointer to, the original class. Then the methods of the proxy class simply redirect
to the method with the same name in the original object. A downside of this technique is
the need to reexpose functions in the original object, a process that essentially equates to
code duplication. This approach therefore requires diligence to maintain the integrity of
the proxy interface when making changes to the original object. The following code
provides a simple example of this technique:

   class Proxy
   {
   public:
       Proxy() :
           mOrig(new Original)
       {}

        ~Proxy()
        {
            delete mOrig;
        }

        bool DoSomething(int value)
        {
            return mOrig->DoSomething(value);
        }

   private:
       Original *mOrig;
   };

           Client                                 Proxy                               RealObject

                                         + FunctionA() : boolean                + FunctionA() : boolean
                                         + FunctionB() : boolean                + FunctionB() : boolean

                          FIGURE 3.3 UML diagram of the Proxy design pattern.

   An alternative solution is to augment this approach by using an abstract interface
that’s shared by both the proxy and original APIs. This allows the proxy object to be
interchangeable with the original one, which can often be desirable. However, this
approach requires you to be able to modify the original API if it doesn’t already derive
from an abstract interface. The code shown here demonstrates this approach:
  class IOriginal
  {
  public:
      virtual bool DoSomething(int value) = 0;
  };

  class Original : public IOriginal
  {
  public:
      bool DoSomething(int value);
  };

  class Proxy : public IOriginal
  {
  public:
      Proxy() :
          mOrig(new Original)
      {}

      ~Proxy()
      {
          delete mOrig;
      }

      bool DoSomething(int value)
      {
          return mOrig->DoSomething(value);
      }

  private:
      Original *mOrig;
  };

 TIP: A Proxy provides an interface that forwards function calls to another interface of the
 same form.

    A Proxy pattern is useful to modify the behavior of the Original class while still
preserving its interface. This is particularly useful if the Original class is in a third-party
library and hence not easily modifiable directly. Some use cases for the Proxy pattern
include:
1. Implement lazy instantiation of the Original object. In this case, the Original ob-
   ject is not actually instantiated until a method call is invoked. This can be useful if
   instantiating the Original object is a heavyweight operation that you wish to defer
   until absolutely necessary.
2. Implement access control to the Original object. For example, you may wish to
   insert a permissions layer between the Proxy and the Original objects to ensure
   that users can call only certain methods on the Original object if they have the
   appropriate permission.
3. Support debug or dry run modes. This lets you insert debugging statements into
   the Proxy methods to log all calls to the Original object. Or you can stop the for-
   warding to certain Original methods with a flag to let you call the Proxy in a dry
   run mode, such as to turn off writing the object’s state to disk.
4. Make the Original class be thread-safe. This can be done by adding mutex locking
   to the relevant methods that are not thread-safe. Although this may not be the
   most efficient way to make the underlying class thread-safe, it’s a useful stopgap if
   you cannot modify Original.
5. Support resource sharing. You could have multiple Proxy objects share the same
   underlying Original class. For example, this could be used to implement reference
   counting or copy-on-write semantics. This case is actually another design pattern,
   called the Flyweight pattern, in which multiple objects share the same underlying
   data to minimize memory footprint.
6. Protect against future changes in the Original class. In this case, you anticipate
   that a dependent library will change in the future, so you create a Proxy wrapper
   around that API that directly mimics the current behavior. When the library
   changes in the future, you can preserve the old interface via your Proxy object and
   simply change its underlying implementation to use the new library methods. At
   that point, you will no longer have a Proxy object, but an Adapter, which is a nice
   segue to our next pattern.

The Adapter pattern
The Adapter design pattern translates the interface for one class into a compatible but
different interface (Fig. 3.4). This is therefore similar to the Proxy pattern in that it’s a
single-component wrapper. However, the interface for the Adapter class and the Original
class may be different.
    This pattern is useful to be able to expose a different interface for an existing API to
allow it to work better with other code. As in the case for the Proxy pattern, the two
interfaces in question could come from different libraries. For example, consider a

        Client                                 Adapter                                RealObject

                                       + FunctionA() : boolean                  + AnotherFunc1() : integer
                                       + FunctionB() : boolean                  + AnotherFunc2() : integer

                        FIGURE 3.4 UML diagram of the Adapter design pattern.

geometry package that lets you define a series of primitive shapes. The parameters for
certain methods may be in a different order from those that you use in your API, or they
may be specified in a different coordinate system, or using a different convention such as
(center, size) versus (bottom-left, top-right), or the method names may not follow your
API’s naming convention. You could therefore use an Adapter class to convert this
interface into a compatible form for your API. For example,

   class RectangleAdapter
   {
   public:
       RectangleAdapter() :
           mRect(new Rectangle)
       {}

        ~RectangleAdapter()
        {
            delete mRect;
        }

        void Set(float x1, float y1, float x2, float y2)
        {
            float w = x2 - x1;
            float h = y2 - y1;
            float cx = w / 2.0f + x1;
            float cy = h / 2.0f + y1;
            mRect->setDimensions(cx, cy, w, h);
        }

   private:
       Rectange *mRect;
   };

    In this example, the RectangleAdapter uses a different method name and calling
conventions to set the dimensions of the rectangle compared with the underlying
Rectangle class. The functionality is the same in both cases. You’re just exposing a
different interface to allow you to work with the class more easily.

 TIP: An Adapter translates one interface into a compatible but different interface.

   It should be noted that Adapters can be implemented using composition (as in
the previous example) or inheritance. These two flavors are often referred to as
object adapters or class adapters, respectively. In the inheritance case, RectangleAdapter
would derive from the Rectangle base class. This could be done using public inheri-
tance if you wanted to also expose the interface of Rectangle in your adapter API,
although more likely you would use private inheritance so that only your new interface
is made public.
   Some benefits of the Adapter pattern for API design include:
1. Enforce consistency across your API. As I discussed in the previous chapter, con-
   sistency is an important quality of good APIs. Using an Adapter pattern, you can
   collate multiple disparate classes, all of which have different interface styles, and
   provide a consistent interface to all of these. The result is that your API is more
   uniform and therefore easier to use.
2. Wrap a dependent library of your API. For example, your API may provide the
   ability to load a PNG image. You want to use the libpng library to implement
   this functionality, but you don’t want to expose the libpng calls directly to the
   users of your API. This could be because you want to present a consistent and
   uniform API or because you want to protect against potential future API changes
   in libpng.
3. Transform data types. For example, consider that you have an API, MapPlot, that
   lets you plot geographic coordinates on a 2D map. MapPlot accepts only latitude
   and longitude pairs (using the WGS84 datum), specified as two double parameters.
   However, your API has a GeoCoordinate type that can represent coordinates in
   several coordinate systems, such as Universal Transverse Mercator or Lambert
   Conformal Conic. You could write an adapter that accepts your GeoCoordinate ob-
   ject as a parameter, converts this to geodetic coordinates (latitude, longitude) if
   necessary, and passes the two doubles to the MapPlot API.
4. Provide interoperability between different languages. For example, perhaps
   you’ve written an Objective-C API and you want to map the Objective-C classes
   and methods to Cþþ versions. Or perhaps you’ve written a plain C API and you
   want to create Adapter classes that wrap the C calls into Cþþ classes. It’s open to
   debate whether this latter case can be strictly considered an Adapter pattern
   because design patterns are primarily concerned with object-oriented systems, but
   if you allow some flexibility in your interpretation of the term then you’ll see that
   the concept is the same. The following code gives an example of a Cþþ adapter for
   a plain C API. (I’ll discuss the differences between C and Cþþ APIs in more detail
   in the next chapter on Styles.)

    class CppAdapter
    {
    public:
        CppAdapter()
        {
            mHandle = create_object();
        }

        ~CppAdapter()
        {
            destroy_object(mHandle);
        }

        void DoSomething(int value)
        {
            object_do_something(mHandle, value);
        }

    private:
        CHandle *mHandle;
    };

The Façade pattern
The Façade design pattern presents a simplified interface for a larger collection of
classes. In effect, it defines a higher-level interface that makes the underlying subsystem
easier to use (Fig. 3.5). To use Lakos’ categorization, the Façade pattern is an example of
a multicomponent wrapper (Lakos, 1996). Façade is therefore different from Adapter
because Façade simplifies a class structure whereas Adapter maintains the same class
structure.
    As your API grows, so can the complexity of using that interface. The Façade pattern is
a way to structure your API into subsystems to reduce this complexity and in turn make
the API easier to use for most of your clients. A Façade might provide an improved
interface while allowing access to the underlying subsystems. This is the same as the
concept of convenience APIs that I described in the previous chapter, in which addi-
tional classes are added to provide aggregated functionality that make simple tasks easy.
Alternatively, a Façade might completely decouple the underlying subsystems from the
public interface so that these are no longer accessible. This is often called an encapsu-
lating façade.

 TIP: A Façade provides a simplified interface to a collection of other classes. In an encapsu-
 lating façade, the underlying classes are not accessible.

                      Client                              Façade

                                                  + FunctionA() : boolean
                                                  + FunctionB() : boolean

         Subsystem

                     Object1                                                Object4

                                   Object2                       Object3

                          FIGURE 3.5 UML diagram of the Façade design pattern.

   Let’s look at an example to illustrate this pattern. Let’s assume that you’re on holiday
and have checked into a hotel. You decide that you want to have dinner and then go to
watch a show. To do so, you’ll have to call a restaurant to make a dinner reservation, call
the theater to book seats, and perhaps also arrange a taxi to pick you up from your hotel.
You could express this in Cþþ as three separate objects with which you have to interact:
   class Taxi
   {
   public:
       bool BookTaxi(int npeople, time_t pickup_time);
   };

   class Restaurant
   {
   public:
       bool ReserveTable(int npeople, time_t arrival_time);
   };

   class Theater
   {
   public:
       time_t GetShowTime();
       bool ReserveSeats(int npeople, int tier);
   };

   However, let’s assume that you’re staying in a high-end hotel and they have a helpful
concierge who can assist you with all of this. In fact, the concierge will be able to find out
the time of the show and then, using his local knowledge of the city, work out an

appropriate time for your dinner and the best time to order your taxi. Translating this
into terms of our Cþþ design, you now need only to interact with a single object with a
far simpler interface:
  class ConciergeFacade
  {
  public:
      time_t BookShow(int npeople, bool andRestaurant, bool andTaxi);
  };

   There are various useful applications of the Façade pattern in terms of API design:
1. Hide legacy code. Often you have to deal with old, decayed, legacy systems that
   are brittle to work with and no longer offer a coherent object model. In these
   cases, it can be easier to create a new set of well-designed APIs that sit on top of
   the old code. Then all new code can use these new APIs. Once all existing clients
   have been updated to the new APIs, the legacy code can be completely hidden
   behind the new façade (making it an encapsulating façade).
2. Create convenience APIs. As I discussed in the previous chapter, there is often a
   tension between providing general, flexible routines that provide more power
   versus simple easy-to-use routines that make the common use cases easy. A
   Façade is a way to address this tension by allowing both to coexist. In essence, a
   convenience API is a Façade. I used the example earlier of the OpenGL library,
   which provides low-level base routines, and the GLU library, which provides
   higher-level and easier-to-use routines that are built on top of the GL library.
3. Support reduced- or alternate-functionality APIs. By abstracting away the access to
   the underlying subsystems, it becomes possible to replace certain subsystems without
   affecting your client’s code. This could be used to swap in stub subsystems to support
   demonstration or test versions of your API. It could also allow swapping in different
   functionality, such as using a different 3D rendering engine for a game or using a
   different image reading library. As a real-world example, the Second Life viewer can be
   built against the proprietary KDU JPEG-2000 decoder library. However, the open
   source version of the viewer is built against the slower OpenJPEG library.

Observer pattern
It’s very common for objects to call methods in other objects. After all, achieving any
nontrivial task normally requires several objects collaborating. However, to do this, an
object A must know about the existence and interface of an object B to call methods on
it. The simplest approach to doing this is for A.cpp to include B.h and then to call
methods on that class directly. However, this introduces a compile-time dependency
between A and B, forcing the classes to become tightly coupled. As a result, the generality
of class A is reduced because it cannot be reused by another system without also pulling
in class B. Furthermore, if class A also calls classes C and D, then changes to class A could

affect all three of these tightly coupled classes. Additionally, this compile-time coupling
means that users can’t dynamically add new dependencies to the system at run time.

 TIP: An Observer lets you decouple components and avoid cyclic dependencies.

   I will illustrate these problems, and how the Observer pattern helps, with reference to
the popular ModeleVieweController (MVC) architecture.

ModeleVieweController
The MVC architectural pattern requires the isolation of business logic (the Model) from
the user interface (the View), with the Controller receiving user input and coordinating
the other two. MVC separation supports the modularization of an application’s function
and offers several benefits:
1. Segregation of Model and View components makes it possible to implement
   several user interfaces that reuse the common business logic core.
2. Duplication of low-level Model code is eliminated across multiple UI
   implementations.
3. Decoupling of Model and View code results in an improved ability to write unit
   tests for the core business logic code.
4. Modularity of components allows core logic developers and GUI developers to
   work simultaneously without affecting the other.
   The MVC model was first described in 1987 by Steve Burbeck and Trygve Reenskaug
at Xerox PARC and it remains a popular architectural pattern in applications and tool kits
today. For example, modern UI tool kits such as Qt from The Qt Company, Apple’s
Cocoa, Java Swing, and Microsoft’s Foundation Class library were all inspired by MVC.
Taking the example of a single checkbox button, the current on/off state of the button is
stored in the Model, the View draws the current state of the button on the screen, and the
Controller updates the Model state and View display when the user clicks on the button.

 TIP: The MVC architectural pattern promotes the separation of core business logic, or the
 Model, from the user interface, or View. It also isolates the Controller logic that effects changes
 in the Model and updates the View.

   The implication of MVC separation on code dependency means that View code can
call Model code (to discover the latest state and update the UI), but the opposite is not
true: Model code should have no compile-time knowledge of View code (because it ties
the Model to a single View). Fig. 3.6 illustrates this dependency graph.
   In a simple application, the Controller can effect changes to the Model based upon
user input and communicate those changes to the View so that the UI can be updated.
However, in real-world applications the View will normally also need to update to reflect
additional changes to the underlying Model. This is necessary because changing one
aspect of the Model may cause it to update other dependent Model state. This requires
Model code to inform the View layer when state changes happen. However, as I’ve
already stated, the Model code cannot statically bind and call the View code. This is
where observers come in.
   The Observer pattern is a specific instance of the Publish/Subscribe, or pub/sub,
paradigm. These techniques define a one-to-many dependency between objects such
that a publisher object can notify all subscribed objects of any state changes without
directly depending upon them. The Observer pattern is therefore an important tech-
nique in terms of API design because it can help you to reduce coupling and increase
code reuse.

Implementing the Observer pattern
The typical way to implement the Observer pattern is to introduce two concepts: the
subject and the observer (also referred to as the publisher and subscriber). One or more
observers register interest in the subject, and then the subject notifies all registered
observers of any state changes. This is illustrated in Fig. 3.7.

                              Controller                        View

                                                Model

FIGURE 3.6 An overview of dependencies in the ModeleVieweController model. Both the Controller and the
View depend upon the Model, but Model code has no dependency on Controller code or View code.
             << interface >>                                                << interface >>
                 ISubject                                                     IObserver

                                                      observerList
       + Subscript() : void                                           + Update() : void
       + Unsubscribe() : void
       + Notify() : void                                       0..*

                 Subject                                                       Observer

                                       subjectState
       + Subscript() : void                                           + Update() : void
       + Unsubscribe() : void          1                              ? GetSubjectState() : State
       + Notify() : void
       + GetState() : State

                        FIGURE 3.7 A UML representation of the Observer pattern.

   This can be implemented using base classes to specify the abstract interface for both
cases:

  #include <map>
  #include <vector>

  enum class MessageType {
      Add,
      Remove
  };

  class IObserver
  {
  public:
      virtual ~IObserver() = default;
      virtual void Update(MessageType message) = 0;
  };

  class ISubject
  {
  public:
      ISubject();
      virtual ~ISubject();
      virtual void Subscribe(MessageType message, IObserver *observer);
      virtual void Unsubscribe(MessageType message, IObserver *observer);
      virtual void Notify(MessageType message);

  private:
      using ObserverList = std::vector<IObserver *>;
      using ObserverMap = std::map<MessageType, ObserverList>;
      ObserverMap mObservers;
  };

   In this design, I’ve added support for the subject to be able to register and emit
notifications for multiple different message types. This allows observers to subscribe
only to the specific messages in which they’re interested. For example, a subject that
represents a stack of elements might wish to send out separate notifications when ele-
ments are added to or removed from that stack. Using these interfaces, you can define a
minimal concrete subject class as:
   #include "observer.h"

   class MySubject : public ISubject
   {
   };

   Finally, you can create observer objects simply by inheriting from the IObserver
interface and implementing the Update() method. The following code demonstrates
putting all these concepts together:

   #include "subject.h"
   #include <iostream>

   class MyObserver : public IObserver
   {
   public:
       MyObserver(const std::string &str) :
           mName(str)
       {}

       void Update(MessageType message)
       {
           std::cout << mName << " received message\n";
       }

   private:
       std::string mName;
   };

   int main(int, char **)
   {
       MyObserver observer1("observer1");
       MyObserver observer2("observer2");
       MyObserver observer3("observer3");
       MySubject subject;

       subject.Subscribe(MessageType::Add, &observer1);
       subject.Subscribe(MessageType::Add, &observer2);
       subject.Subscribe(MessageType::Remove, &observer2);
       subject.Subscribe(MessageType::Remove, &observer3);

       subject.Notify(MessageType::Add);
       subject.Notify(MessageType::Remove);

       return 0;
   }

    This example demonstrates creating three separate observer classes and subscribes
them for different combinations of the two messages defined by the earlier MySubject
class. Finally, the calls to subject.Notify() cause the subject to traverse its list of ob-
servers that have been subscribed for the given message and calls the Update() method
for each of them. The important point to note is that the MySubject class has no compile-
time dependency on the MyObserver class. The relationship between the two classes is
dynamically created at run time.
    Of course, there may be a small performance cost for this flexibility: the cost of
iterating through a list of observers before making the (virtual) function call. However,
this cost is generally insignificant compared with benefits of reduced coupling and
increased code reuse.

Push versus pull observers
There are many ways to implement the Observer pattern; the previous example is only
one such method. However, I will note two major categories of observers: push-based
and pull-based. This categorization determines whether all of the information is
pushed to an observer via arguments to the Update() method, or whether the Update()
method is simply used to send a notification about the occurrence of an event, and if the
observer wishes to discover more details, then the subject object must be queried
directly. As an example, a notification that the user has pressed the Return key in a text
entry widget may pass the actual text that the user typed as a parameter of the Update()
method (push), or it may rely on the observer calling a GetText() method on the subject
to discover this information if it needs it (pull).
    Fig. 3.7 illustrates a pull observer pattern because the Update() method has no arguments
and the observer can query the subject for its current state. This approach allows you to use
the same simple IObserver for all observers in the system. By comparison, a push-based
solution would require you to define different abstract interfaces for each Update()
method that requires a unique signature. A push-based solution is useful for sending small
commonly used pieces of data along with a notification, such as the checkbox on/off state
for a checkbox state change. However, it may be inefficient for larger pieces of data, such as
sending the entire text every time a user presses a key in a text box widget.
    I’ll finish up the coverage of observers by providing a real-world example, referring
again to the open source VTK. This library uses an observer pattern to allow client code
to be called when various events happen in the system. The API for managing VTK
observers looks like:

  unsigned long AddObserver(unsigned long, vtkCommand *, float priority = 0.0f);
  vtkTypeBool HasObserver(unsigned long);
  vtkTypeBool HasObserver(unsigned long, vtkCommand *);
  void RemoveObserver(vtkCommand *);
  void RemoveObservers(unsigned long);
  void RemoveObservers(unsigned long, vtkCommand *);
  void RemoveAllObservers();

   You can see from this set of functions that VTK observers are keyed on an unsigned
long. However, the API includes overloaded versions of these functions that accept a
const char * as a convenience. There’s a GetEventIdFromString() function that’s used
internally to perform the mapping from a string to an unsigned long to support this.
   The events themselves are defined in a large enum with values such as
vtkCommand::DeleteEvent, vtkCommand::RenderEvent, and vtkCommand::EnterEvent. The
observer object is modeled by a vtkCommand object, which looks like:

   class vtkCommand : public vtkObjectBase
   {
   public:
       void UnRegister();
       virtual void Execute(vtkObject *caller, unsigned long eventid,
                            void *callData) = 0;
        static const char *GetStringFromEventId(unsigned long event);
        static unsigned long GetEventIdFromString(const char *event);
        ...
   };

    Observers are therefore expected to override the Execute() function to perform their
custom work, and this function receives the object invoking the event, the event iden-
tifier, and any optional call data provided by the invoking object.
This page intentionally left blank
