                                                                                                                           5
Styles
The previous chapters dealt with the qualities and approaches toward good application
programming interface (API) design. Although I’ve illustrated these concepts with spe-
cific Cþþ examples, the abstract process of designing an API is language independent.
However, in the next few chapters, I’ll start to turn to more Cþþ specific aspects of
producing a high-quality API.
    In this chapter, I’ll cover the topic of API style. Style in this context means how you
decide to represent the capabilities of your API. That is, your API may provide access to
internal state and routines to perform required functionality, but what is the form of
invoking these actions? The answer to this question may seem obvious: you create
classes to represent each key object in your API and provide methods on those classes.
However, there are other styles you could adopt, and the object-oriented style may not
be the best fit all of the time. In this chapter I’ll present five very different API styles:
1. Flat C APIs: An API that can be compiled by a C compiler. This simply involves a
   set of free functions along with any supporting data structures and constants.
   Because this style of interface contains no objects or inheritance, it’s often called
   flat or procedural.
2. Object-Oriented CDD APIs: As a Cþþ programmer, this is likely the style with
   which you’re most familiar. It involves the use of objects with associated data and
   methods, and the application of concepts such as inheritance, encapsulation, and
   polymorphism.
3. Template-Based APIs: Cþþ also supports generic programming and metaprogram-
   ming via its template functionality. This allows functions and data structures to be
   written in terms of generic types that can be specialized later by instantiating them
   with concrete types.
4. Functional APIs: Functional programming is a style that relies on composing func-
   tions rather than executing sequences of imperative statements. It’s a declarative
   programming style, meaning that it focuses more on what you want to do rather
   than how you want to do it.
5. Data-Driven APIs: This type of interface involves sending named commands to a
   handler, with arguments that are packaged within a flexible data structure, rather
   than invoking specific methods or free functions. This style maps well to support-
   ing network protocols and file formats.
   I’ll now describe each of these API styles in turn and discuss the situations in which
one style may be favored over another. Throughout the chapter, I’ll use examples from
the FMOD API to illustrate three of those styles. FMOD is a commercial library for

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00020-9                                                                     179
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

creating and playing back interactive audio that is used by many game companies such
as Activision, Blizzard, Ubisoft, and Microsoft. It provides a flat C API, a Cþþ API, and a
Data-Driven API to access its core audio functionality. As such it provides an instructive
comparison for several of those API styles.

Flat C APIs
The term flat API is meant to convey the fact that the C language doesn’t support the
notion of encapsulated objects and inheritance hierarchies. Hence, an API that uses pure
C syntax must be represented with a more restricted set of language features, such as
typedefs, structs, and function calls that exist in the global namespace. Owing to the lack
of the namespace keyword in C, APIs employing this style must use a common prefix for all
public functions and data structures to avoid name collisions with other C libraries.
    Of course, you can still use internal linkage (Lakos, 1996) to hide symbol names in
your implementation, such as declaring them static at the file scope level of your .cpp
files. In this way you can be assured that any such functions will not be exported
externally and hence will not collide with the same symbol name in another library. (This
applies equally to Cþþ programs as well, of course, although in Cþþ the use of anon-
ymous namespaces is a preferred way to achieve the same result).
    There are many examples of popular C APIs that are in use today, including:
n   The C Standard Library. If you’re writing a C program, then you must be familiar
    with the C Standard Library. This is composed of a collection of include files (such
    as stdio.h, stdlib.h, and string.h) and library routines for I/O, string handling,
    memory management, mathematical operations, etc. (such as printf(), malloc(),
    floor(), and strcpy()). Most C and many Cþþ programs are built using this library.
n   The Windows API. Often referred to as the Win32 API, this is the core set of in-
    terfaces used to develop applications for the Microsoft Windows range of operating
    systems. It includes a group of APIs across various categories such as base services,
    the graphics device interface, the common dialogue box library, and network ser-
    vices. Another library, called Microsoft Foundation Class, provides a Cþþ wrapper
    to the Windows API.
n   The Linux Kernel API. The entire Linux kernel is written in plain C. This includes
    the Linux Kernel API, which provides a stable interface for low-level software such
    as device drivers to access operating system functionality. The API includes driver
    functions, data types, basic C library functions, memory management operations,
    thread and process functions, and network functions, among many others.
n   GNOME GLib. This is a general-purpose open source utility library containing
    many useful low-level routines for writing applications. This includes string utili-
    ties, file access, data structures such as trees, hashes, and lists, and a main loop
    abstraction. This library provides the foundation for the GNOME desktop environ-
    ment and was originally part of the GIMP Toolkit (GTKþ).

n   The Netscape Portable Runtime. The Netscape Portable Runtime library provides
    a cross-platform API for low-level functionality such as threads, file I/O, network
    access, interval timing, memory management, and shared library linking. It is used
    as the core of the various Mozilla applications, including the Firefox Web browser
    and Thunderbird email client.
n   Image Libraries: Most of the open source image libraries that help you add sup-
    port for various image file formats to your applications are written entirely in C.
    For example, the libtiff, libpng, libz, libungif, and jpeg libraries are all plain C APIs.

ANSI C features
If you’re used to writing Cþþ APIs, there will be many language features that you’ll have
to do without when writing a plain C API. For example, C does not support classes,
references, smart pointers, templates, the Cþþ Standard Library, default arguments,
access levels (public, private, or protected), or a bool type. Instead, C APIs are generally
composed only of:
1. Built-in types such as int, float, double, char, and arrays and pointers to these.
2. Custom types created via the typedef and enum keywords.
3. Custom structures declared with the struct or union keywords.
4. Global free functions.
5. Preprocessor directives such as #define.
   In fact, the complete set of C language keywords is quite short. The entire list is
presented here as a reference:
n   auto: defines a local variable as having a local lifetime.
n   break: passes control out of a while, do, for, or switch statement.
n   case: defines a specific branch point within a switch statement.
n   char: the character data type.
n   const: declares a variable value or pointer parameter to be unmodifiable.
n   continue: passes control to the beginning of a while, do, or for statement.
n   default: defines the fallback branch point for a switch statement.
n   do: begins a do-while loop.
n   double: the double-precision floating point data type.
n   else: the statements to perform when an if statement resolves to false.
n   enum: defines a set of constants of type int.
n   extern: introduces the name of an identifier that is defined elsewhere.
n   float: the single-precision floating point data type.
n   for: defines a for loop.
n   goto: transfers control to a labeled line of code.
n   if: provides conditional execution of a sequence of statements.
n   int: the integer data type.
n   long: extends the size of certain built-in data types.
n   register: instructs the compiler to store a variable in a CPU register.

n    return: exits a function with an optional return value.
n    short: reduces the size of certain built-in data types.
n    signed: declares a data type to be able to handle negative values.
n    sizeof: returns the size of a type or expression.
n    static: preserves the value of a variable even after its scope ends.
n    struct: allows multiple variables to be grouped into a single type.
n    switch: causes control to branch to one of a list of possible statements.
n    typedef: creates a new type in terms of existing types.
n    union: groups multiple variables that share the same memory location.
n    unsigned: declares a data type to handle only positive values.
n    void: the empty data type.
n    volatile: indicates that a variable can be changed by an external process.
n    while: defines a loop that exists when the condition evaluates to false.
   Although C is not strictly a subset of Cþþ, well-written ANSI (American National
Standards Institute) C programs will tend to be legal Cþþ programs, too. In general, a
Cþþ compiler will impose greater type checking than a C compiler. When you’re writing
a plain C API, it’s often a worthwhile task to try and compile your code with a Cþþ
compiler and then fix any additional warnings or errors that are raised.

    SIDEBAR: Stronger type checking saves brain cells
    I recall one occasion early in my career when my manager at SRI International, Yvan Leclerc,
    had a crashing bug in a C program. He spent the best part of a day trying to track the prob-
    lem down, and eventually the two of us stepped through his code together, line by line.
        After much scratching of heads, we finally noticed that he was using the calloc() function,
    but was passing only a single argument to it. As you may recall from Chapter 2, the malloc()
    function takes one parameter, whereas the calloc() function takes two parameters.
        He had switched from using malloc() to calloc() to return an initialized block of memory
    but had forgotten to change the parameters to the function call. As a result, the returned block
    of memory was not the size he expected it to be. This is not an error in C (although these days
    most C compilers will at least give you a warning), but it is a compile error in Cþþ. Using a
    Cþþ compiler to compile that C code would have turned up the problem immediately.

    TIP: Try compiling your C API with a Cþþ compiler for greater type checking, and to ensure
    that a Cþþ program can use your API.

Benefits of an ANSI C API
One of the main reasons to write an API in C is if it must integrate with an existing
project that is written entirely in C. Situations such as these are becoming rarer as more
projects are being written from the ground up in Cþþ, but occasions may arise when

your clients place this restriction on your API. Examples include any of the existing large
C APIs that I listed earlier. For instance, if you’re working on a Linux Kernel API, then you
will need to write this interface in C.
    Another reason to prefer the creation of a plain C API is binary compatibility. If you
are required to maintain binary compatibility between releases of your API library, this is
much easier to achieve with a plain C API than a Cþþ one. I will discuss the details of
this in the chapter on Versioning, but suffice to say for now that seemingly minor
changes to a Cþþ API can affect the binary representation for the resulting object and
library files, thus breaking the ability for clients to simply drop in a replacement shared
library and have it work without recompiling their code.
    Of course, there’s nothing to stop you producing an API that works under both C and
Cþþ. In fact, you may even decide that you wish to create a Cþþ API, to take advantage
of the additional object-oriented features of Cþþ, but also create a plain C wrapping of
this interface for use within C-only projects, or to expose a simple and lowesurface area
version of your API for which binary compatibility is easier to enforce. The FMOD API is
one such example of this, because it provides both a Cþþ and a C API.

Writing an API in ANSI C
The C language does not provide support for classes, so you cannot encapsulate data in
objects along with the methods that act upon those data. Instead, you declare structs (or
unions) that contain data, and then pass those as parameters to functions that operate
on those data. For example, consider the following Cþþ class definition:

   class Stack
   {
   public:
       void Push(int val);
       int Pop();
       bool IsEmpty() const;

   private:
       int *mStack;
       int mCurSize;
   };

   This might look as follows in terms of a flat C API:

   struct Stack
   {
       int *mStack;
       int mCurSize;
   };

   void StackPush(Stack *stack, int val);
   int StackPop(Stack *stack);
   bool StackIsEmpty(const Stack *stack);

   Each C function associated with the stack must accept the Stack data structure as a
parameter, often as the first parameter. Also note that the name of the function must normally
include some indication of the data on which it operates, because the name is not scoped
within a class declaration as in Cþþ. In this case I chose to prefix each function with the word
Stack to make it clear that the functions operate on the Stack data structure. This example can
be further improved by using an opaque pointer to hide the private data, such as:

   typedef struct Stack *StackPtr;

   void StackPush(StackPtr stack, int val);
   int StackPop(StackPtr stack);
   bool StackIsEmpty(const StackPtr stack);

   Additionally, C does not support the notion of constructors and destructors.
Therefore, any structs must be explicitly initialized and destroyed by the client. This is
normally done by adding specific API calls to create and destroy a data structure:

   StackPtr CreateStack();
   void DestroyStack(StackPtr stack);

   Now that I’ve compared what a C and Cþþ API might look like for the same task, let’s
look at the code that the client must write to use each API style. First, here’s an example
of using the Cþþ API:

   Stack *stack = new Stack;
   stack->Push(10);
   stack->Push(3);
   while (!Stack->IsEmpty()) {
       stack->Pop;
   }
   delete stack;

whereas the same operations performed with the C API might look like:

   StackPtr stack = CreateStack();
   StackPush(stack, 10);
   StackPush(stack, 3);
   while (!StackIsEmpty(stack)) {
       StackPop(stack);
   }
   DestroyStack(stack);

   I’m ignoring the error handling in the previous case for simplicity. But it should be
noted that the Cþþ new operator does not return nullptr in the case of an error and
instead throws a bad_alloc exception. So the Cþþ example would require a try/catch

block to check for memory allocation errors, whereas the C code would check for a
nullptr returned from the CreateStack() function.

Calling C functions from Cþþ
Cþþ compilers can also compile C code, and even though you’re writing a C API you
may want to allow Cþþ clients to use your API, too. This is a relatively easy task and one
that I suggest you undertake as a matter of course when releasing a C API.
   The first step is to make sure that your code compiles under a Cþþ compiler. As I’ve
already noted, the C standard is more relaxed, and so a C compiler will let you get away
with more sloppy code than a Cþþ compiler will.
   As part of this process, you will, of course, want to make sure that you don’t use any
Cþþ reserved keywords in your code. For example, the following code is legal C, but will
produce an error with a Cþþ compiler because class is a reserved word in Cþþ:

   int class = 0;

   Finally, C functions have different linkage than Cþþ functions. That is, the same
function is represented differently in object files produced by a C and Cþþ compiler.
One reason for this is that Cþþ supports function overloading: declaring methods with
the same name but different parameters or return values. As a result, Cþþ function
names are mangled to encode additional information in the symbol name such as the
number and type of each parameter. Because of this linkage difference, you cannot
compile Cþþ code that uses a function, say DoAction(), and then link this against a li-
brary produced by a C compiler that defines the DoAction() function.
   To get around this problem, you must wrap your C API in an extern “C” construct,
which tells the Cþþ compiler that the contained functions should use C-style linkage. A
C compiler will not be able to parse this statement, so it’s best to compile it conditionally
for Cþþ compilers only. This code snippet illustrates this best practice:

   #ifdef __cplusplus
   extern "C" {
   #endif

   // your C API declarations

   #ifdef __cplusplus
   }
   #endif

 TIP: Use an extern “C” scope in your C API headers so that Cþþ programs can compile and
 link against your API correctly.

Case study: FMOD C API
The following source code presents a small program using the FMOD C API to play a
single sound sample. This is provided to give you a real-world example of using a flat C
API. Note the use of function naming conventions to create multiple layers of name-
space, in which all functions begin with FMOD_, all system-level calls begin with
FMOD_System_, and so on. Notice, in the interest of readability, that this example does not
perform any error checking. Obviously, any real program would check that each function
call completed without error:

   #include "fmod.h"

   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       FMOD_SYSTEM *system;
       FMOD_SOUND *sound;
       FMOD_CHANNEL *channel = 0;
       unsigned int version;

        // Initialize FMOD
        FMOD_System_Create(&system);

        FMOD_System_GetVersion(system, &version);
        if (version < FMOD_VERSION) {
            printf("Error! FMOD version %08x required\n", FMOD_VERSION);
            exit(0);
        }

        FMOD_System_Init(system, 32, FMOD_INIT_NORMAL, NULL);

        // Load and play a sound sample
        FMOD_System_CreateSound(system, "sound.wav", FMOD_SOFTWARE,
                                0, &sound);
        FMOD_System_PlaySound(system, FMOD_CHANNEL_FREE, sound,
                              0, &channel);

        // Main loop
        while (!UserPressedEscKey()) {
            FMOD_System_Update(system);

            NanoSleep(10);
        }

        // Shut down
        FMOD_Sound_Release(sound);
        FMOD_System_Close(system);
        FMOD_System_Release(system);
        return 0;
   }

Object-oriented Cþþ APIs
When you consider writing an API in Cþþ, you probably think in terms of object-
oriented design. Object-oriented programming (OOP) is a style of programming in
which data and the functions that operate on those data are packaged together as an
object. The origins of OOP date back to the 1960s with the development of the Simula

and Smalltalk languages. However, it didn’t take off as a dominant programming model
until the 1990s, with the introduction of languages such as Cþþ and Java.
   Because I have already covered many of the key techniques of OOP in the previous
chapters, I will not spend too much time on this API style. I refer you to the Class Design
section of the previous section, where I defined various OOP terms such as class, object,
inheritance, composition, encapsulation, and polymorphism.
   It should be noted that features such as method and operator overloading, default
parameters, templates, exceptions, and namespaces are strictly not object-oriented
concepts. However, they are new features that were included in the Cþþ language
and are not a part of the original C language. Cþþ supports several programming models
other than OOP, such as procedural programming (as seen in the previous section),
generic programming, and functional programming (both of which I’ll cover next).

Advantages of object-oriented APIs
The primary benefit of using an object-oriented API is the ability to use classes and inher-
itance: that is, the ability to model software in terms of interconnected data, rather than
collections of procedures. This can provide both conceptual and technical advantages.
    In terms of conceptual advantages, often the physical items and processes that you try to
model in code can be described in terms of objects. For example, an address book is a
physical item with which we are all familiar, and it contains descriptions for several people,
which again is a conceptual unit to which anyone can relate. The core task of OOP is therefore
to identify the key objects in a given problem space and determine how they relate to each
other. Many engineers believe that this is a more logical way to approach software design
than thinking in terms of the set of all actions that must be performed (Booch et al., 2007).
    As for the technical advantages, using objects provides a way to encapsulate all of the
data and methods for a single conceptual unit in one place. It essentially creates a
unique namespace for all related methods and variables. For example, the methods of
our earlier Cþþ Stack example all exist within the Stack namespace, such as
Stack::Push() or Stack::Pop(). Objects also provide the notion of information hiding with
public, protected, and private access levels, which is a critical concept for API design.

 TIP: Object-oriented APIs offer the advantages of inheritance, encapsulation, and information
 hiding.

Disadvantages of object-oriented APIs
However, there can be downsides to using object-oriented concepts. Many of these
result from abuses of the power of object-oriented techniques. The first is that adding
inheritance to your object model can introduce a degree of complexity and subtlety that
not all engineers may fully understand, such as knowing that base class destructors must
always be marked as virtual, or that an overridden method in a subclass will hide all
overloaded methods with the same name in the base class.

   Furthermore, deep inheritance hierarchies can make it challenging to figure out the
complete interface offered by an object just by looking at header files, because the
interface may be distributed across multiple headers (of course, good documentation
tools such as Doxygen can help to abate this particular concern). Also, some engineers
may abuse, or incorrectly use, the concepts of OOP, such as using inheritance in cases
where it doesn’t make sense (where the objects don’t form an is-a relationship). This can
cause strained and unclear designs that are difficult to work with.
   Finally, creating a binary compatible API using object-oriented Cþþ concepts is an
extremely difficult task. If binary compatibility is your goal, you may wish to choose one of
the other API styles that I describe in this chapter, such as a flat C API or a data-driven API.

Case study: FMOD Cþþ API
The following source code presents the same program you saw in the earlier section,
except that this example uses the FMOD Cþþ API instead of the C API. Namespacing is
now achieved using the Cþþ namespace feature, so that all classes and functions exist
within the FMOD namespace. Also the include file for the API has the same base name as
the C API, except that it uses an .hpp extension to indicate that it’s a Cþþ header. Once
again, error checking has been omitted to make the code more legible:

   #include "fmod.hpp"

   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       FMOD::System *system;
       FMOD::Sound *sound;
       FMOD::Channel *channel = 0;
       unsigned int version;

        // Initialize FMOD
        FMOD::System_Create(&system);

        system->getVersion(&version);
        if (version < FMOD_VERSION) {
            printf("Error! FMOD version %08x required\n", FMOD_VERSION);
            exit(0);
        }

        system->init(32, FMOD_INIT_NORMAL, NULL);

        // Load and play a sound sample
        system->createSound("sound.wav", FMOD_SOFTWARE, 0, &sound);
        system->playSound(FMOD_CHANNEL_FREE, sound, 0, &channel);

        // Main loop
        while (!UserPressedEscKey()) {
            system->update();

             NanoSleep(10);
        }

        // Shut down
        sound->release();
        system->close();
        system->release();
        return 0;
   }

Template-based APIs
Templates are a feature of Cþþ that allow you to write functions or classes in terms of a
generic yet-to-be-specified type. You can then specialize the template by instantiating it
with a specific type or types. As a result, programming with templates is often called
generic programming.
   Templates are an extremely powerful and flexible tool. They can be used to write
programs that generate code or that execute code at compile time (a technique known as
metaprogramming). This can be used to achieve impressive results such as unrolling
loops, precomputing certain values in a mathematical series, generating lookup tables at
compile time, and expanding recursive functions that recurse a predetermined number
of times. As such, templates can be used to perform work at compile time and thus
improve run time performance.
   However, it’s not the focus of this book to provide a treatment of these aspects of
template programming. There are many great books out there that already do this
(Alexandrescu, 2001; Vandevoorde and Josuttis, 2002). Instead, our focus will be on the
use of templates for API design. In this regard, there are several examples of well-
designed template-based APIs that you can look to for reference and inspiration,
such as:
n   The CDD Standard Library. All of the Standard Library container classes with
    which you’re familiar, such as std::set, std::map, and std::vector, are class tem-
    plates. That’s why they can be used to hold data of different types.
n   Boost. The Boost libraries provide a suite of powerful and useful features, many of
    which have since been added to the Cþþ standard. Most of the Boost classes use
    templates such as boost::shared_ptr, boost::function, and
    boost::static_pointer_cast.
n   Loki. This is a library of class templates written by Andrei Alexandrescu to support
    his book, Modern Cþþ Design. It provides implementations of various design pat-
    terns, such as Visitor, Singleton, and Abstract Factory. This elegant code provides
    an exemplar of good template-based API design.
    Even though templates in Cþþ are often used in combination with object-oriented
techniques, it’s worth noting that the two are completely orthogonal concepts.
Templates can be used equally well with free functions and with structs and unions
(although of course, as you already know, structs are functionally equivalent to classes in
Cþþ, except for their default access level).

An example template-based API
Continuing our stack example, let’s look at how you would create a generic stack
declaration using templates, and then instantiate it for integers. You can define the
template-based stack class in terms of a generic type T as:

   #include <vector>

   template <typename T>
   class Stack
   {
   public:
       void Push(T val);
       T Pop();
       bool IsEmpty() const;

   private:
       std::vector<T> mStack;
   };

   I have omitted the method definitions to keep the example clear. I will present some
best practices for providing template definitions in the later chapter on Cþþ Usage. It’s
also worth noting that there’s nothing special about the name T. It’s common to use the
name T for your generic type, but you could equally well call it MyGenericType if you
prefer.
   With this declaration for a generic stack, you can then instantiate the template for the
type int by creating an object of type Stack<int>. This will cause the compiler
to generate code for this specific type instance. You could also define a simple typedef to
make it more convenient to access this instance of the template, such as:

   using IntStack = Stack<int>;

   Then this IntStack type can be used just as if you had written the class explicitly. For
example:

   IntStack *stack = new IntStack;
   stack->Push(10);
   stack->Push(3);
   while (! stack->IsEmpty()) {
       stack->Pop;
   }
   delete stack;

Templates versus macros
An alternative to the templates approach would be to use the C preprocessor to define a
block of text that you can stamp into the header multiple times, such as:

   #include <vector>

   #define DECLARE_STACK(Prefix, T) \
       class Prefix##Stack          \
       {                            \
       public:                      \
           void Push(T val);        \
           T Pop();                 \
           bool IsEmpty() const;    \
                                    \
       private:                     \
           std::vector<T> mStack;   \
       }

   DECLARE_STACK(Int, int);

   Aside from the ugliness of this code (e.g., having to end each line with a backslash and
use preprocessor concatenation), the preprocessor has no notion of type checking or
scoping. It’s simply a text copying mechanism. This means that the declaration of the
macro is not actually compiled, and so any errors in your macro will be reported on the
single line where it’s expanded, not where it’s declared. Similarly, you can’t step into
your methods with a debugger because the whole code block is expanded in a single line
of your source file. By contrast, templates provide a type-safe way to generate code at
compile time, and you’ll be able to debug into the actual lines of your class template.
   Unless you’re writing a plain C API and therefore don’t have access to templates, you
should avoid using the preprocessor to simulate templates.

Advantages of template-based APIs
The obvious power of templates is that they let you create (instantiate) many different
classes from a single root declaration. In our previous stack example, you could add
support for string-based and floating-point stack classes simply by adding these
declarations:

   using StringStack = Stack<std::string>;
   using DoubleStack = Stack<double>;

   As such, templates can help to remove duplication because you don’t need to copy,
paste, and tweak the implementation code. Without templates, you would have to create
(and maintain) a lot of very similar-looking code to support IntStack, StringStack, and
DoubleStack class.
   Another important property of templates is that they can provide static (compile
time) polymorphism, as opposed to the use of inheritance, which provides dynamic (run
time) polymorphism. One element of this is that templates allow the creation of different
classes that all exhibit the same interface. For example, every instance of our stack class,

whether IntStack, DoubleStack, or StringStack, is guaranteed to provide the same set of
methods. You can also use templates to create functions that accept any of these types,
without the run time cost of using virtual methods. This is achieved by generating
different type-specific versions of the function at compile time. The following template
function demonstrates this ability: it can be used to pop the topmost element from any
of our stack types. In this example, two different versions of the function will be
generated at compile time:

   template <typename T>
   void PopAnyStack(T &stack)
   {
       if (!stack.IsEmpty()) {
           stack.Pop();
       }
   }

   ...

   IntStack int_stack;
   StringStack string_stack;

   int_stack.Push(10);
   string_stack.Push("Hello Static Polymorphism!");

   PopAnySack(string_stack);
   PopAnyStack(int_stack);

   A further benefit of templates is that you can specialize certain methods of a class for
a specific type instance. For instance, our generic stack template is defined as Stack<T>,
but you could provide customized function implementations for certain types, such as
for Stack<int>. This is very handy for optimizing the class for certain types or for adding
customizations for certain types that behave uniquely. This can be done by providing a
method definition with the syntax:

   template <>
   void Stack<int>::Push(int val)
   {
       // integer specific push implementation
   }

Disadvantages of template-based APIs
In terms of disadvantages of using templates, the most critical one for API design is that
the definition of your class templates will normally have to appear in your public
headers. This is because the compiler must have access to the entire definition of your
template code to specialize it. This obviously exposes your internal details, which you

know is a major sin of API development. It also means that the compiler will recompile
the code each time the file is included, causing the generated code to be added to the
object file for every module that uses the API. The result can be slower compilation times
and code bloat (although Cþþ11 introduced the notion of extern templates to address
this). However, there are situations where you can in fact hide the implementation of a
template in the .cpp file, using a technique called explicit instantiation. I will discuss this
technique in more detail in the next chapter on Cþþ Usage.
    The previous static polymorphism example demonstrates another potential source of
code bloat. This is because the compiler must generate code for each different version
of the PopAnyStack() function that’s used. This is opposed to the virtual method flavor of
polymorphism, which requires the compiler only to generate one such method, but then
incurs a run time cost to know which class’s IsEmpty() and Pop() methods to call.
Therefore, if code size is more important to you than run time cost, you may decide to go
with an object-oriented solution rather than use templates. Alternatively, if run time
performance is critical for you, then templates may be the way to go.
    Another commonly viewed disadvantage of templates is that most compilers can
create verbose, long, or confusing messages for errors that occur in template code. It’s
common for simple errors in heavily templated code to produce dozens of lines of error
output that cause you to scratch your head for a long time. In fact, there are even
products on the market to simplify template error messages and make them easier to
decipher, such as the STLFilt utility from BD Software. This is a concern not only for you
as the developer of an API, but also for your clients because they will also be exposed to
these voluble error messages if they use your API incorrectly. Cþþ20 introduced a new
feature called constraints to help alleviate this issue and provide more contextual tem-
plate error messages.

Functional APIs
Functional programming is a programming style that relies on composing functions
rather than executing sequences of imperative statements. It relies heavily on functions
as a first-class concept, rather than objects. This approach is based on the formal system
of computation called the lambda calculus, developed by Alonzo Church in 1936.
   There are several programming languages that support only functional programming,
such as Haskell, and there are others that support functional programming along with
imperative style programming, such as Cþþ. With the introduction of Cþþ11, the
language now has stronger support for functional programming, owing to additions like
lambda functions and several new Cþþ Standard Library functions.

Functional programming concepts
Functional programming is a declarative programming style, meaning that it focuses
more on what you want to do rather than the imperative approach of how you want to do

it. That is, it focuses on the evaluation of expressions instead of the execution of state-
          
ments (Cuki    ?
               c, 2018). For example, this imperative code shows how to calculate the
average of a collection of integers:

   auto nums = {1, 2, 4, 6, 1, 9, 3, 4};
   int sum = 0;
   for (int num : nums) {
       sum += num;
   }
   auto avg = sum / (double) nums.size();

whereas the following shows the same thing expressed in a functional style, using the
Cþþ20 std::accumulate() function:

   auto nums = {1, 2, 4, 6, 1, 9, 3, 4};
   auto avg = std::accumulate(nums.begin(), nums.end(), 0) / (double)
   nums.size();

   In the functional programming style, functions are a first-class concept, so they can
be passed as arguments to other functions, returned as the result of a function, and
assigned to variables. For example, the std::accumulate function also has an overloaded
version in which you can provide a function to define an accumulation operator other
than addition, such as:

   auto nums = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
   auto op = [](int a, int b) {
       return a * b;
   };
   int factorial = std::accumulate(nums.begin(), nums.end(), 1, op);
   // returns 120

   Another core aspect of functional programming is the use of pure functions. These
are functions that have the attributes of:
  Immutable arguments: pure functions don’t modify their arguments.
  Stateless: pure functions don’t rely on any inputs other than their arguments.
  No side effects: pure functions don’t mutate nonlocal variables or local static
  variables.
    As a result, pure functions can be called multiple times with the same arguments and
they’ll always return the same result. For example, mathematical functions such as
sqrt() and max() can be implemented as pure functions, whereas rand() and time()
cannot. (Note that a pure function in this context of functional programming is very
different from a pure virtual function that’s used in object-oriented Cþþ programming.)

   (It’s interesting that there’s been a proposal to add support for a [[pure]] attribute to
the Cþþ standard so that developers could specify a function as being pure. Among
other things, this would allow compilers to perform more aggressive optimizations.
However, at the time of writing this book, this proposal has not been adopted by the
Cþþ standards committee).

An example functional API
Continuing our example of defining an API for manipulating a stack, this behavior could
be expressed in terms of a functional style by introducing various functions that operate
on a stack data structure as:

   namespace stack {

   using Stack = std::vector<int>;

   [[nodiscard]] Stack push(const Stack &stack, int element);
   [[nodiscard]] Stack pop(const Stack &stack);
   [[nodiscard]] Stack pop_if(const Stack &stack,
   std::function<bool(int)> predicate);

   }   // namespace stack

   This design shows several pure functions that are contained within a stack name-
space and that can be chained together to create composite expressions, such as:

   auto stack = stack::push(stack::pop(stack::push(stack::push({}, 1),
   2)), 3);
   // returns {1, 3}

   This API also shows the use of functions as a first-class concept by introducing a
pop_if() function that accepts a function argument, in which elements will continue to
be popped from the stack as long as the function returns true, such as:

   auto isEven = [](int x) {
       return x % 2 == 0;
   };
   auto stack = stack::pop_if({1, 2, 3, 4, 6}, isEven);
   // returns {1, 2, 3}

   I’ve used the Cþþ17 [[nodiscard]] attribute on each of the functions. That’s because
pure functions have no effect if their return value is not used, because they are defined to
be stateless and without side effects. The use of [[nodiscard]] will therefore generate a
compiler warning if the user ignores the return result. This can help if the user assumes,

incorrectly, that the function will modify the data structure in place instead of returning
its result as a new data structure.
    There are several other ways that a functional style stack API could be implemented.
Often, you’ll find that you want to combine functional programming with template
programming, so that your functions can work on different types. The example I pro-
vided earlier works only on a stack of integers, so that I could focus on functional
concepts, but you could, of course, extend it to use function templates that work on any
type, T. Also, many of the functional algorithms added to the Cþþ Standard Library, such
as std::accumulate, std::copy_if, and std::transform, operate on iterators instead of
containers. This makes them more general, but it also makes returning the results more
convoluted and difficult to chain together as I did earlier.

Advantages of functional APIs
Functional programming has been a popular style of programming for many years,
largely because of the many benefits it offers. These benefits include:
  Declarative style: Because functional programming focuses more on the how than
  the what, it can result in more self-explanatory code. For example, rather than
  writing for loops with custom logic to manipulate individual elements of a
  container, you can rely on higher-level functions such as for_each, transform, and
  copy_if.
  Code readability: Functional code can often be shorter than the equivalent imper-
  ative code because it tends to be specified at a higher level. This can help with the
  readability and maintainability of your clients’ code.
  Concurrency: As I’ll cover in the Concurrency chapter, the use of shared mutable
  state is the most common problem when trying to produce thread-safe code.
  However, pure functions are defined to have no shared state or side effects. They
  can therefore be trivially parallelized without the need to add synchronization
  primitives such as mutex locking.
  Loose coupling: The use of pure functions can also produce more robust code,
  and often fewer bugs as a result, because the lack of shared state and side effects
  removes any complex interactions with other parts of the system.
  Testability: A further benefit of pure functions is that they’re easier to test. That’s
  because they don’t depend on external state, meaning that their behavior is fully
  expressed by the set of inputs that accept. Also, they will return the same result for
  the same set of inputs, making any automated tests more reproducible and robust.

Disadvantages of functional APIs
Every programming style has its disadvantages as well as its advantages. In terms of the
functional style, some potential concerns to bear in mind include:

  Memory usage: Functional programming relies on making copies of data to avoid
  mutating existing variables. This style may therefore consume more memory than
  an equivalent imperative solution. This is a direct trade-off for all of the benefits of
  pure functions listed earlier. However, there may be optimizations that compilers
  can implement to offset these memory concerns, such as copy on write and return
  value optimization.
  Performance: Copying large amounts of memory can affect performance.
  Dedicated functional programming languages can often implement optimizations
  to offset these concerns, such as lazy evaluation and tail call recursion, but com-
  pilers for multiparadigm languages such as Cþþ may not be able to implement all
  of these optimizations as effectively.
  Hardware compatibility: Another aspect of performance is that imperative pro-
  gramming generally maps well to today’s CPU and GPU architectures. However,
  functional programming does not map as well to modern hardware. The heavy use
  of recursion in traditional functional programming is one example, although it’s
  fair to note that most functional implementations in Cþþ are implemented itera-
  tively, not recursively.
  Less support: Objects and templates are the most common API styles for Cþþ. As
  a result, there may be fewer functional programming experts that you can rely
  upon for your functional API designs and fewer resources such as tools and docu-
  mentation available to you. Writing good functional APIs does require you to think
  differently, and the demands of producing a design for a general audience may
  require you to adopt the more mainstream methodologies.

Data-driven APIs
A data-driven API can be differentiated from a code-driven API:
  Code-driven API: an engineer writes code that’s compiled into a binary and
  distributed to clients for them to run. If new behavior is needed, the engineer
  changes the code and distributes a new binary to the clients. All of the examples so
  far in this chapter are examples of code-driven APIs.
  Data-driven API: an engineer writes code for a general engine that can read and
  interpret data from a file, where that file defines much of the run time behavior of
  the system. If new behavior is needed, a nonengineer (potentially even the client)
  could change the data file without needing to recompile the software.
   A data-driven program is therefore one that can perform different operations each
time it’s run by supplying it with different input data. For example, a data-driven pro-
gram may simply accept the name of a file on disk that contains a list of commands to
execute. This has an impact on the design of an API because it means that instead of
relying on a collection of objects that provide various method calls, you provide more
generic routines that accept named commands and a dictionary of named arguments.
This is sometimes also called a message passing API or event-based API. The following
function call formats illustrate how this API type differs from standard C and Cþþ calls:

n    func(obj, a, b, c) ¼ flat C-style function
n    obj.func(a, b, c) ¼ object-oriented Cþþ function
n    send("func", a, b, c) ¼ data-driven function with positional parameters
n    send("func", dict(arg1¼a, arg2¼b, arg2¼c)) ¼ data-driven function with a dictionary
     of named arguments (pseudocode).

    SIDEBAR: A data-driven dialogue engine
    While at Apple, I developed a data-driven dialogue system for the Siri virtual assistant
    (Rhoten and Reddy, 2020). This was driven by a data file format called Conversation
    Authoring Template (CAT), which could contain localized dialogue with embedded parameter
    values and conditional logic.
       We developed an API that could load a CAT file for the current locale (e.g., en-US or fr-FR)
    and accept various parameters from the run time code. The parameters would be formatted,
    correctly inflected for the locale, and inserted into the dialogue template. Conditions defined in
    the file could be used to select among different templates based on the input parameter values.
    The resulting localized dialogue would be spoken by Siri and shown on the display device.
       Some of the benefits of this data-driven approach were that we could build rich authoring
    and localization GUI tools for nonengineers to use, we could employ extensive validation of
    the data files to catch errors early on, and we could push updates for Siri’s dialogue to devices
    after an OS had shipped because the changes were expressed as data, not code.

   To provide a concrete example of what this looks like, let’s see how you might
redesign our Stack example using a more data-driven model:

     class Stack
     {
     public:
         Stack();

           Result Command(const std::string &command,
                          const ArgList &args);
     };

     This simple class could then be used to perform multiple operations, such as:

     s = new Stack;
     s->Command("Push", ArgList().Add("value", 10));
     s->Command("Push", ArgList().Add("value", 3));
     auto r = s->Command("IsEmpty");
     while (!r.convertToBool()) {
         s->Command("Pop");
         r = s->Command("IsEmpty");
     }
     delete s;

   This is a more data-driven API because the individual methods have been replaced by
a single method, Command(), which supports multiple possible inputs specified as string
data. One could easily imagine writing a simple program that could parse the contents of
an ASCII text file containing various commands and executing each command in order.
The input file could look something like:

   # Input file for data-driven Stack API
   Push value:10
   Push value:3
   Pop
   Pop

    A program to consume this data file using the previous data-driven API would simply
take the first whitespace-delimited string on each line (ignoring blank lines and lines that
begin with # as a convenience). The program could then create an ArgList structure for
any further whitespace-delimited strings that follow the initial command. It would then
pass those to the Stack::Command() and continue processing the remainder of the file.
This program could then perform vastly different stack operations by supplying a
different text file, and notably without requiring the program to be recompiled.

Advantages of data-driven APIs
I’ve already pointed out one of the major benefits of data-driven APIs: that the business
logic of a program can be abstracted out into a human-editable data file. In this way, the
behavior of a program can be modified without the need to recompile the executable.
    You may even decide to support a separate design tool to let users easily author the data
file. Several commercial packages work this way, such as FMOD, which includes the FMOD
Designer program that allows complex authoring of sound effects. The resulting .fev files
can be loaded by the data-driven FMOD Event API. Also, the Qt UI toolkit includes the Qt
Designer application that lets users create user interfaces in a visual and interactive
fashion. The resulting .ui files can be loaded at run time by Qt’s QUiLoader class.
    Another major benefit of a data-driven API is that it tends to be far more tolerant of
future API changes. That’s because adding, removing, or changing a command can in
many cases have no effect on the signatures of the public API methods. Often it will
simply change the supported set of strings that can be passed to the command handler.
In other words, passing an unsupported or obsolete command to the handler will not
produce a compile-time error. Similarly, different versions of a command can be sup-
ported based upon the number and type of arguments that are provided, essentially
mimicking Cþþ’s method overloading.
    Taking the earlier example of our data-driven Stack API, which simply provides a
Stack::Command() method, a newer version of the API might add support for a Top
command (to return the topmost element without popping it) and could also extend the
Push command to accept multiple values, each of which are pushed onto the stack in
turn. An example program using these new features might look like:

   s = new Stack;
   s->Command("Push", ArgList().Add("value1", 10).Add("value2", 3));
   Result r = s->Command("Top");
   int top = r.convertToInt(); // top == 3

    Adding this new functionality involved no change whatsoever to the function sig-
natures in the header file. It merely changed the supported strings, and the list of ar-
guments, which can be passed to the Command() method. Because of this property, it’s
much easier to create backward compatible API changes when using a data-driven
model, even when removing or changing existing commands. Similarly, it’s much
easier to create binary compatible changes because it’s more likely that you’ll not need
to change the signature of any of your public methods.
    One further benefit of data-driven APIs is that they more easily support data-driven
testing techniques. This is an automated testing technique in which, instead of writing
lots of individual test programs or routines to exercise an API, you can simply write a
single data-driven program that reads a file containing a series of commands to perform
and assertions to check. Then, writing multiple tests means simply creating multiple
input data files. Test development iteration can therefore be faster because no compi-
lation step is required to create a new test. Also, QA engineers who do not possess deep
Cþþ development skills can still write tests for your API.
    Remaining with our Stack example, you could create a test program that accepts
input data files such as:

   IsEmpty => True    # A newly created stack should be empty
   Push value:10
   Push value:3
   IsEmpty => False   # A stack with two elements is nonempty
   Pop => 3
   IsEmpty => False   # A stack with one element is nonempty
   Pop => 10
   IsEmpty => True    # A stack with zero elements is empty
   Pop => NULL        # Popping an empty stack is an error

   This test program is very similar to the program I described earlier to read Stack
commands from a data file. The main difference is that I’ve added support for a ¼>
symbol, which lets you check the result returned by the Stack::Command() method. With
that small addition, you now have a flexible testing framework that allows you to create
any number of data-driven tests for our API.

 TIP: Data-driven APIs map well to Web services and other client/server APIs. They also support
 data-driven testing techniques.

Disadvantages of data-driven APIs
As I’ve stated, the data-driven model is not appropriate for all interfaces. It may be
useful for data communication interfaces such as Web services or for client/server
message passing. However, it would not be an appropriate choice for a real-time 3D
graphics API.
    For one reason, the simplicity and stability of the API comes with a run time cost. This
is because of the additional overhead of finding the correct internal routine to call given
a command name string. The use of an internal hash table or dictionary that maps
supported command names to callable functions can speed this process, but it will never
be as fast as calling a function directly.
    It’s also worth noting that data-driven systems may require additional function-
ality to be built that you would not normally need for a code-driven solution. For
example, with a code-driven solution you can rely on the compiler to emit warnings
and errors if you make mistakes representing the logic of your program. However,
with a data-driven approach you may need to write your own validation routines for
the data formats that you support, so that you can detect syntactic and semantic
errors in the data file inputs. You may also need to build a robust versioning system
for your data format, so that your code can handle older or newer formats
appropriately.
    Furthermore, another downside of data-driven APIs is that your physical header files
do not reflect your logical interface. This means that a user cannot simply look at your
public header files and know what functionality and semantics are provided by the
interface. However, recall in the first section of this book that I defined an API as a
collection of header files . and associated documentation. So, as long as you provide
good API documentation to specify the list of supported commands and their expected
arguments, you can reasonably compensate for this disadvantage.

Supporting variant argument lists
Up to this point, I have glossed over the use of our Result and ArgList types in the
various previous examples. These are meant to represent data values that can contain
differently typed values that may not be known at compile time. For example, ArgList

could be used to pass no arguments, a single integer argument, or two arguments in
which one is a string and the other is a float. Weakly typed languages such as Python
explicitly support this concept, but traditionally Cþþ has not: arrays and containers
must contain elements that are all the same type, and where that type must be known
at compile time.
    However, Cþþ17 introduced the std::any type, which provides a type-safe way to
hold a value of different types. This can therefore be used to parse arbitrary data from a
file. For example, the following types can be used to represent a dictionary of arbitrarily
typed values, such as a JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) object, using the Cþþ any
type:

   using Arg = std::any;
   using ArgList = std::map<std::string, Arg>;

  This would allow us to create an interface with an optional number of named ar-
guments that can be of type bool, int, double, or string. For example:

   s = new Stack;
   ArgList args;
   args["NumberOfElements"] = Arg(2);
   s->Command("Pop", args);

   You can now support methods that accept a single parameter of type ArgList, which
can be used to pass any combination of bool, int, double, or std::string arguments. As
such, future changes to the API behavior (e.g., adding a new argument to the list of
arguments supported by the method) can be made without changing the actual signa-
ture of the method.

Case study: FMOD data-driven API
Here, I present a simple program using the FMOD data-driven API, to give a real-world
example of this API style. This is only one example of a data-driven interface, and it does
not illustrate all of the concepts that I’ve discussed. However, it does illustrate the case in
which much of the logic is stored in a data file that’s loaded at run time. This is the
sound.fev file, which is created by the FMOD Designer tool. The program then shows
accessing a named parameter of an event in that file and changing that parameter’s
value:

   #include "fmod_event.hpp"

   int main(int argc, char *argv[])
   {
       FMOD::EventSystem *eventsystem;
       FMOD::Event *event;
       FMOD::EventParameter *param;
       float param_val = 0.0f;
       float param_min, param_max, param_increment;

       // Initialize FMOD
       FMOD::EventSystem_Create(&eventsystem);
       eventsystem->init(64, FMOD_INIT_NORMAL,
                          0, FMOD_EVENT_INIT_NORMAL);

       // Load a file created with the FMOD Designer tool
       eventsystem->load("sound.fev", 0, 0);
       eventsystem->getEvent("EffectEnvelope", FMOD_EVENT_DEFAULT,
                             &event);

       // Get a named parameter from the loaded data file
       event->getParameter("param", &param);
       param->getRange(&param_min, &param_max);
       param->setValue(param_val);
       event->start();

       // Continually modulate the parameter until Esc pressed
       param_increment = (param_max - param_min) / 100.0f;
       bool increase_param = true;
       while (!UserPressedEscKey()) {
           if (increase_param) {
               param_val += param_increment;
               if (param_val > param_max) {
                    param_val = param_max;
                    increase_param = false;
               }
           } else {
               param_val -= param_increment;
               if (param_val < param_min) {
                    param_val = param_min;
                    increase_param = true;
               }
           }
           param->setValue(param_val);

           eventsystem->update();
           NanoSleep(10);
       }

       // Shut down
       eventsystem->release();
       return 0;
   }

Data-driven Web services
Not all interfaces are appropriately represented with a data-driven style. However, this
style is particularly suited to stateless communication channels such as client/server

applications in which the API allows commands to be sent to a server and optionally to
return results to the client. It’s also useful for passing messages between loosely coupled
components and for working with inherently data-driven entities such as file formats.
   Web services in particular can be naturally represented using a data-driven API. A Web
service is normally accessed by sending a URL with a set of query parameters to a given Web
service, or by sending a message in some structured format such as JSON or XML. For instance,
the Digg website supports an API to let users interact with the Digg.com Web service. As a
specific example, the Digg API provides the digg.getInfo call to return extended information for
a specific digg on a story. This is invoked by sending an HTTP GET request in the form:

   http://services.digg.com/1.0/endpoint?method=digg.getInfo&digg_id=id

  This maps well to the sort of data-driven APIs I’ve presented earlier, in which an
HTTP request such as this could be invoked as:

   d = new DiggWebService;
   d->Request("digg.getInfo", ArgList().Add("digg_id", id));

   This correlates very closely to the underlying protocol, although it still provides an
abstraction from the details of that protocol. For example, the implementation can still
decide whether it’s more appropriate to send the request as a GET or POST, or even a
JSON or XML description.

Idempotency
Because I’m discussing client/server applications, it’s worth covering the topic of
idempotency here, as well. An API is considered idempotent if calling a function more
than once with the same set of parameters has no additional effect. For example,
removing an element from an std:set or std:map is idempotent because if you attempt to
remove the same element multiple times, the contents of the data structure will be the
same as if you tried to remove the element only once.
    Here’s a simple example of an idempotent API, in which you can get or set a vector of
strings, check if a string exists in the vector, and remove a string from the vector:

   class Labels
   {
   public:
       std::vector<std::string> GetLabels() const;
       bool HasLabels(const std::string &label) const;
       void Setlabels(const std::vector<std::string> &labels);
       void DeleteLabel(const std::string &label);

   private:
       std::vector<std::string> mLabels;
   };

   This API is idempotent because repeating any method call with the same input pa-
rameters will not change the underlying state of the object; for example,

   Labels labels;
   labels.SetLabels({"one", "two", "three"});
   auto labels = labels.GetLabels();
   auto hasLabel = labels.HasLabel("two");
   labels.DeleteLabel("three");

will have the same effect as:

   Labels labels;
   labels.SetLabels({"one", "two", "three"});
   labels.SetLabels({"one", "two", "three"});
   auto labels = labels.GetLabels();
   labels = labels.GetLabels();
   auto hasLabel = labels.HasLabel("two");
   hasLabel = labels.HasLabel("two");
   labels.DeleteLabel("three");
   labels.DeleteLabel("three");

However, we could extend this API with a new AddLabel() function to append a label to
the vector of strings, in which the string argument is always appended to the vector even
if it already exists. This new API might look like:

   class Labels
   {
   public:
       std::vector<std::string> GetLabels() const;
       bool HasLabels(const std::string &label) const;
       void Setlabels(const std::vector<std::string> &labels);
       void AddLabel(const std::string &label);

   private:
       std::vector<std::string> mLabels;
   };

This new API call is not idempotent because calling AddLabel() multiple times will
change the underlying data structure each time we call it:

   Labels labels;
   labels.AddLabel("one");

will produce a vector with one string in it, whereas:

   Labels labels;
   labels.AddLabel("one");
   labels.AddLabel("one");

will produce a vector with two strings in it. So repeating the function call produced a
different end state.
    Enforcing an idempotent API is not something that you need to strive for in most
cases: many well-designed APIs are not idempotent and that’s fine. However, there are a
few problem domains where having an idempotent interface is desirable because it
offers additional fault tolerance guarantees. The most common example is when dealing
with network protocols. As such, you often hear about idempotency with respect to
RESTful Web APIs.
    When sending information over a network, you can sometimes encounter time-outs
or network outages. In the face of such errors, a common strategy is for the client to
resend the original request to the server. With an idempotent interface, the client can
safely retransmit the same request without being concerned that the data on the server
will be corrupted by being applied multiple times. For example, imagine a banking
application in which the client sends a money transfer request to the server. If the
request times out and is resent by the client, then in a nonidempotent system there’s a
possibility that two transfers are executed instead of one.
    Because idempotency is concerned primarily with the effect of an API call on the
underlying state of the system, any read-only API calls can be considered idempotent.
Similarly, any calls that replace the representation of an existing data entry, or any calls
that delete a data entry, can also be considered idempotent because they can be
repeated safely (as shown in the previous example). But calls that add new data to the
system are generally not idempotent.
    In terms of the HTTP protocol, Table 5.1 indicates which HTTP methods are
considered idempotent and which are not (according to RFC 9110).

Table 5.1 HTTP methods and
                           whether they are idempotent.
                           HTTP method              Is idempotent?
                           HEAD                     Yes
                           GET                      Yes
                           OPTIONS                  Yes
                           TRACE                    Yes
                           PUT                      Yes
                           DELETE                   Yes
                           POST                     No
                           PATCH                    No

    It’s possible to make an operation such as a POST HTTP call become idempotent. A
common way to do this is to introduce a unique identifier that’s generated for each data-
modifying request. The server can keep a record of the recent transaction GUIDs, and if
it encounters a GUID that it’s already seen, it can ignore the request and return an
appropriate success response without modifying the underlying data a second time.
    It’s not necessary for the duplicate call to return the same server response as the first
one: idempotency is about ensuring the consistency of the data, so it could be valid for
the second request to return a result indicating that it was ignored, and the client can
choose how it wants to handle that information. It’s also worth noting that the server
may log a list of all requests that have been received, including any duplicate requests, so
in that way the total underlying state will be different after a duplicate request, but the
core business logic state should be unaffected.
    So, in terms of API design guidelines, when a data-modifying operation is required to
be fault tolerant, you can consider introducing a transaction GUID for each action so
that the host can use this to handle duplicate requests correctly. Or, more generally, you
could introduce the concept of beginning and ending an atomic transaction, in which
the transaction is either guaranteed to be entirely executed or not at all, such as with a
BeginTransaction() and EndTranscation() pair of functions in your API.
This page intentionally left blank
