                                                                                                                           8
Performance
It’s not the focus of this book to tell you how to optimize the performance of your
implementation, or even to tell you whether it’s necessary. Your implementation should
be as fast as it needs to be: some application programming interfaces (APIs) are per-
formance critical and must be called many times per second whereas other APIs are
infrequently used and their speed is of less concern. However, it is the focus of this book
to show you how certain API design decisions can affect performance, and therefore how
you can optimize the performance of your interface.
    Your implementation may not need to have high performance, but your interface
should still be as optimal as possible so that it’s not actively undermining performance.
Requirements change, and you may find yourself needing to optimize your imple-
mentation after the first version of your API has been released. In this situation, you’ll
wish that you had considered the performance impact of your API beforehand, so that
you’re not forced to break backward compatibility to improve performance.
    However, the most important point to make here is that you should strive never to
warp your API for performance reasons. Good designs normally correspond with good
performance (Tulach, 2008; Bloch 2008). Your API should continue to provide a clean
and logical representation of the problem domain even after you’ve optimized its
implementation. There are cases where this is simply not possible. For example, if you’re
writing an API that must communicate across a remote procedure call barrier, or if
you’re sending multiple HTTP requests to a Web-based API, you may hit the case that
the overhead for performing many individual API calls is too slow and instead you feel
the need to introduce a vectorized API, which batches up many calls into a single
method. But other than these domain-specific examples, you will often find that a lot can
be optimized behind your API without having to change the public interface. That’s why
you’re writing an API after all!

  TIP: Don’t unduly warp your API to achieve high performance.

    There are several components to API performance. I’ll consider each of these in the
following subsections:
1. Compile-time speed. The impact of your API on the time it takes to compile a
   client program. This can affect the productivity of your users.

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00005-2                                                                     329
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

2. Run-time speed. The time overhead for calling your API methods. This is impor-
   tant if your methods must be called frequently.
3. Run-time memory overhead. The memory overhead for calling your API methods.
   This is important if you expect many of your objects to be created and kept in
   memory. It can also affect CPU cache performance.
4. Library size: The size of the object code for your implementation that clients must
   link into their applications. This affects the total disk and memory footprint of your
   clients’ applications.
5. Start-up time: The time it takes to load and initialize a dynamic library that imple-
   ments your API. Various factors can affect this, such as template resolution, bind-
   ing unresolved symbols, calling static initializers, and library path searching.
   In addition to specific API factors that affect these performance metrics, you should,
of course, investigate your compiler’s options to see whether there are any flags you can
turn on or off to give a performance boost. For example, turning off run-time type in-
formation if you don’t need to use the dynamic_cast operator is one common decision
(-fno-rtti for the GNU Cþþ compiler).
   One of the most important lessons to learn about performance optimization is
that you should never trust your instincts about which parts of your implementation
you think will be slow. You should always measure the actual performance profile of
your API in real-world situations and then focus your optimization effort on the areas
that give you the biggest impact. A corollary to this is that you don’t need to start
with the most efficient implementation: do it the easy way first and then figure
out which parts of your implementation need to be optimized once everything is
working.
   At Pixar, we would regularly have various teams work on different components of a
particular feature for one of our films. For example, the driving system in Cars involved
work by the R&D team to implement a generic simulation plugin system, work by GUI
engineers to provide direct manipulation controls for animators, and work by the pro-
duction teams on the movie to integrate everything into their pipeline. Then, once all of
the software was functional and integrated, we convened “speed team” meetings to
assess where the bottlenecks were and assign work to the relevant engineers so that the
overall system would meet specific performance criteria.
   The important point is always to remember Amdahl’s law. This states that the overall
performance improvement gained by optimizing a single part of a system is limited by
the fraction of time that the improved part is actually used. You may increase the per-
formance of one part of your API by a factor of 10, but if a client’s program spends only
1% of its time in that code, then the overall improvement is reduced to a factor of only
0.1 (10 * 0.01).

 TIP: To optimize an API, instrument your code and collect performance data for real-world
 examples. Then target your optimization effort at the actual bottlenecks. Don’t guess where the
 performance hot spots are.

Pass input arguments by const reference
In Chapter 6, I recommended that you prefer const references over pointers to pass
input parameters (i.e., parameters that are not changed by the function), but that you
should prefer pointers over nonconst references for output parameters so that their
mutability is clearly advertised to clients. This section now offers some additional
performance reasons to support the use of const references to pass input arguments
into a function.
   By default, function arguments in Cþþ are passed “by value”. This means that the
object being passed into the function is copied, and then that copy is destroyed when the
function returns. As a result, the original object that’s passed into the method can never
be modified. However, this involves the overhead of calling the object’s copy constructor
and then destructor. Instead, you should pass a const reference to the object. This has
the effect of only passing the pointer to the object, but also ensuring that the object is not
modified by the method:

   void SetValue(std::string str);        // pass by value
   void SetValue(std::string &str);       // pass by reference
   void SetValue(const std::string &str); // pass by const reference

 TIP: Always prefer passing a nonmutable object as a const reference rather than passing it by
 value. This will avoid the memory and performance costs to create and destroy a temporary
 copy of the object, and all of its member and inherited objects.

   This rule applies only to objects. It’s not necessary for built-in types such as int, bool,
float, double, or char because these are small enough to fit in a CPU register. In addition,
Cþþ Standard Library iterators, smart pointers, and function objects are designed to be
passed by value. However, for all other custom types, you should favor references or
const references. Let’s look at a specific example:

   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       // constructor
       MyObject();
       // destructor
       ~MyObject();
       // copy constructor
       MyObject(const MyObject &obj);
       // assignment operator
       MyObject &operator=(const MyObject &obj);

   private:
       std::string mName;
   };

   class MyObjectHolder
   {
   public:
       MyObjectHolder();
       ~MyObjectHolder();

       MyObject GetObject() const;
       void SetObjectByValue(MyObject obj);
       void SetObjectByConstReference(const MyObject &obj);

   private:
       MyObject mObject;
   };

   If you assume that the SetObjectByValue() and SetObjectByConstReference() methods
both simply assign their argument to the mObject member variable, then the sequence of
operations that’s performed when each of these methods is called is:
  SetObjectByValue(object)
    std::string constructor
    MyObject copy constructor
    MyObject assignment operator
    MyObject destructor
    std::string destructor
  SetObjectByConstReference(object)
    MyObject assignment operator
   The situation becomes worse if MyObject is derived from some base class, because
then the copy constructor and destructor of each base class in the object hierarchy
would also have to be called for the pass by value case.
   There’s another reason to avoid passing arguments by value, and that’s the “slicing
problem” (Meyers, 2005). This is the problem in which, if a method accepts a base class
argument (by value) and you pass a derived class, then any extra fields of the derived
class will be sliced off. This is because the size of the object to be passed by value is
determined, at compile time, to be the size of the base class. Passing arguments as const
references instead of passing by value avoids the slicing problem.

Minimize #include dependencies
The time it takes to compile a large project can depend greatly on the number and depth
of #include files. As such, one of the common techniques for decreasing build times is to
try and reduce the number of #include statements in header files. As you know, it’s good
practice to put include guards around your header files to avoid their being expanded
multiple times during the complication of a single translation unit. But there are other
factors you can consider to improve build times.

Avoid “Winnebago” headers
Some APIs provide a single large header file that pulls in all of the classes and global
definitions for the interface. This can seem like a convenient affordance for your clients.
However, it only serves to increase the compile-time coupling between your clients’ code
and your API, and it means that even the most minimal use of your API must pull in
every public symbol.
   For example, the standard Win32 header windows.h pulls in well over 200,000 lines of
code (under Visual Studio 9.0). Every .cpp file that includes this header effectively adds
over 4 MB of extra code that needs to be loaded from around 90 separate files and
compiled for every source file. Similarly, the macOS header Cocoa/Cocoa.h expands to
over 100,000 lines of code at over 3 MB.
   Precompiled headers can help to alleviate this burden by preprocessing these
large common include files to a more optimal form, such as a .pch or .gch file.
However, a more modular and loosely coupled solution would involve providing a
collection of smaller individual headers for each component of your API. Clients can
then choose to #include only the declarations for the subset of your API that they’re
using. This can make for longer lists of #include statements in your clients’ code, but
the result is an overall reduction in the amount of your API that their code must
pull in.

Forward declarations
A header file, A, includes another header file, B, to pull in the declaration of a class,
function, struct, enum, or other entity that’s used in header A. The most common sit-
uation in an object-oriented program is that header A wants to pull in the declaration of
one or more classes from header B. However, in many situations, header A doesn’t
actually need to include header B and can instead simply provide a forward declaration
for the classes needed. A forward declaration can be used when:
1. The size of the class is not required. If you include the class as a member variable
   or subclass from it, then the compiler will need to know the size of the class.
2. You don’t reference any member methods of the class. Doing so would require
   knowing the method prototype: its argument and return types.

3. You don’t reference any member variables of the class; but you already know never
   to make those public (or protected).
   For example, you can use forward declarations if header A refers only to the name of
classes from header B via pointers or references:

   class B;   // forward declaration

   class A
   {
   public:
       void SetObject(const &B obj);

   private:
       B *mObj;
   };

    However, if you were to change the definition of class A so that the compiler needs to
know the actual size of class B, then you must include the actual declaration of class B
(i.e., you must #include its header). For example, if you store an actual copy of B inside A:

   #include "B.h"

   class A
   {
   public:
       void SetObject(const &B obj);

   private:
       B mObj;
   };

   As noted in the chapter on Patterns, you can use the pimpl idiom to avoid having to
define object B as a data member in your header file, and thereby avoid the need to
#include the B.h header in the previous case.
   Obviously, you will need to #include the full header in any .cpp file that uses the
classes in that header (e.g., A.cpp must include B.h). A forward declare simply tells the
compiler to add the name to its symbol table with a promise that you’ll provide the full
declaration when it actually needs it.
   One interesting point is that a forward declaration is sufficient if you pass a var-
iable to a method by value or return it by value (although you should prefer a const
reference over passing a parameter by value). You might think that the compiler
needs to know the size of the class at this point, but it’s needed only by the code that
implements the method and any client code that calls it. So the following example is
quite legal:

   class B;

   class A
   {
   public:
       void SetObject(B obj);
       B GetObject() const;
   };

 TIP: As a rule of thumb, you should need to #include the header file for a class only if you use
 an object of that class as a member variable in your own class or if you inherit from that
 class.

    Note: it’s generally safer to use forward declarations only for your own code. By using
forward declarations, you are embedding knowledge of how symbols are declared in the
header that you’re eliding. For example, if you use forward declares for a foreign header
and your API is used in environments with different versions of that header, the decla-
ration of a class within that header could be changed to a typedef, or the class could be
changed to a templated class, which would break your forward declaration. This is one
reason why you should specifically never try to forward declare Cþþ Standard Library
objects. For example, always do #include <string>, never attempt to forward declare
std::string.

 TIP: Only forward declare symbols from your own API.

    Of note here is the <iosfwd> header offered by the Standard Library. This header
contains forward declarations for the input/output library, so that you don’t have to pull
the full definitions into your own header files.
    Finally, a header file should declare all of its dependencies as either forward decla-
rations or explicit #include lines. Otherwise, the inclusion of the header in other files may
become order dependent. This is at odds with the statement to minimize the number of
#include statements, but it is an important exception for the sake of API robustness and
elegance. A good way to test this is to ensure that an empty .cpp file that includes only
your public header can compile without error.

 TIP: A header file should #include or forward declare all of its dependencies.

Redundant #include guards
Another way to reduce the overhead of parsing too many include files is to add redun-
dant preprocessor guards at the point of inclusion. For example, if you have an include
file, bigfile.h, which looks like this:

   #ifndef BIGFILE_H
   #define BIGFILE_H

   // lots and lots of code

   #endif

   Then you might include this file from another header by doing this:

   #ifndef BIGFILE_H
   #include "bigfile.h"
   #endif

    This saves the cost of pointlessly opening and parsing the entire include file if you’ve
already included it. This may seem like a trivial optimization, and indeed it can be for
small include hierarchies. However, if you have a large code base with many include
files, this optimization can make a significant difference. Back in 1996, John Lakos
performed several experiments to demonstrate the degree of performance improve-
ments that this optimization can elicit on a large project. The results were striking
(Lakos, 1996). However, because these results are from the mid-1990s, I designed a
similar experiment to test this effect on a modern compiler, and the results correlate well
with those of Lakos.
    For a given number N, I generated N include files that each included the N-1 other
include files. Each include file also contained around 100 lines of class declarations. I
also generated N .cpp files, in which each .cpp file included only one header. I then timed
how long it took to compile every .cpp file. This experiment therefore chooses a worst-
case O(n2) include structure, although it also includes the time to run the compiler N
times. The experiment was performed for a set of include files that used redundant
include guards and a set that did not. Table 8.1 shows the averaged results of this
experiment, using the GNU Cþþ compiler, version 4.2.1, on an Intel Core 2 Duo pro-
cessor running macOS 10.6 with 2 GB of RAM.
    This behavior will, of course, vary by compiler and platform, so in the interest of good
experimental technique, I repeated the experiment with the Microsoft Cþþ compiler,

Table 8.1 Compilation time speedup from using
                 redundant include guards for a worst-case include
                 hierarchy containing N include files.
                 N        Without guards (s)    With guards (s)     Speedup
                 2        0.07                  0.07                1.00 ?
                 4        0.15                  0.14                1.07 ?
                 8        0.35                  0.31                1.13 ?
                 16       0.98                  0.76                1.29 ?
                 32       4.07                  2.12                1.92 ?
                 64       25.90                 6.82                3.80 ?
                 128      226.83                24.70               9.18 ?

version 14.0, on an Intel Core 2 Quad CPU running Windows XP with 3.25 GB of RAM.
The results in this case were even more pronounced, with a speedup of around 18 times
for the N ¼ 128 case.

 TIP: Consider adding redundant #include guards to your headers to optimize compile time for
 your clients.

    By comparison, I found that the experiment showed almost no effect under Linux
(1.03? speedup for N ¼ 128), in which presumably the combination of the GNU
compiler and the Linux disk cache produces a more efficient environment. However, the
users of your API may be using a broad range of platforms, so this optimization could
have a large impact on many of them. Even a speedup of only 1.29? could make a big
difference to the amount of time they spend waiting for a build to finish. The code to run
the experiment is included in the full source code package on the accompanying website
for this book, so you can try it out for your own platforms.
    Herb Sutter recommends against using redundant #include guards, partly because
they break encapsulation (Sutter and Alexandrescu, 2004). I also do not support breaking
encapsulation. You should never use this technique across libraries or to include headers
that you do not maintain. Use this only within your own APIs. As with all optimizations,
you should measure performance for your compilers first. Modern compilers are
improving in this area, although I was still able to measure significant differences across
platforms as of 2024.
    This technique has been used to practical benefit by many large-scale APIs. To give a
retro example, the Commodore Amiga platform used this technique to improve the
performance of the AmigaOS APIs. For instance, here’s what the top of the intuition/
screens.h header file looked like for the Amiga in the early 1990s:

   #ifndef INTUITION_SCREENS_H
   #define INTUITION_SCREENS_H TRUE
   /*
   ** $Filename: intuition/screens.h $
   ** $Release: 2.04 Includes, V37.4 $
   ** $Revision: 36.36 $
   ** $Date: 91/10/07 $
   **
   ** The Screen and NewScreen structures and attributes
   **
   ** (C) Copyright 1985-1999 Amiga, Inc.
   **         All Rights Reserved
   */

   #ifndef EXEC_TYPES_H
   #include <exec/types.h>
   #endif

   #ifndef GRAPHICS_GFX_H
   #include <graphics/gfx.h>
   #endif

   #ifndef GRAPHICS_CLIP_H
   #include <graphics/clip.h>
   #endif

   #ifndef GRAPHICS_VIEW_H
   #include <graphics/view.h>
   #endif

   #ifndef GRAPHICS_RASTPORT_H
   #include <graphics/rastport.h>
   #endif

   #ifndef GRAPHICS_LAYERS_H
   #include <graphics/layers.h>
   #endif

   #ifndef UTILITY_TAGITEM_H
   #include <utility/tagitem.h>
   #endif

Declaring constants
Often you want to define several public constants for your API. This is a great technique
for avoiding the proliferation of hardcoded values throughout your client’s code, such as
maximum values or default strings. For example, you might declare several constants in
the global scope of your header in this way:

   const int MAX_NAME_LENGTH = 128;
   const float LOG_2E = log2(2.71828183f);
   const std::string LOG_FILENAME = "filename.log";

   The issue to be aware of here is that only very simple constants for built-in types will
be inlined by your Cþþ compiler. By default, any variable that you define in this way will
cause your compiler to store space for the variable in every module that includes your
header. In the previous case, this will happen for both the float and the string constant. If
you declare a lot of constants, and your API headers are included in many .cpp files, then
this can cause bloat in the client’s .o object files and the final binary. The solution is to
declare the constants as extern:

   extern const int MAX_NAME_LENGTH;
   extern const float LOG_2E;
   extern const std::string LOG_FILENAME;

   Then define the value of each constant in the accompanying .cpp file. In this way, the
space for the variables is allocated only once. This has the additional benefit of hiding
the actual constant values from the header file: they are implementation details, after all.
   A better way to do this is if you can declare the constants within a class. Then you can
declare them as static const (so they will not count toward the per-object memory size):

   // myapi.h
   class MyAPI
   {
   public:
       static const int MAX_NAME_LENGTH;
       static const int MAX_RECORDS;
       static const std::string LOG_FILENAME;
   };

   You can then define the value for these constants in the associated .cpp file:

   // myapi.cpp
   const int MyAPI::MAX_NAME_LENGTH = 128;
   const int MyAPI::MAX_RECORDS = 65525;
   const std::string MyAPI::LOG_FILENAME = "filename.log";

    You may think that this is a trivial optimization and will save an insignificant amount
of space. However, at Linden Lab, we decided to clean up all of these instances in the
Second Life Viewer source code. The end effect was an appreciable 10% reduction in the
size of the generated files.
    If you’re using a Cþþ17 (or later) compiler, then you should instead take advantage of
inline variables to solve this issue for you, allowing you simply to put your constants, and
their values, in your header files.
    Another option to avoid the bloat issue in certain cases is to use enums as an alter-
native to variables. Or you could also use getter methods to return the constant values,
such as:

   // myapi.h
   class MyAPI
   {
   public:
       static int GetMaxNameLength();
       static int GetMaxRecords();
       static std::string GetLogFilename();
   };

 TIP: Declare global scope constants with extern, or declare constants in classes as static const.
 Then define the value of the constant in the .cpp file. This reduces the size of object files for
 modules that include your headers. Even better, hide these constants behind a function call or
 use Cþþ17 inline variables.

The constexpr, consteval, and constinit keywords
The problem with most of the previous options is that the compiler can no longer
evaluate the const expression at compile time, because the actual value is hidden in the
.cpp file. For example, clients would not be able to do either of these:

   char name1[MyAPI::MAX_NAME_LENGTH];               // illegal
   char name2[MyAPI::GetMaxNameLength()];            // illegal

   However, the constexpr keyword was added as of Cþþ11 to allow for more aggressive
compile-time optimizations. This can be used to indicate functions or variables that you
know to be constant, so that the compiler can perform greater optimization. For
example, consider this code:

   int GetTableSize(int elems) { return elems * 2; }
   double myTable[GetTableSize(2)]; // illegal in C++03

  This is illegal according to the Cþþ03 standard, because the compiler has no way of
knowing that the value returned by GetTableSize() is a compile-time constant. However,
under Cþþ11, you can tell the compiler that this is in fact the case:

   constexpr int GetTableSize(int elems) { return elems * 2; }
   double myTable[GetTableSize(2)]; // legal in C++11

   The constexpr keyword can also be applied to variables. However, marking the result
of a function as a compile-time constant opens the door to letting us define constants
using a function call while allowing clients to use the constant value at compile time. For
example:

   // myapi.h
   class MyAPI
   {
   public:
       constexpr int GetMaxNameLength() { return 128; }
       constexpr int GetMaxRecords() { return 65525; }
       constexpr std::string GetLogFilename() { return "log.txt"; }
   };

    As I covered in the Cþþ Revisions chapter, Cþþ20 added further const specifiers to
the standard with the introduction of consteval and constinit. The consteval specifier
allows functions to be used in constant expressions and requires the function to be
evaluated at compile time. The constinit specifier ensures that a static or thread storage
variable is initialized at compile time, to avoid static initialization problems at library
load time. Here’s a quick summary of the differences between each of these similar-
sounding keywords:
  const declares that an object or variable is immutable (e.g., that a method does not
  change any data members or that a variable cannot be modified).
  constexpr can be used on functions and variables to produce a constant expression
  that can be evaluated at compile time or at run-time; constexpr functions and
  static data members are also implicitly inline.
  consteval can be used only on functions and forces compile-time evaluation of the
  function; consteval implies inline. It cannot be applied to destructors or alloca-
  tion/deallocation functions, and you cannot use consteval and constexpr together.
  constinit can be used only on variables that can be initialized at compile time. You
  cannot use constinit and constexpr together.

Initialization lists
Cþþ provides constructor initialization lists to let you easily initialize all member vari-
ables in your class. Using this feature can afford a slight performance increase over
simply initializing each member variable in the body of the constructor. For example,
instead of writing:

   // avatar.h
   class Avatar
   {
   public:
       Avatar(const std::string &first, const std::string &last)
       {
           mFirstName = first;
           mLastName = last;
       }

   private:
       std::string mFirstName;
       std::string mLastName;
   };

   you could write:

   // avatar.h
   class Avatar
   {
   public:
       Avatar(const std::string &first, const std::string &last) :
           mFirstName(first),
           mLastName(last)
       {
       }

   private:
       std::string mFirstName;
       std::string mLastName;
   };

   Member variables are constructed before the body of the constructor is called, so in
the first example the default std::string constructor will be called to initialize the two
member variables, and then inside the constructor the assignment operator is called
(DeLoura, 2001). However, in the second example, only the assignment operator is
invoked. Using an initialization list therefore avoids the cost of calling the default
constructor for each member variable that you include in the list.
   Of course, in terms of good API design, you should hide as much implementation
detail from your header files as possible. The best approach is therefore to define the
class in your header file as:

   // avatar.h
   class Avatar
   {
   public:
       Avatar(const std::string &first, const std::string &last);

   private:
       std::string mFirstName;
       std::string mLastName;
   };

   Then provide the constructor and initialization list in the associated .cpp file:

   // avatar.cpp
   Avatar::Avatar(const std::string &first, const std::string &last) :
       mFirstName(first),
       mLastName(last)
   {
   }

 TIP: Use constructor initialization lists to avoid the cost of a constructor call for each data
 member, but declare these in the .cpp file to hide implementation details.

   Here are a few things to be aware of when using initialization lists:
1. The order of variables in the initialization list must match the order in which the
   variables are specified in the class.
2. You can’t specify arrays in an initialization list. However, you can specify an
   std::vector, which may be a better data structure choice anyway.
3. If you’re declaring a derived class, the default constructor for any base classes will
   be called implicitly. You can use the initialization list to call a nondefault
   constructor instead. If specified, a call to a base class constructor must appear
   before any member variables.
4. If you’ve declared any of your member variables as references or as const, then
   you must initialize them via the initialization list (to avoid the default constructor
   defining their initial, and only, value).
   In Cþþ03, constructors cannot call other constructors. However, this constraint was
loosened in Cþþ11, allowing constructors to call other constructors in the same class.
This lets you avoid copying code between constructors by delegating the implementa-
tion of one constructor to another, such as in this example:

   class MyClass
   {
   public:
       MyClass(int answer) :
           mAnswer(answer)
       {}
       MyClass() :
           MyClass(42) // legal in C++11
       {}

   private:
       int mAnswer;
   };

   Although the same effect could be achieved by using a single constructor with a
default argument, that would bake the default value into your client’s code. The Cþþ11
syntax lets you hide this value because you can (and should) define the initialization list
in the .cpp file.

Memory optimization
On modern CPUs, memory latency can be one of the largest performance concerns for a
large application. That’s because while processor speeds have been improving at a rate

              100,000
                                                                                              LEGEND

                                                                                                Processor
              10,000                                                                             Speed

                                                                                                 Memory
                                                                                                 Speed
Performance

                1000

                                                              Processor / Memory
                 100
                                                               Performance Gap

                  10

                    1
                   1980      1985      1990    1995         2000         2005         2010
                                               Year
FIGURE 8.1 The widening gap in CPU performance improvements versus memory improvements. The vertical axis
is on a logarithmic scale. Adapted from Hennessy, J.L. and Patterson, D.A., 2006. Computer Architecture: A
Quantitative Approach, Fourth ed. Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN 0123704901. Copyright Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.

of roughly 55% per year, access times for DRAM have been improving at around 7% per
year (Hennessy and Patterson, 2006). This has resulted in the so-called processore
memory performance gap, as shown in Fig. 8.1.
    Because of this trend, memory overhead is now a principal factor in the execution
time of most programs. This is further exacerbated by the fact that the cost for a cache
miss (i.e., the cost to access main memory) has increased from a few CPU cycles 30 years
ago to over 400 cycles on modern architectures. The effect of this is that a seemingly
elegant and demonstrably correct algorithm can behave poorly in real-world situations
because of unanticipated cache behavior (Albrecht, 2009). As a result, cache-miss
optimization has become an extremely important element of performance optimiza-
tion activities in recent years.
    Although it’s not the focus of this book to provide techniques to optimize your
implementation details in the presence of caches, there are some API-related efforts that
you can undertake to improve data cache efficiency. One key technique is to reduce the
size of your objects: the smaller your objects are, the more of them can potentially fit into
a cache. There are several ways that you can reduce the size of your objects:
1. Cluster member variables by type. Modern computers access memory a single
   word at a time. Your Cþþ compiler will therefore align certain data members so
   that their memory addresses fall on word boundaries. A number of unused
   padding bytes may be added to a structure to make this happen. By clustering all
   member variables of the same type next to each other, you can minimize the
   amount of memory lost to these padding bytes. Table 8.2 provides example align-
   ment figures for member variable on the Windows platform.
2. Use bit fields. A bit field is a decorator for a member variable that specifies how
   many bits the variable should occupy (e.g., int tinyInt:4). This is particularly useful

Table 8.2 Typical alignment of member variables of
                 different types under Windows on x86 CPUs.
                 Type                                Size (bytes)   Alignment (bytes)
                 bool                                1              1
                 char                                1              1
                 short int                           2              2
                 int                                 4              4
                 float                                4              4
                 double                              8              8
                 pointer/reference (32-bit)          4              4
                 pointer/reference (64-bit)          8              8

                 These sizes may vary by platform and processor.

   for packing several bools into a single byte or squeezing two or more numbers into
   the space of a single int. The downside is that there’s normally a performance pen-
   alty for using bit field sizes that are not a multiple of 8, but if memory is your
   biggest concern, then this may be an acceptable cost. When implementing perfor-
   mance optimizations, you often have to trade speed for size, or vice versa.
   Remember, when in doubt about the impact of a feature, measure the real-world
   performance.
3. Use unions. A union (or std::variant in Cþþ17) is a structure in which data mem-
   bers share the same memory space. This can be used to allow multiple values that
   are never used at the same time to share the same area of memory, thus saving
   memory. The size of a union is the size of the largest type in the union. For
   example:

       union
       {
           float floatValue;
           int intValue;
       } FloatOrIntValue;

4. Don’t add virtual methods until you need them. I recommended this as a way to
   keep an API minimally complete back in Chapter 2, but there are also performance
   reasons to do this. Once you add one virtual method to a class, that class needs to
   have a vtable. Only one copy of the vtable needs to be allocated per class type, but
   a pointer to the vtable is stored in every instance of your object. This adds the size
   of one pointer to your overall object size (normally 4-bytes for a 32-bit application
   or 8-bytes for a 64-bit application).
5. Use explicit size-based types. The size of various types can differ by platform,
   compiler, and whether you’re building on a 32-bit or a 64-bit architecture. If you
   want to specify the exact size of a member variable, then you should use a type

   that specifically enforces this, rather than assuming that types such as bool, short,
   or int will be a specific size. As of Cþþ11, you can use the cstdint header to ac-
   cess various fixed-width integer types, such as int8_t, uint32_t, and int64_t.
   Let’s look at an example. The following structure defines a collection of variables to
describe a fireworks effect. It contains information about the color and color variance of
the firework particles, some flags such as whether the effect is currently active, and a
screen location for the effect to begin. A real fireworks class would have a lot more state,
but this is sufficient for illustration purposes:

   class Fireworks_A
   {
   public:
       bool mIsActive;
       int mOriginX;
       int mOriginY;
       bool mVaryColor;
       char mRed;
       int mRedVariance;
       char mGreen;
       int mGreenVariance;
       char mBlue;
       int mBlueVariance;
       bool mRepeatCycle;
       int mTotalParticles;
       bool mFadeParticles;
   };

   The variables in this class are ordered roughly in terms of their logical function,
without any consideration to how efficiently they’re packed in terms of memory. Most
member variables are ordered in this way, or sometimes even more randomly simply by
adding new variables to the end of the class. For this particular example, the total size for
the structure on a 32-bit computer is 48 bytes: that is, sizeof(Fireworks_A) ¼ ¼ 48.
   If you simply cluster the member variables based upon their type and sort them based
upon the size of each type (bools, chars, then ints), then the size of the structure can be
reduced to 32 bytes, a 33% reduction:

   class Fireworks_B
   {
   public:
       bool mIsActive;
       bool mVaryColor;
       bool mRepeatCycle;
       bool mFadeParticles;
       char mRed;
       char mGreen;
       char mBlue;
       int mRedVariance;
       int mGreenVariance;
       int mBlueVariance;
       int mTotalParticles;
       int mOriginX;
       int mOriginY;
   };
 TIP: Cluster member variables by their type to optimize object size.

    You can still squeeze a few more bytes out of the structure, however. By using bit
fields you can make each of the bool flags occupy a single bit instead of an entire byte.
Doing this lets you get the structure size down to 28 bytes, a 42% reduction:

   class Fireworks_C
   {
   public:
       bool mIsActive : 1;
       bool mVaryColor : 1;
       bool mRepeatCycle : 1;
       bool mFadeParticles : 1;
       char mRed;
       char mGreen;
       char mBlue;
       int mRedVariance;
       int mGreenVariance;
       int mBlueVariance;
       int mTotalParticles;
       int mOriginX;
       int mOriginY;
   };

 TIP: Consider the use of bit fields to compress an object further, but be aware of their perfor-
 mance impact.

   Finally, you can step back and consider the actual size requirements for each variable
rather than simply using ints for all integer values. Doing so, you might decide that the
RGB variance values need to be only 1 byte, and the screen space coordinates can be 2
bytes each. I’ll use the types of char and short, respectively, to simplify the subsequent
figure, but in reality you could use size-specific types such as int8_t and uint16_t:

   class Fireworks_D
   {
   public:
       bool mIsActive : 1;
       bool mVaryColor : 1;
       bool mRepeatCycle : 1;
       bool mFadeParticles : 1;
       char mRed;
       char mGreen;
       char mBlue;
       char mRedVariance;
       char mGreenVariance;
       char mBlueVariance;
       int mTotalParticles;
       short mOriginX;
       short mOriginY;
   };

 TIP: Use size-specific types, such as int32_t or uint16_t, to specify the maximum number of
 required bits for a variable.

   This version of our structure occupies only 16 bytes, a reduction of 66% from the
original unoptimized size of 48 bytes. That’s quite a massive memory savings, just by
rearranging the member variables and thinking a little more about how large they need
to be. Fig. 8.2 shows you exactly where all of your memory is going in each of these four
configurations.

                       0            8            16           24          32           40               48

         Fireworks_A

                       0            8            16           24          32

         Fireworks_B

                                                                                            KEY

                       0            8            16           24    28                      = bool

         Fireworks_C                                                                        = char

                                                                                            = short

                                                                                            = int
                       0            8            16                                         = padding
         Fireworks_D

FIGURE 8.2 The memory layout for four different configurations of the member variables in a class. Fireworks_A
is the original unoptimized version, Fireworks_B employs type clustering, Fireworks_C uses bit fields to compress
the bool variables, and Fireworks_D uses smaller integer types.

Don’t inline functions until you need to
This may seem like strange advice to give in a chapter on performance: don’t inline code!
However, this is first and foremost a book about APIs, and inlining code in your header
files breaks one of the cardinal rules of API design: don’t expose implementation details.
That’s not to say that you should never inline code. Sometimes your performance re-
quirements demand it, but you should do so with your eyes wide open and with a full
understanding of the implications, such as:
1. Exposing implementation details. As I’ve just covered, the primary reason for
   avoiding inlining in public API headers is that it causes you to expose the

   implementation of your API methods directly in the header. I spent an entire sec-
   tion in Chapter 2 detailing why you shouldn’t do that.
2. Code embedded in client applications. Inlined code in your API headers is
   compiled directly into your clients’ applications. This means that clients must
   recompile their code whenever you release a new version of the API with any
   changes to inlined code. They cannot simply drop a new version of your shared li-
   brary into their installation and expect their application just to work. In other
   words, inlining breaks binary compatibility.
3. Code bloat. Excessive inlining can significantly grow the size of your object files
   and resulting binary. This is, of course, because each call to an inlined method is
   replaced by all of the operations of that method. This larger code size can end up
   reducing performance by causing more disk access and virtual-memory page
   faults.
4. Debugging complications. Many debuggers have problems dealing with inlined
   code. This is perfectly understandable: it’s difficult to put a breakpoint in a func-
   tion that doesn’t actually exist! The common way to circumvent these problems is
   to turn off inlining for debug code.
   As Donald Knuth famously stated: “Premature optimization is the root of all evil”
(Knuth, 1974).
   Despite these downsides, there still may be cases in which you need to put inlined
code into your API’s public headers. The two main reasons for doing this are:
1. Performance. Using getter and setter methods to wrap access to member variables
   can cause a performance impact on your code if those methods are called many
   times a second. Inlining can recover those performance loses while allowing you to
   keep the getter/setter methods (the accompanying source code for this book has a
   simple program to let you test this for yourself). However, marking a function as
   inline may not necessarily give you performance gains. For one, this is simply a
   hint to the compiler that can be ignored. Some situations in which the request is
   likely to be ignored are using loops in the function, calling another inline function,
   or recursion. Even when the compiler does inline the method, the resulting code
   could be larger or smaller, and it could be faster or slower, depending upon the
   original size of the method, your CPU’s instruction cache, and your virtual memory
   system (Cline et al., 1998). Inlining tends to work best for small, simple, frequently
   called functions.
2. Templates. You may also be using templates in your header and so are forced to
   inline the template implementation. However, as I covered in the previous chapter
   on Cþþ Usage, you can sometimes use explicit template instantiation to avoid
   this.

 TIP: Avoid using inlined code in your public headers until you have proven that your code is
 causing a performance problem and confirmed that inlining will fix that problem.

   For those cases in which you need to use inlined code, I will discuss the best way to
do it. One way to inline code is simply to include the implementation of a method in the
class body, such as:

   class Vector
   {
   public:
       double GetX() const { return mX; }
       double GetY() const { return mY; }
       double GetZ() const { return mZ; }
       void SetX(double x) { mX = x; }
       void SetY(double y) { mY = y; }
       void SetZ(double z) { mZ = z; }

   private:
       double mX, mY, mZ;
   };

    This perfectly demonstrates the concern of including implementation details in your
header files: a user of your API can look at your header and see exactly how an inlined
method is implemented. In this example, the implementation is simple, but it could
easily expose a lot more complexity.
    Another way to inline code is by using the Cþþ inline keyword. This approach offers
at least one improvement over the previous syntax in that it lets you define the code for a
method outside the class body. Although the code is still in the header, at least you don’t
obfuscate the class declaration with code:

   class Vector
   {
   public:
       double GetX() const;
       double GetY() const;
       double GetZ() const;
       void SetX(double x);
       void SetY(double y);
       void SetZ(double z);

   private:
       double mX, mY, mZ;
   };

   inline void Vector::SetX(double x) { mX = x; }
   inline void Vector::SetY(double y) { mY = y; }
   inline void Vector::SetZ(double z) { mZ = z; }
   inline double Vector::GetX() const { return mX; }
   inline double Vector::GetY() const { return mY; }
   inline double Vector::GetZ() const { return mZ; }

    An even better style would be to hide the inline statements in a separate header,
where the filename of that header indicates that it contains implementation details. This
is the same technique that I suggested earlier for dealing with templates, and it’s used by
several industry-strength APIs such as the Boost headers. Boost uses the convention of a
“detail” subdirectory to hold all private details that must be exposed in header files and
then #include those from the public header files. For example:

   class Vector
   {
   public:
       double GetX() const;
       double GetY() const;
       double GetZ() const;
       void SetX(double x);
       void SetY(double y);
       void SetZ(double z);

   private:
       double mX, mY, mZ;
   };

   #include "detail/Vector.h"

   The Boost headers also often use the convention of using a “detail” subnamespace to
contain all private implementation code, such as boost::tuples::detail. This is a good
practice to segment necessary private code further in public headers.
   Finally, I’ll make the point that this section was about avoiding inlining functions.
With Cþþ17, you can also inline variable definitions with external linkage. This is a great
feature that you should use where possible to define constants in your header files.

Copy on write
One of the best ways to save memory is not to allocate any until you need to. This is the
essential goal of copy-on-write (COW) techniques. These work by allowing all clients to
share a single resource until one of them needs to modify the resource. Only at that point
is a copy made. Hence the name: copy on write. The advantage is that if the resource is
never modified, then it can be shared for all clients. This is related to the Flyweight
design pattern, which describes objects that share as much memory as possible to
minimize memory consumption (Gamma et al., 1994).

                                                                                    Copy       Copy of
                 Resource                                            Resource
                                                                                              Resource

        Read                 Read                                   Read                           Write

      Object 1               Object 2                                 Object 1                Object 2

FIGURE 8.3 Illustrating copy on write: Object1 and Object2 can share the same resource until Object2 wants to
change it, at which point a copy must be made so that the changes do not affect Object1’s state.

 TIP: Use copy-on-write semantics to reduce the memory cost for many copies of your objects.

   For example, several string objects that store the same text could all share the same
memory buffer. Then when one of the strings must modify the text, it creates a copy of
the memory buffer so that the modification doesn’t affect the other strings. Fig. 8.3 il-
lustrates this concept. Most Cþþ Standard Library string implementations use copy on
write so that passing them by value is fairly cheap (Stroustrup, 2000).
   There are several ways to implement copy on write. One popular way is to declare a
class template that lets you create pointers to objects managed with copy-on-write se-
mantics, in the same way that you would create a shared or weak pointer template. The
class normally contains a standard shared pointer, to track the reference count of the
underlying object, and provides a private Detach() method for operations that modify the
object and hence require detaching from the shared object and creating a new copy. An
implementation of this is shown next using shared pointers. I show this with inline
methods within the class declaration for reasons of clarity. In real-world applications,
you should, of course, hide these inline definitions in a separate header as they obscure
the interface declarations:

#include <memory>

template <class T>
class CowPtr
{
public:
    using RefPtr = std::shared_ptr<T>;

    inline CowPtr() :
        mPtr(0)
    {}
    inline ~CowPtr() {}
    inline explicit CowPtr(T *other) :
        mPtr(other)
    {}
    inline CowPtr(const CowPtr<T> &other) :
        mPtr(other.mPtr)
    {}

    inline T &operator*()
    {
        Detach();
        return *mPtr.get();
    }
    inline const T &operator*() const
    {
        return *mPtr.get();
    }
    inline T *operator->()
    {
        Detach();
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline const T *operator->() const
    {
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline operator T *()
    {
        Detach();
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline operator const T *() const
    {
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline T *data()
    {
        Detach();
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline const T *data() const
    {
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline const T *constData() const
    {
        return mPtr.get();
    }
    inline bool operator==(const CowPtr<T> &other) const
    {
        return mPtr.get() == other.mPtr.get();

           }
           inline bool operator!=(const CowPtr<T> &other) const
           {
               return mPtr.get() != other.mPtr.get();
           }
           inline bool operator!() const
           {
               return !mPtr.get();
           }
           inline CowPtr<T> &operator=(const CowPtr<T> &other)
           {
               if (other.mPtr != mPtr) {
                   mPtr = other.mPtr;
               }
               return *this;
           }
           inline CowPtr &operator=(T *other)
           {
               mPtr = RefPtr(other);
               return *this;
           }

      private:
          inline void Detach()
          {
               T *temp = mPtr.get();
               if (temp && !mPtr.unique()) {
                   mPtr = RefPtr(new T(*temp));
               }
          }

           RefPtr mPtr;
      };

   This class can then be used as:

   CowPtr<std::string> string1(new std::string("Share Me"));
   CowPtr<std::string> string2(string1);
   CowPtr<std::string> string3(string1);
   string3->append("!");

   In this example, string2 points to the same object as string1, whereas string3 points
to a copy of the object because it needed to modify it. As I’ve mentioned, many
implementations of std::string will use copy-on-write semantics anyway. I’m simply
using this as a convenient example.
   There’s a loophole that can be exploited in the previous CowPtr implementation. It’s
possible for users to dig into the copy-on-write pointer and access the underlying object
to hold on to references to its data. They could then modify the data directly, thus
affecting all CowPtr variables that share that object. For example:

   CowPtr<std::string> string1(new std::string("Share Me"));
   char &char_ref = string1->operator[](1);
   CowPtr<std::string> string2(string1);
   char_ref = 'p';

   In this code, the user takes a reference to a character in the underlying std::string of
string1. After string2 is created, which shares the same memory as string1, the user then
directly changes the second character in the shared string, causing both string1 and
string2 now to equal “Spare Me”.
   The best way to avoid this sort of misuse is simply not to expose CowPtr to your clients.
It most cases, you don’t need your clients to know you are using a copy-on-write
optimization: it’s an implementation detail, after all. Instead, you could use CowPtr to
declare member variables in your objects and not change your public API in any way.
This is called implicit sharing by the Qt library. For example:

   // myobject.h
   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       MyObject();

       std::string GetValue() const;
       void SetValue(const std::string &value);

   private:
       CowPtr<std::string> mData;
   };

   where the implementation of MyObject might look like:

   // myobject.cpp
   MyObject::MyObject() :
       mData(0)
   {}

   std::string MyObject::GetValue() const
   {
       return (mData) ? *mData : "";
   }

   void MyObject::SetValue(const std::string &value)
   {
       mData = new std::string(value);
   }

   In this way, your clients can use your MyObject API without any knowledge that it uses
copy on write, but underneath the covers the object is sharing memory whenever
possible and enabling more efficient copy and assignment operations:

   MyObject obj1;
   obj1.SetValue("Hello");

   MyObject obj2 = obj1;
   std::string val = obj2.GetValue();

   MyObject obj3 = obj1;
   obj3.SetValue("There");

   In this example, obj1 and obj2 will share the same underlying string object, whereas
obj3 will contain its own copy because it modified the string.

Iterating over elements
Iterating over a collection of objects is an extremely common task for client code, so it’s
worth spending some time looking at alternative strategies that offer different strengths
and weaknesses. That way you can choose the best solution for your API requirements.

Iterators
The Cþþ Standard Library approach to this problem is to use iterators. These are objects
that can traverse over some or all elements in a container class (Josuttis, 1999). An
iterator points to a single element in a container, with various operators available, such
as operator* to return the current element, operator-> to access the members of the
container element directly, and operatorþþ to step forward to the next element. This
design intentionally mimics the interface of plain pointer manipulation in C/Cþþ.
    Clients can then use the begin() and end() methods on each container class to return
iterators that bound all elements in the container, or they can use various Standard
Library algorithms that return iterators within the set of all elements, such as std::find(),
std::lower_bound(), and std::upper_bound(). The next code segment provides a simple
example of using a Standard Library iterator to sum all of the values in an std::vector:

   float sum = 0.0f;
   std::vector<float>::const_iterator it;
   for (it = values.begin(); it != values.end(); ++it) {
       sum += *it;
   }

   This is purely an illustrative example. If you really wanted to calculate the sum of all
elements in a container, you should prefer the use of the Standard Library algorithm
std::accumulate, as described in the Functional APIs section of the Styles chapter.
   In terms of your own API designs, here are some reasons why you may want to adopt
an iterator model to allow your clients to iterate over data:

n   Iterators are a well-known pattern with which most engineers are already familiar.
    As such, using an iterator model in your own APIs will minimize the learning curve
    for users. This addresses the ease of use quality I introduced in Chapter 2. For
    example, most engineers will already be aware of any performance issues, such as
    knowing that they should prefer the preincrement operator for iterators (þþit) as
    opposed to postincrement (itþþ), to avoid the construction and destruction of
    temporary variables.
n   The iterator abstraction can be applied to simple sequential data structures, such
    as arrays or lists, as well as more complicated data structures, such as sets and
    maps, which are often implemented as self-balancing binary search trees such as
    red-black trees (Josuttis, 1999).
n   Iterators can be implemented quite efficiently, even as simply as a pointer in some
    cases. In fact, std::vector iterators were actually implemented this way in Visual
    Cþþ 6 and GNU Cþþ 3 (although most modern Standard Library implementations
    now use dedicated iterator classes).
n   Iterators can be used to traverse massive datasets that may not even fit entirely
    into memory. For example, the iterator could be implemented to page in blocks of
    data from disk as needed, and free previously processed blocks. Of course, the
    client can also stop traversing at any point without having to visit every element in
    the container.
n   Clients can create multiple iterators to traverse the same data and use these iter-
    ators simultaneously. If clients wish to insert or delete elements while traversing
    the container, there are established patterns for doing this while maintaining the
    integrity of the iterators.

Random access
An iterator allows clients to traverse linearly through each element in a container.
However, you may have cases where you wish to support random access to any element,
such as accessing a specific element in an array or vector container. Cþþ Standard
Library container classes that support random accesses provide this in a couple of ways:
1. The [] operator. This is meant to simulate the array indexing syntax of C/Cþþ.
   Normally this operator is implemented without any bounds checking, so it can be
   made very efficient.
2. The at() method. This method is required to check if the supplied index is out of
   range and throw an exception in this case. As a result, this approach can be slower
   than the [] operator.
   To illustrate these concepts, the iterator source example in the previous section can
be recast in terms of the [] operator as:

    float sum = 0.0f;
    size_t len = values.size();
    for (size_t it = 0; it < len; ++it) {
        sum += values[it];
    }

   In terms of performance, these two methods are essentially equivalent. Obviously one
approach may prove to be marginally more efficient than the other for a given platform
and compiler, but in general they should involve an equivalent degree of overhead.
   If you plan to add random access functionality to your API, you should strive to adopt
the previous design to capitalize on consistency with the Standard Library. However, if
your API doesn’t need to provide random access to the underlying data, you should
prefer using the iterator model over the operator[] approach, simply because an iterator
expresses the user’s intent more clearly and results in client code that is more obvious
and consistent.

Array references
As an alternative to iterators, some APIs use an approach in which the user passes in an
array data structure by reference. The API then fills the array with the requested ele-
ments and returns it to the user. The Maya API uses this pattern extensively. Autodesk
Maya is a high-end 3D modeling and animation system used extensively in the film and
game industry. The package includes a Cþþ and Python API that provides programmatic
access to the underlying 2D and 3D data in a scene.
   As an example of this pattern, the MfnDagNode::getAllPaths() method is used to return
a sequence of node paths in the Maya scene graph. This is achieved by passing in an
MDagPathArray object by reference, which is then populated with MDagPath references.
Some reasons for this design, and hence the reasons why you may prefer this approach
for your own APIs, are:
n   The primary purpose of this method is performance. In essence, it’s a way to
    collapse a series of connected nodes of a graph data structure into a sequential
    array data structure. This provides a data structure that can be very efficiently iter-
    ated over, but also locates elements adjacent to each other in memory. The result
    is a data structure that can take better advantage of CPU caching strategies, as
    opposed to a tree structure in which individual nodes in the tree may be frag-
    mented across the process’s address space.
n   This technique is particularly efficient if the client keeps the same array around to
    service multiple calls to getAllPaths(). Also, any initial performance overhead to fill
    the array can be compensated for if the array is kept around to support multiple it-
    erations over its elements.
n   This technique also offers a specific feature that the iterator model does not: sup-
    port for noncontiguous elements. That is, a traditional iterator cannot handle
    different orderings of elements or omit certain elements from a sequence, whereas
    using the array reference technique, you can fill the array with any subset of ele-
    ments in any order.

   This concept can be seen in other languages, too, such as the iterator_to_array()
function in PHP, which can be used to convert an iterator into an array for faster
traversal in certain cases.
   As an alternative to consuming a user supplied array, you could also return a const
container of objects and rely on the compiler’s return value optimization to avoid
copying data.

 TIP: Adopt an iterator model for traversing simple linear data structures. If you have a linked
 list or tree data structure, then consider using array references if iteration performance is
 critical.

Extern templates
One issue with the use of templates in Cþþ03 is that compilers must generate code in
each translation unit where a template is instantiated. Most modern compilers will
discard any duplicate code when assembling the final binary at link time, but this can
still cause increases in compilation time and intermediate object code size.
    Cþþ11 introduced the concept of extern templates to improve this situation. This lets
you define a template without instantiating it in a translation unit. Ultimately, this
feature does not affect your public interface, but it can help with compilation and link
performance for your clients.
    For example, consider this class template defined in a header.h file:

   // header.h

   template <class T>
   class Range
   {
   public:
       Range(T min, T max);
       T GetMin() const;
       T GetMax() const;

   private:
       T mMin;
       T mMax;
   };

   This template can be instantiated in multiple translation units. For example, these
two modules both instantiate a specialization of the template for type int:

   // module1.cpp

   #include "header.h"

   void Module1Function()
   {
       Range<int> v1(1, 2);
       ...
   }

   // module2.cpp

   #include "header.h"

   void Module2Function()
   {
       Range<int> v1(2, 4);
       ...
   }

   In this case, the compiler will generate code for the template instantiation in both
module1.o and module2.o object files. To avoid this, you can prevent the template
instantiation in one of the modules by using an extern template. For example,

   // module2.cpp

   #include "header.h"

   // tell the compiler to not instantiate the template in this module
   extern template class Range<int>;

   void Module2Function()
   {
       Range<int> v1(1, 2);
       ...
   }

   With this change, the compiler will no longer generate code for the template
instantiation in module2.o. The resulting library or executable binary will be the same in
each case, but the compiler can do less work and produce smaller intermediate
products.
   When using extern templates, it’s incumbent on you to ensure that the template is
instantiated in at least one translation unit; otherwise you’ll get an undefined symbol
linker error.

Performance analysis
In the final section in this chapter on performance, I’ll look at some tools and techniques
to help you measure the performance of your system. Most of these are aimed at
analyzing the performance of your implementation code and as such are not directly

related to how you design your API. However, this is obviously still a very important part
of producing an efficient API and therefore worthy of focus.
    I’ll consider several different aspects of performance: time-based performance,
memory overhead, and multithreading contention. Also, whereas the preceding sections
in this chapter dealt with stable features of Cþþ, the subsequent text presents software
products that may change over time. Products come, go, change ownership, and change
focus. However, I have endeavored to make this list as up-to-date as possible at the time
of publication.

Time-based analysis
The most traditional interpretation of performance is how long it takes your code to
perform various operations. For example, if you are developing an image processing
library, how long does your Sharpen() or RedEyeReduction() method take to run on a given
image? The implication here is that you must write some sample or test programs that
use your API so that you can then time your API’s performance under different real-
world scenarios. If you have written such programs, there are several forms of perfor-
mance analysis you could consider using:
1. In-house instrumentation. The most targeted and efficient profiling you can
   perform is the kind that you write yourself. Every piece of software is different, and
   so the performance-critical sections of your code will be specific to your API. It’s
   therefore extremely beneficial to have access to a fast timer class that can be inser-
   ted into your code at key points to gather accurate timing information. The results
   can be output to a file and analyzed offline, or your clients could integrate a visual
   display of the timer results into their end-user applications.
      The Second Life Viewer provides this capability via its LLFastTimer class. This
   works by inserting LLFastTimer() calls into critical sections of the code using an
   extensible label that identifies the area being analyzed, such as
   LLFastTimer(RENDER_WATER). The Second Life Viewer itself then provides a debugging
   overlay display to view the cumulative result of the timers in real time. See Fig. 8.4
   for an example of this debugging view.
2. Binary instrumentation. This technique involves instrumenting a program or
   shared library by adding code that records details for each function call. Running
   the instrumented binary then creates an exact trace of the function calls for that
   session. Processing the resulting data can then determine the top call stacks where
   the program spent most of its time.
      One drawback of this approach is that the extra instrumentation overhead can
   slow the program execution significantly, sometimes by as much as 10-100 times,
   although relative performance should be preserved. Finally, this technique will
   obviously not be able to time functions that do not appear as symbols in the bi-
   nary file, such as inline functions.

FIGURE 8.4 Screenshot of the Second Life Viewer showing its built-in view to display the results of various timers
embedded in the code.

3. Sampling. This involves the use of a separate program that continually samples
   your test application to determine its program counter. This is a low-overhead sta-
   tistical technique, meaning that it may not log every single function call made by
   your application, but with a sufficiently high sample rate, it can still be useful in
   telling you where your application is spending most of its time.
      Sampling can be performed at a system level (e.g., to see if your application
   spends a lot of time in system calls, such as whether it is I/O bound), or it can be
   isolated to the functions in your application. In addition to recording time samples,
   this technique can refer to sampling processor events, such as cache misses, mis-
   predicted branches, and CPU stalls.

4. Counter monitoring. Many commercially available operating systems provide per-
   formance counters that report how well various subsystems are performing, such
   as the processor, memory, network, and disk. For example, Microsoft provides the
   Performance Counters API to access counter data on the Windows platform. By
   monitoring these counters while your application is running you can determine
   system bottlenecks and evaluate how inadequate system resources can affect your
   API’s performance.
   Given this categorization of performance analyzing techniques, the next list provides
a cross-section of profiling tools that were on the market at the time of this book’s
publication:
n   Intel VTune: This is a commercial performance analysis suite available for both
    Microsoft Windows and Linux platforms. It includes a binary instrumentation
    feature (called call graph), time- and event-based sampling, and a counter monitor,
    among various other tools. It comes with extensive and powerful graphical tools to
    visualize the resulting performance data.
n   gprof: GProf is the GNU profiler. It uses binary instrumentation to record the num-
    ber of calls, and time spent within each function. It is integrated with the GNU
    Cþþ compiler and activated via the -pg command line option. Running an instru-
    mented binary creates a data file in the current directory that can be analyzed with
    the gprof program (or the Saturn application on macOS).
n   OProfile: This is an open source performance tool for Linux. It is a system-wide
    sampling profiler that can also leverage hardware performance counters. Profile
    data can be produced at the function or instruction level and the software includes
    support for annotating source trees with profile information.
n   AMD CodeXL: A freely available profiler from AMD that runs on Windows and
    Linux. It is based upon OProfile with specific support for analyzing and visualizing
    the pipeline stages of AMD processors.
n   Open SpeedShop: An open source performance measurement tool for Linux based
    upon SGI’s IRIX SpeedShop and currently supported by the Krell Institute. Open
    SpeedShop uses a sampling technique with support for hardware performance
    counters. It provides support for parallel and multithreaded programs and also in-
    cludes a Python scripting API.
n   Sysprof: This is an open source performance profiler for Linux. It uses a system-
    wide sampling technique to profile the entire Linux system while your application
    is running. A simple user interface is provided to browse the resulting data.
n   Callgrind: Callgrind is a part of the valgrind instrumentation framework for Linux
    and macOS. It uses a binary instrumentation technique to collect call graph and
    instruction data for a given program run. The separate KCachegrind tool can be
    used to visualize the profile data. An optional cache simulator can be used to pro-
    file memory access behavior.

n   Apple Shark: Shark is a system-wide sampling profiler written by Apple and pro-
    vided for free as part of their developer tools. It can also profile hardware and soft-
    ware events such as cache misses and virtual memory activity. Shark includes an
    intuitive and easy-to-use interface to browse the hot spots of your Apple
    applications.
n   DTrace: DTrace is a unique and powerful tracing framework that can be used to
    monitor applications in real time. This is done by writing custom tracing programs
    that can define a list of probes and actions to be performed when a probe fires.
    Probes include opening a file, starting a process, and executing a specific line of
    code; actions can analyze the run-time context such as the call stack. Apple added
    DTrace to macOS 10.5 with an accompanying GUI called Instruments. It is also
    available as ktrace on FreeBSD.

Memory-based analysis
As I stated earlier in this chapter, memory performance can be just as important as time-
based performance. Algorithms that allocate and deallocate memory frequently, or
whose memory allocation profiles don’t map well to modern processor caches, can end
up performing a lot slower than expected. Also, memory bugs such as doubling freeing or
accessing unallocated memory can corrupt data or cause crashes, and memory leaks can
build up over time to the point that they consume all available memory and reduce the
performance of your clients’ applications to a crawl or cause them to crash.
   These tools can be used to profile your API’s memory performance and to detect
memory bugs:
n   UNICOM Systems PurifyPlus: This is a commercial memory debugger that uses bi-
    nary instrumentation to detect memory access errors in C/Cþþ programs. After a
    program run, Purify outputs a report file that can be browsed via a graphical inter-
    face. It includes an API that you can access within your programs. Purify is avail-
    able for Solaris, Linux, AIX, and Windows.
n   Valgrind: Valgrind is an open source instrumentation framework for Linux and
    macOS that began life as a memory profiling tool. However, it has since matured
    into a more general performance analysis tool. It works by performing binary
    instrumentation of your executable file and outputs a textual report when your
    program ends. Several front-end GUIs are available to browse the output file, such
    as Valkyrie and Alleyoop.
n   Perforce TotalView MemoryScape: A commercial memory analysis tool available
    for Unix and macOS platforms that works without binary instrumentation. It pro-
    vides a real-time graphical view of your heap memory, including memory use, allo-
    cation bounds violations, and leaks. It handles parallel and multithreaded
    programs and also incorporates a scripting language to perform batch testing.
n   Parasoft InsureDD: A commercial memory debugger that is available for
    Windows, Linux, Solaris, AIX, and HP-UX. Insureþþ performs instrumentation at

    the source code level by prepending your compile line with the insure program.
    You can even set your debugger to stop whenever it detects an error, by adding a
    breakpoint in __Insure_trap_error(). Of course, there is a GUI tool to let you
    browse the detected memory errors.
n   Synopsys Coverity: Coverity is a tool different from the others I have listed. It’s a
    static analysis tool, which means that it checks your source code without executing
    your programs. It records all potential coding errors in a database using a unique
    ID for each error that is stable across multiple analysis runs. A Web interface is
    provided to view the results of the static analysis.

Multithreading analysis
The final aspect of performance that I’ll cover here is multithreaded performance.
Writing efficient multithreaded code is a very difficult task, but luckily there are various
tools out there to help you find logical threading errors in your code, such as race
conditions or deadlocks, as well as profile the performance of your threaded code to find
concurrency bottlenecks:
n   Intel Inspector: This is a commercial threading analysis tool available for 32-bit
    and 64-bit Windows and Linux. It can be used to discover logical threading errors,
    such as potential deadlocks. You can use it as a command-line tool that outputs a
    textual report, or you can use the accompanying visual GUI that maps potential er-
    rors to source code lines.
n   Intel VTune: The thread profiler component of VTune lets you visualize your
    threaded application’s behavior by displaying a time line that shows what your
    threads are doing and how they interact. This lets you determine if you’re getting
    the maximum concurrency from your code. It runs on Windows and Linux.
n   Intel Parallel Studio XE: Intel’s Parallel Studio provides a suite of tools to support
    parallel applications on multicore systems, including a utility to identify candidate
    functions for parallelizing, the Intel Threading Building Blocks, an inspector tool to
    detect threading and memory errors, and a performance analysis tool for parallel
    applications.
n   ParaTools ThreadSpotter: Lets you find performance problems in multithreaded
    and OpenMPI applications on Solaris, Linux, and Windows. It can identify areas
    where a program is using processor cache memory, and in some cases it can sug-
    gest ways to restructure the code to make more effective use of cache memory.
n   Helgrind and DRD: Helgrind and DRD are both modules of the open source
    Valgrind instrumentation framework. They can be used to detect synchronization
    errors in pthreads-based applications, including misuses of the pthreads API, dead-
    locks, and race conditions. They can be used on Linux and macOS.
This page intentionally left blank
