                                                                                                                           9
Concurrency
Concurrency is the act of breaking down a problem into independently executing ele-
ments and then composing those together to solve some larger problem. This is distinct
from the concept of parallelism, which is concerned with executing multiple operations
simultaneously. The difference is that a concurrent algorithm might run correctly on a
single processor or 100 of them, whereas a parallel program is about employing multiple
cores to execute different elements of a task at the same time.
   Concurrency is often achieved through multithreading, in which a single process can
have multiple threads of execution. Some of the complexities introduced by multi-
threaded programming include the need to communicate between threads, such as
through message passing or shared memory, and managing access to shared resources,
such as global data. Done incorrectly, your code can exhibit severe faults such as crashes,
deadlocking, or resource starvation.
   In this chapter, I’ll cover some of the core multithreading features offered by Cþþ. I’ll
then explain some of the related terminology, such as race conditions, thread safety, and
reentrancy. I’ll also look at ways to initialize and synchronize data so that your code is
safe to use from multiple threads simultaneously. And finally, I’ll introduce a collection
of best practices for writing concurrent code and discuss the Thread-Safe Interface
design pattern as one way to write thread-safe object-oriented code.
   Because this is a book focused on the design of software interfaces, I’ll not dive deeply
into all of the aspects of how to write robust multithreaded code in Cþþ. There are many
other good books on the market with that focus (e.g., Williams, 2012). Instead, I’ll look at
how adopting a multithreading model can influence your application programming
interface (API) design decisions. Having said that, this topic does require delving one
level down into your implementation code because that’s where many of the decisions
are made that ultimately determine the thread safety of your API, such as mutex locking.

Multithreading with Cþþ
The Cþþ98 and Cþþ03 standards did not specify how code should behave in the
presence of multiple threads. As a result, it was not possible to write portable multi-
threaded code using compilers based on these early standards. Some of the problems
that could be faced writing Cþþ03 code include optimizing compilers that may reorder
statements and multiple processor caches that might reorder shared memory writes. As a
result, developers had to rely on external libraries, such as pthreads or Boost, to make
their multithreaded programs work correctly.

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00007-6                                                                     367
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

   Fortunately, the Cþþ11 standard introduced direct support for multithreading,
including a memory model that defines how a compiler can access memory. This
involved the introduction of atomic load and store operations and memory access set-
tings that specify how operations on different threads should be synchronized. The
Cþþ20 revision added some incremental improvements to this memory model, in
particular for Power and ARM CPUs and NVIDIA GPUs.

 TIP: Building a modern robust multithreaded library in Cþþ will generally require the use of
 Cþþ11 or later.

    At the language level, the Cþþ11 standard also enforced guarantees around the
behavior of the static keyword. This is a typical way to implement shared data in Cþþ,
but it wasn’t until Cþþ11 that the standard required the initialization of a static object to
be thread-safe. Now the standard states that only one thread can enter the initialization
of a static and that the compiler must not introduce any deadlocks around its
initialization.
    Additionally, Cþþ11 introduced the specific concept of a thread and various new
primitives for working with threads, such as semaphores, mutex locks, and condition
variables. The writers of the specification even added higher-level concepts in the
form of asynchronous tasks that abstract away many of the details of managing
threads.
    The standard also introduced minimum requirements for Cþþ Standard Library
implementations when it comes to thread safety. For example, data containers can’t use
a static object for internal purposes without synchronization. However, in general, if you
expect any threads to write to Standard Library data containers, you should add your
own synchronization mechanisms to keep them thread-safe.
    Because of the large number of threading features that were added to Cþþ11 (and
later revisions), several different categories of solutions operate at different levels of
abstraction. You may not need to worry about all of the different tiers for most projects.
This list gives an overview of these levels of abstraction, from the lowest to the highest
level:
1. Memory model: The standard introduced the std::atomic template, which can be
   used to access data atomically across multiple threads, along with the std::me-
   mory_order enum, which specifies how atomic operation memory accesses are
   ordered. It also enforced the thread safety of the static keyword and introduced
   per-thread static storage with the thread_local keyword.
2. Threading model: The std::thread class was introduced to represent a single
   thread of execution along with related synchronization primitives to help you

   coordinate work across multiple threads such as std::mutex, std::lock_guard,
   std::condition_variable, and std::init_once.
3. Task execution: The std::async function template can be used to execute a func-
   tion asynchronously without having to worry about the details of coordinating
   multiple threads. The result of an asynchronous function is returned in an
   std::future, which offers the ability to wait until the future has a valid result.
4. Standard Library containers and algorithms: The Cþþ standard defines the basic
   thread safety guarantees for Standard Library container classes, and as of Cþþ17
   the set of algorithms includes parallel variants that can take advantage of multiple
   processors, including functions such as std::copy, std::reverse, and std::transform.

Terminology
Before I dive in deeper, I’ll explain some of the terms you may encounter when trying to
build an interface that can take advantage of concurrency and parallelism. In the
remaining sections of this chapter, we will look at how multithreaded programming can
affect your API designs and how to build robust thread-safe and concurrent interfaces.

Data races and race conditions
A data race is when one thread accesses a memory location while another thread is
writing to the same address, causing undefined or unpredictable behavior. This can
happen when code tries to access some shared data without any synchronization. The
standard way to fix these kinds of faults is therefore to add appropriate synchronization
around the data accesses, or to use an operation that’s guaranteed to execute atomically,
so that only one thread can access the shared data at any time.
   In contrast, a race condition is a semantic flaw that happens when the timing or order
of events affects the correctness of a section of code. The classic example of a race
condition is a bank account transfer operation, such as:

  bool TransferBalance(const Amount &amount, Account *from, Account *to)
  {
      if (from->GetBalance() < amount) {
          return false;
      }
      to->AddToBalance(amount);
      from->AddToBalance(-amount);
      return true;
  }

    In this example, it’s possible for two threads to get past the initial balance check, but
then both threads remove money from the account, potentially resulting in a negative
balance. This is an example of a check-then-act race condition. The fix in this case is to
make the entire function operate atomically by introducing synchronization around all
of the code inside the function.

   Race conditions and data races are very different types of concurrency errors, and
neither is a subset of the other. Data races are concerned with access to the same
memory address whereas race conditions are concerned with the correctness of blocks
of code. Many race conditions can be caused by data races, but it’s also possible to have
race conditions in code that has no data races.

Thread safety
A thread-safe API is one in which its functions can be called by multiple threads
simultaneously without producing unexpected behavior or faults (i.e., without exhibiting
any data races or race conditions). Another way of describing this is an API that only
accesses shared resources in a way that ensures safety and correctness when executed by
multiple threads at the same time.
    There’s not generally just one solution to ensuring thread safety because achieving
this will depend upon the specific characteristics of your code and the usage pattern of
clients exercising your code. Race conditions in particular will depend upon the se-
mantics of your code and whether certain blocks of code need to be executed atomically.
It can therefore sometimes be better to think of three basic levels of guarantees that your
code offers:
1. Not Thread-Safe. The API doesn’t provide any specific correctness guarantees
   when accessed by multiple threads simultaneously. Most code written using
   Cþþ98/Cþþ03 should be considered not thread-safe unless it specifically employs
   a threading library such as pthreads or Boost threads.
2. Partially Thread-Safe. The API provides some guarantees of thread safety when
   used in specific ways. For example, most of the Cþþ Standard Library containers
   offer the guarantee that simultaneous reads of the same object are okay and simul-
   taneous writes of different objects are okay. But simultaneous writes of the same
   object are not directly supported, requiring clients to implement their own syn-
   chronization to handle these cases. We’ll see an example of this later in the
   chapter.
3. Thread-Safe. The API commits to being free of data races and race conditions
   when accessed by multiple threads at the same time. This requires a concerted
   effort on the part of the developer to ensure that all access to shared resources is
   done safely and that operations that need to be executed atomically are done so.
   Even if your API offers full thread safety, clients of your interface could still use it in
ways that introduce race conditions into their code. For example, consider this simple
code fragment to pop an element from the end of a vector:

  if (!vec.empty()) {
      vec.pop_back();
  }

   The pop_back() method of std::vector produces undefined behavior if the vector is
empty (using the clang 14 compiler, it causes a crash). However, in the previous code
fragment, it would be possible for two threads to pass the condition check, which would
then cause undefined behavior if the vector had only one element and both threads tried
to call pop_back(). Ultimately, the authors of this code fragment need to perform their
own locking around this entire code block to ensure thread safety. This is why the
Standard Library container classes aren’t required to implement locking of their un-
derlying data: because the users of the container class will often need to implement
locking at the level of their own code anyway.
   One possible way to address this at the API level might be for the container class to
offer a pop_back_if_empty() function, in which the need to introduce locking can then be
hidden entirely within the API implementation and not exposed to the client. However,
this could mean adding many of these composite operations, which would quickly
pollute the API and violate the principle of being minimally complete that we introduced
in the Qualities chapter.

Reentrancy
An API call is considered reentrant if it can be safely called again before the previous
invocation has finished: for example, if a function can be interrupted at any point during
its execution and then safely reentered before that earlier invocation is done.
    This sounds similar to the definition of thread safety, but the key distinction is that
reentrancy is a term that comes from a time before the introduction of modern multitasking
operating systems and therefore refers to the ability to reenter a function within a single-
threaded environment: for example, if a system interrupt is triggered and the interrupt
handler calls the reentrant function while it’s already in the process of being executed.
    A function that’s reentrant can often also be thread-safe, but this is not always
guaranteed: a reentrant function might not be thread-safe, and a thread-safe function
might not be reentrant. For example, the use of mutex locking can make a function
thread-safe in the presence of multiple threads, but if that function locked its mutex and
was then called again within the same thread before releasing that lock, it would be
deadlocked waiting for the mutex to be released.
    Some best practices for writing reentrant functions:
1. The function should work only on the data provided by the caller.
2. It should not hold static or global nonconst data unless atomic access can be
   guaranteed.
3. It should not return the memory address to any static or global nonconstant data.
4. It must not call other nonreentrant functions.
5. Locking any shared resource should be avoided, unless you can use a reentrant
   lock, such as a recursive mutex lock.
6. Self-modifying code should be avoided unless this can be done in its own thread-
   specific memory.

   For the purposes of most modern projects, thread safety is probably the more
important issue to be concerned about. But if you are developing an API that may be
used in an interrupt or signal handler, then you will want to consider whether your
function calls are reentrant within the same thread.

Asynchronous tasks
Cþþ11 introduced a number of primitives to help developers directly create and manage
threads, but it also introduced some higher-level concepts for performing work asyn-
chronously in the form of the std::async and std::future templates.
   The std::async function template is used to run any Cþþ functor asynchronously,
and std::future is used to access the result of that function once the work has
completed. This makes it a lot easier to perform background processing tasks without
having to worry about managing threads and semaphores. For example, the next code
snippet demonstrates using a lambda function to perform some work asynchronously
using std::async. The main thread can then do some other work and then call
future.get() to block on the result from std::async:

   auto future = std::async(std::launch::async, []() {
       int result = 0;
       // perform work to calculate the result value
       return result;
   });

   // Do something else while the async task is running

   auto result = future.get();

   Asynchronous tasks make it a lot easier to write multithreaded code in Cþþ. However, in
terms of implications for your API designs, there’s perhaps not a lot to talk about here. That’s
because you can use any function or object method with std::async (i.e., there’s nothing
special you need to add to your class definitions to make them callable with std::async).
This is an elegant feature of the Cþþ implementation, particularly compared with other
languages such as Swift, in which functions must be decorated with an async keyword and
callers of those async functions must use the await keyword at the call site, which can cause
a cascade of changes to happen to add asynchronous support to a Swift API.

Parallelism
As noted at the start of this chapter, concurrency and parallelism are related but distinct
concepts. For the purposes of the discussion here, I’ll define parallelism as splitting a
task into multiple subtasks that can then be executed simultaneously on multiple CPUs.
For example, consider an algorithm that runs a function on every value in a vector and
returns another vector containing all of the results. This input vector could be split into
several smaller vectors and each of those could be computed on a different CPU to
parallelize the work.

   The Cþþ17 standard introduced parallel support for many of the algorithms in the
Cþþ Standard Library. These are provided as overloaded versions of functions such as
std::sort, std::find, std::reverse, and std::count. These new parallelized versions accept
a new execution policy argument, which can be one of the following values:
1. std::execution::seq: Runs the algorithm sequentially. This is the default if you
   don’t specify an execution policy.
2. std::execution::par: The implementation can choose to run the algorithm in paral-
   lel on multiple processors. You’re responsible for ensuring no data races happen
   within the function.
3. std::execution::par_unseq: The implementation can choose to run the algorithm in
   parallel on multiple processors. Additionally, this policy enables the use of vectori-
   zation/single instruction, multiple data technology where available.
4. std::execution::unseq (introduced in Cþþ20): Indicates that the algorithm can be
   vectorized (e.g., it can execute on a single thread but take advantage of CPU vecto-
   rization technology such as SSE on ?86 chips or Altivec on PPC chips).
   For instance, the previous example of executing a function over every element in a
vector is performed by the std::transform function. You can use the Cþþ17 parallelized
version of this algorithm as follows. In this example, we use a lambda function to double
the value of every element in the vector. The key part in this example is the use of the
std::execution::par policy to enable the parallel implementation:

     std::vector<double> inVec;
     std::vector<double> outVec;
     ...
     std::transform(std::execution::par,
                    inVec.begin(), inVec.end(),
                    outVec.begin(),
                    [](double value) { return value * 2.0; });

    Like the previous asynchronous task section, this functionality likely has little impact
on the actual design of your APIs. The new parallel algorithms are features that your
clients could use in their code or that you can use within your API implementation, but
they don’t have much of an impact on the surface area of your API itself. One exception
might be if you want to provide your own parallel algorithms, in which case you might
consider being consistent with the functions in the Cþþ Standard Library and handle an
execution policy parameter to configure the parallel behavior of your calls.

Accessing shared data
Stateless APIs
Threading errors are generally caused when multiple threads try to manipulate a shared
resource at the same time, such as a global variable. Therefore, objects that don’t
maintain or rely on any shared state can be safely accessed by multiple threads. Any
function parameters and local variables within a function are allocated on the stack, and
each thread has its own stack, so these are safe to use within your functions.

  There are certain categories of problem that lend themselves more toward this kind of
approach, such as mathematical calculations or unit conversion routines. For example:
   class MathUtils
   {
   public:
       static size_t Factorial(size_t num)
       {
           size_t result = 1;
           for (size_t i = 2; i <= num; i++) {
               result *= i;
           }
           return result;
       }
   };

   In this case, the Factorial() function uses only the value parameter num and a local
variable result, so this can be considered stateless and safe to call from multiple threads.
The function is declared static, indicating that it does not refer to any object instance
state. We are not passing in any pointers or references to shared state.
   Stateless functions such as this will often be side effect free and deterministic,
meaning that for the same set of inputs they’ll produce the same result every time they’re
called unless, of course, they depend upon some other nondeterministic function, such
as a random number generator. This is essentially the same as the concept of pure
functions, which I described earlier in the Functional APIs section of the Styles chapter.
The functional programming style often adapts well to concurrency without the need for
additional synchronization.
   It’s sometimes possible to recast an otherwise stateful API as a stateless one. This can be
done by having any state that it may produce be returned as the result of the function. For
example, consider this class that holds a vector of numbers with a routine to reverse the vector:
      class NumberSequence
      {
      public:
          explicit NumberSequence(const std::vector<int> &seq);
          std::vector<int> Get() const;
          void Reverse();

      private:
          std::vector<int> mSequence;
      };

   This object maintains the state for the number sequence in an instance variable.
Without appropriate synchronization, calling the Reverse() method at the same time
from multiple threads on the same object could have unpredictable results. Instead, we
can develop a stateless version of this API:
      class NumberSequence
      {
      public:
          static std::vector<int> Reverse(const std::vector<int> &seq);
      };

   In this case, the number sequence is passed into the API and the modified version of
the sequence is returned as the function result. If the implementation of this function

uses only temporary local variables, then this should be safe to call from multiple
threads. However if the caller needs to store this result in a shared data structure, we’ve
simply moved the burden of correctly synchronizing the code onto the caller.
   An example of this in the Cþþ Standard Library is reversing a string. You can use the
std::reverse() function to reverse a string in place (i.e., to change the state of the string).
Or you can use the std::string constructor to return a new string that is the reverse of
the input string, such as:

     std::string str = "Hello World";

     // reverse the string in place
     std::reverse(str.begin(), str.end());

     // return a reversed version of the string
     std::string rev = std::string(str.rbegin(), str.rend());

Initializing shared data
If you’re unable to avoid shared data in your projects, then you must make sure that all
access to any shared data is appropriately synchronized to make it safe in the presence of
multiple threads. The first part of achieving this is to ensure that the data are safely
initialized. If multiple threads try to initialize your data at the same time, then it can
leave your data in an inconsistent state.
    There are multiple ways to declare global data, with different levels of scoping. This
code provides examples of a few of these:
     // 1: global variables are accessible across multiple translation units
     int myGlobal = 1;

     // 2: file statics are accessible only in the current translation unit
     static int myFileStatic = 2;

     namespace myNamespace {

     // 3: namespace statics are scoped within the namespace
     static int myNamespaceStatic = 3;

     class MyClass
     {
     public:
         int GetSharedValue() const
         {
             // 4: function statics are scoped to within a single function
             static int myFunctionStatic = 4;
             return myFunctionStatic;
         }

     private:
         // 5: class statics are accessible to all instances of a class
         static int myClassStatic = 5;
     };

     }   // namespace myNamespace

   Data defined at the file, global, namespace, or class scope (i.e., 1, 2, 3, and 5) should
generally be avoided because they introduce several problems. First, they are initialized

when a library is first loaded into a process and they use memory in every linked process,
even when those processes don’t use the library. Second, if you call any functions to
initialize the data, then you can run into complex initialization dependency problems
that in the worst case can cause your library to crash on load.
    A static variable is initialized when it’s first encountered, so using a function-scoped
static (i.e., 4) is far preferable because it avoids library load time dependency issues and
it creates the shared data only if that function is executed. This is described in more
detail in the section on Singletons in the Patterns chapter.
    As we noted earlier in this chapter, before Cþþ11 it was simply not possible to
implement thread-safe initialization of data using the static keyword. However, since
Cþþ11, static data initialization must now be implemented by compilers in a thread-
safe manner. So you should use static data without further synchronization only if
you’re using Cþþ11 or a later revision.
    Nevertheless, there may be times when you need to perform several instructions to
initialize your shared data fully and a single static declaration is insufficient. In those cases,
you can rely on another new feature of Cþþ11: std::call_once. This will execute a piece of
code exactly once even if called concurrently from multiple threads. Here’s an example:

   MyClass &GetInstance()
   {
       static MyClass sData;
       static std::once_flag sFlag;
       std::call_once(sFlag, []() {
           // perform initialization of sData
       });
       return &sData;
   }

   Because we’re talking about static data and threading, we should mention the
thread_local keyword that was also introduced with Cþþ11. This is a way to define a
static variable with a separate copy of the data per thread. A thread-local variable is
created at thread creation time and destroyed when the thread finishes. A typical
example of this is a random number generator in which each thread has its own random
seed, as shown in this example:
        #include <random>

        double randomDouble()
        {
            // return a random number from 0 to 1 with a per-thread seed
            thread_local static std::random_device rd;
            thread_local static std::mt19937 gen(rd());
            thread_local std::uniform_real_distribution<double> dist(0.0, 1.0);
            return dist(gen);
        }

  Finally, another way to ensure that your shared data are initialized in a thread-safe
manner is to perform the initialization while the app is still single threaded. This is

something that only the client of your library can fully determine, so this approach
means providing an initialization function that your clients must call at an appropriately
early point in their programs.

Synchronized data access
Now that we’ve covered how to initialize shared data safely, we can move on to discuss
how to modify those data safely without causing a data race. A data race is when two or
more threads try to access the same memory address and at least one of the threads is
writing to the data.
   The way to avoid data races is to introduce locking around all accesses to the data,
such as with a mutually exclusive lock, also known as a mutex. This ensures that only a
single thread can access the shared data at any point in time. You generally must acquire
the mutex lock before you access the shared data and then release it afterward. If you
don’t balance your lock and unlock calls, perhaps due to an early function exit, then no
other attempt to acquire the lock will succeed and your program will deadlock.
   To avoid this, it’s better to apply RAII principles and have the lock be automatically
released when your code goes out of scope. This is also referred to as the scoped locking
idiom (Schmidt, 1999). Cþþ11 introduced new objects for this purpose, such as
std::lock_guard and std::unique_lock. For example, when an std::lock_guard object is
created it locks the mutex, and when it goes out of scope the mutex is released. Here’s an
example:

     class NumberSequence
     {
     public:
         NumberSequence(const std::vector<int> &seq) :
             mSequence(seq)
         {}

          std::vector<int> Get() const
          {
              std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lock(sMutex);
              return mSequence;
          }
          void Reverse()
          {
              std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lock(sMutex);
              std::reverse(mSequence.begin(), mSequence.end());
          }

     private:
         std::mutex mMutex;
         std::vector<int> mSequence;
     };

    We don’t need to add locking code to the constructor. Objects are constructed by a
single thread and can be accessed by other threads only once they’ve been initialized. So
it’s safe to eschew the lock in this case. Of course, if the constructor were to try to access
any shared or global resources, then locking would be required.

    In this example I’ve added the mutex as a class data member, so the mutex will be
initialized when the object is created and we will create a separate mutex for each
instance of the object. This is generally preferrable to the alternative of having a single
mutex for all instances because the way it’s expressed in the previous example allows
different threads to access different instances of the object at the same time. However, if
you did want to use a single mutex for all instances, you could declare the mutex to be a
static class data member. You would want to do this if the shared data you want to
protect are also a static data member (i.e., the data are shared across all instances of the
object).

 TIP: Any time you create global or static data for your APIs, you should think about the
 thread safety implications of accessing those shared data from multiple threads.

Concurrent API design
In terms of API design, it’s important to bear in mind that building an API that handles
concurrency can be different from building a single-threaded one. Nonetheless, many of
the design principles we’ve already covered will help you in both cases. For example,
designing loosely coupled, minimally complete interfaces in which you hide imple-
mentation details and don’t duplicate concepts will help you as you design APIs that
support concurrency. And if you chose to adopt a functional programming style, then
your use of pure functions is likely already thread-safe.

Concurrency best practices
In his book Clean Code, Robert Martin offers a series of great tips for writing good
concurrent code (Martin, 2008). Also, Bjarne Stroustrup and Herb Sutter provide several
recommendations related to concurrency on their Cþþ Core Guidelines website. I’ve
summarized several of these best practices here as they relate to API design:
  Limit Access to Shared Data: As we’ve already covered, most multithreaded prob-
  lems come down to accessing shared resources, such as shared mutable data. Code
  that doesn’t share writable data won’t have data races. So, limiting the amount of
  shared data you have in your design and ensuring that all access goes through an
  API where you can enforce synchronization will help to avoid data races.
  Return Copies of Data: If your clients can work on copies of your data, then this
  will be much simpler than trying to synchronize all access to a single shared
  instance. For example, you can have an API that returns a read-only copy of the
  data if clients don’t always need the ability to change it. Or you can have an API
  that returns a copy of your data for clients to work on and then provide a single
  synchronized API call for them to return the modified version.

  Independent Threads: You should try to partition your data into independent ob-
  jects so that threaded code doesn’t need to share data from other threads. By
  allowing threads to be as independent as possible, you minimize the need to
  perform synchronization and avoid data races. Similarly, you should be aware of
  dependencies between API calls that require synchronization because these can
  introduce subtle bugs.
  Minimize Synchronized Sections: When you add locking to some shared resource,
  you’re ensuring that only one thread can execute that critical section of code at
  any time. If you perform a lot of work within this critical section, you can drasti-
  cally affect the overall performance of your system. So try to limit locks to just the
  code that needs to be synchronized and don’t include other unrelated calls.
  Think in Terms of High-Level Tasks: Threads are a low-level implementation
  concept. But usually your clients are focused on achieving higher-level tasks.
  Thinking about your API design in terms of tasks, rather than threads, can there-
  fore make it easier for your clients to reason about your design. Cþþ11 introduced
  the concept of std::async to run a function asynchronously. Consider using this
  task-level feature to introduce support for concurrency in your designs where
  feasible.
  Don’t Rely on the Volatile Keyword: The volatile keyword is used to tell the
  compiler that a variable can be changed by some external event. This can be used
  to avoid compiler optimizations such as caching the value in a register. This may
  sound like it could also be useful for multithreading because multiple threads may
  try to change the same variable, but it’s important to appreciate that volatile has
  nothing to do with concurrency (i.e., it doesn’t perform any synchronization or
  prevent instruction reordering). Adding this keyword will not fix any data races in
  your code.
  Test Concurrent Code: When writing concurrent code, you should not ignore
  seemingly one-off failures because they can indicate that you have an underlying
  threading problem. Make sure you thoroughly test concurrent code by running it
  on different platforms, running it multiple times with different timings and order-
  ings, and running with more threads than processors. Also, take advantage of tools
  that can help you find potential threading errors in your code. You can refer to the
  Multithreading Analysis section of the Performance chapter for a review of several
  tools that can check your multithreaded code.

Thread-Safe Interface pattern
If you have multiple functions within your API that call each other, there can be the
potential for self-deadlocking (i.e., when one function locks a resource and then calls
another function that also tries to lock the same resource). One way to solve this is with a
recursive mutex, but that can introduce additional locking overhead. A better solution is
to use the Thread-Safe Interface design pattern. The basic principles of this pattern are
(Schmidt, 1999):

1. Only public methods should acquire and release locks. These functions can then
   call into private or protected implementation methods to perform the actual work.
2. Private and protected methods should perform work only when called by the pub-
   lic methods. These functions should never call public methods because that could
   introduce self-deadlocking.
   This is demonstrated in this code:
   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       void Foo()
       {
           std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lockGuard(mLock);
           DoFoo();
       }

   private:
       void DoFoo()
       {
            // perform the actual work
       }

         std::mutex mLock;
   };

   The use of inheritance can also introduce subtle concurrency bugs around locking. For
example, you may have an API that does locking to synchronize access to a shared resource,
but a client could override a virtual function and provide a new implementation that doesn’t
do any locking. The Thread-Safe Interface pattern can help here, too. You just need to
ensure that any virtual functions are defined as protected or private (i.e., that clients can
provide an alternative implementation for a virtual function, but the functionality is only
ever accessed by calling a public function that performs all necessary locking). For example:

      class MyObject
      {
      public:
          void Foo()
          {
              std::lock_guard<std::mutex> lockGuard(mLock);
              DoFoo();
          }

      protected:
          virtual void DoFoo() {
              // Base class functionality, no locking required
          }

      private:
          std::mutex mLock;
      };

      class MyDerivedObject : public MyObject
      {
      protected:
          void DoFoo() override
          {
              // Overridden functionality, no locking required
          }
      };

   In this example, you can see that the client created a new MyDerivedObject class that
overrides the protected virtual function DoFoo(). The client doesn’t need to worry about
locking any shared resources in this override because the only correct way to call DoFoo()
is by calling the public Foo() function, which performs all necessary locking before
forwarding to the DoFoo() implementation.
This page intentionally left blank
