                                                                                                                 10
Versioning
Up to this point, I have largely considered the design of an application programming
interface (API) as a discrete task that is finished once the API is fully specified and
released to users. Of course, this is simply the beginning of a continuous and complex
process. After an API has been released, that’s when the real work begins and when your
API development process is put to the test.
    Very few if any APIs stop development after the 1.0 product is released. There will
always be bugs to fix, new features to integrate, workflows to refine, architecture to
improve, other platforms to support, and so on.
    The primary objective for all releases after the initial release of an API must be to
cause zero impact on existing clients, or as close to zero as practically possible. Breaking
the interface, or the behavior of the interface, between releases will force your clients to
update their code to take advantage of your new API. The more you can minimize the
need for this manual intervention on their part, the more likely your users are to upgrade
to your new API, or even to keep using your API at all. If your API has a reputation for
introducing major incompatible changes with each new release, you are giving your
clients incentive to look for an alternative solution. On the other hand, an API with a
reputation for stability and robustness can be the largest factor in the success of your
product.
    To this end, this chapter will cover the details of API versioning, explaining the
different types of backward compatibility and describing how you can achieve backward
compatibility for your API.

Version numbers
Each release of your API should be accompanied with a unique identifier so that the
latest incarnation of the API can be differentiated from previous offerings. The standard
way to do this is to use a version number.

Version number significance
There are many different schemes in use to provide versioning information for a soft-
ware product. Most of these schemes attempt to impart some degree of the scale of
change in a release by using a series of numbers, normally separated by a period (.)
symbol. Most commonly, either two or three separate integers are used, for example

API Design for C++. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-443-22219-1.00002-7                                                                     383
Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

 PATCH
                                          1.2.1                                               3.1.1
RELEASE

 MINOR
                        1.1.0    1.2.0             1.3.0            2.1.0             3.1.0
RELEASE

 MAJOR                                                     2.0.0
                1.0.0                                                        3.0.0
RELEASE

                                                       TIME
FIGURE 10.1 Illustrating the progression of version numbers using a standard MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH numbering
scheme.

“1.2” or “1.2.3”. The subsequent list, along with Fig. 10.1, explains the significance of
each of these integers:
1. Major version. This is the first integer in a version number, such as 1.0.0. It’s nor-
   mally set to 1 for the initial release and is increased whenever significant changes
   are made. In terms of API change, a major version change can signal the
   backward-compatible addition of substantial new features, or it can signify that
   backward compatibility has been broken. In general, a bump of the major version
   of an API should signal to your users to expect significant API changes.
2. Minor version. This is the second integer in a compound version number (e.g.,
   1.0.0). This is normally set to 0 after each major release and increased whenever
   smaller features or significant bug fixes have been added. Changes in minor
   version number should not normally involve incompatible API changes. Users
   should expect to be able to upgrade to a new minor release without making any
   changes to their own software. However, some new features may be added to the
   API, which, if used, would mean that users could not revert to an earlier minor
   version without changing their code.
3. Patch version. The (optional) third integer is the patch number, sometimes also
   called the revision number (e.g., 1.0.0). This is normally set to 0 after each minor
   release and increased whenever important bug or security fixes are released.
   Changes in patch number should imply no change to the actual API interface (i.e.,
   only changes to the behavior of the API). In other words, patch version changes
   should be backward and forward compatible. That is, users should be able to revert
   to an earlier patch version and then switch back to a more recent patch version
   without changing their code (Rooney, 2005).
   Some software products employ additional numbers or symbols to further describe a
release. For example, an automated build number might be used so that every single
build of the software can be differentiated from previous builds. This build number

could be derived from the revision number of the last change checked into the revision
control system, it may be derived from the current date, or it could just be a mono-
tonically increasing number.
   Software is often provided to users before the final release to get feedback and
valuable field testing. In these cases, it’s common to add a symbol to the version string to
indicate the phase of the development process to which the software relates. For
example, “1.0.0a” might refer to an alpha release, “1.0.0b” might refer to a beta release,
and “1.0.0rc” might refer to a release candidate. However, once you start deviating from
a purely numeric identification system, doing comparisons of version numbers starts to
become more complicated (see Python PEP 0386 at http://www.python.org/dev/peps/
pep-0386/ for an example of this complexity).

 TIP: It is good practice to include your API’s major version number in your library names,
 particularly if you’ve made nonebackward compatible changes, such as libFoo.so,
 libFoo2.so, or libFoo3.so.

Esoteric numbering schemes
I’ve also decided to list some nonstandard or imaginative versioning schemes that have
been used by software projects in the past. This section is more for fun than actual
practical advice, although each scheme obviously offers advantages for certain situa-
tions. For API development, however, I recommend sticking with the widely understood
major, minor, patch scheme.
    The TeX document processing system, originally designed by Donald Knuth, pro-
duces new version numbers by including additional digits of precision to the value pi, p.
The first TeX version number was 3, then came 3.1, then 3.14, and so on. The current
version as of 2021 was 3.141592653. Similarly, the version numbers for Knuth’s related
METAFONT program asymptotically approach the value e, 2.71828182.
    Although this may seem at first to be simply the wry sense of humor of a mathe-
matician, this numbering scheme does convey an important quality about the software.
Even though Knuth himself recognizes that some areas of TeX could be improved, he has
stated that no new fundamental changes should be made to the system and any new
versions should contain only bug fixes. As such, the use of a versioning scheme that
introduces increasingly smaller floating-point digits is insightful. In fact, Knuth’s
recognition of the importance of feature stability and backward compatibility, to the
extent that he encoded this importance in the versioning scheme for his software, is food
for thought for any API designer.
    Another interesting versioning scheme is the use of dates as version numbers. This is
commonly used for large end-user software releases such as Microsoft’s Visual Studio
2022 and games such as EA’s FIFA 23. However, a more subtle system is used by the
Ubuntu flavor of the Linux operating system. This uses the year and month of a release

as the major and minor version number, respectively. The first Ubuntu release, 4.10,
appeared in Oct. 2004 whereas 9.04 was released during Apr. 2009. Ubuntu releases are
also assigned a code name, consisting of an adjective and an animal name with the first
same letter, such as Breezy Badger and Lucid Lynx. With the exception of the first two
releases, the first letter of these code names increases alphabetically for each release.
These schemes have the benefit of imparting how recent an Ubuntu release is, but they
do not convey any notion of the degree of change in a release. This may be fine for a
continually evolving operating system, although you should prefer a more traditional
number scheme for your API to give your users an indication of the degree of API change
to expect in a release.
   The Linux kernel currently uses an even/odd numbering scheme to differentiate
between stable releases (even) and development releases (odd). For example, Linux 2.4
and 2.6 are stable releases, whereas 2.3 and 2.5 are development releases. This
numbering scheme is also used by the Second Life Server releases.

Creating a version API
The version information for your API should be accessible from code, to allow your
clients to write programs that are conditional on your API’s version number: for
example, to call a new method that exists only in recent versions of your API, or to work
around a bug in the implementation of a known release of your API.
    To offer maximum flexibility, users should be able to query your API’s version at
compile time as well as runtime. The compile-time requirement is necessary so that the
user can use #if preprocessor directives to conditionally compile against newer classes
and methods that would cause undefined reference errors if linking against older ver-
sions of your API. The runtime requirement allows clients to choose between different
API calls dynamically or to provide logging output with your API version number
included. These requirements suggest the creation of a version API. I present a simple
generic API for this purpose:

   // version .h
   #include <string>

   #define API_MAJOR 1
   #define API_MINOR 2
   #define API_PATCH 0

   class Version
   {
   public:
       static int GetMajor();
       static int GetMinor();
       static int GetPatch();

         static std::string GetVersion();

         static bool IsAtLeast(int major, int minor, int patch);

         static bool HasFeature(const std::string &name);
   };

   There are a few features of note in this Version class. First, I provide accessors to
return the individual major, minor, and patch numbers that comprise the current
version. These simply return the values of the respective #define statements, API_MAJOR,
API_MINOR, and API_PATCH. Although I stated in the Cþþ Usage chapter that you should
avoid #define for constants, this is an exception to that rule because you need users to be
able to access this information from the preprocessor.
   The GetVersion() method returns the version information as a user-friendly string,
such as 1.2.0. This is useful for the client to display in an About dialog or to write to a
debug log in the application.
   Next, I provide a method to let users perform version comparisons. This lets them do
checks in their code, such as checking that they are compiling against an API that is
greater than or equal to the specified (major, minor, patch) triple. Obviously you could
add other version math routines here, but IsAtLeast() provides the most common use
case.

 TIP: Provide version information for your API.

   Finally, I provide a HasFeature() method. Normally when users want to compare
version numbers, they don’t really care about the version number itself, but instead
they’re using this designator as a way to determine whether a feature they want to use is
present in the API. Instead of making your users be aware of which features were
introduced in which versions of your API, the HasFeature() method lets them test for the
availability of the feature directly. For example, in version 2.0.0 of your API, perhaps you
made the API thread-safe. You could therefore add a feature tag called THREADSAFE, so
that users could do a check such as:

   if (Version::HasFeature("THREADSAFE")) {
       ...
   }

    Although you probably don’t need to define any feature tags for your 1.0 release, you
should include this method in your version API so that it’s possible for a client to call it in
any release of your API. The method can simply return false for 1.0, but for future re-
leases, you can add tags for new features or major bug fixes. These strings can be stored
in an std::set and lazily initialized on the first call so that it’s efficient to determine
whether a feature tag is defined. The source code that accompanies this book provides
an implementation of this concept.
    Feature tags are particularly useful if you have an open source project in which
clients may fork your source code, or an open specification project in which vendors

can produce different implementations of your specification. In these cases, there
could be multiple versions of your API that offer different feature sets in releases with
the same version number. This concept is employed by the OpenGL API, in which
the same version of the OpenGL API may be implemented by different vendors
but with different extensions available. For example, the OpenGL API provides the
glGetStringi(GL_EXTENSION, n) call to return the name of the n’th extension. Also,
Cþþ11 introduced a number of feature testing macros to detect the presence of new
language features, such as __cpp_consteval.

Software branching strategies
Before I talk in more depth about API versioning, let’s cover some basics about the
related topic of software branching strategies. Although small projects with one or two
engineers can normally get by with a single code line, larger software projects normally
involve some form of branching strategy to enable simultaneous development, stabili-
zation, and maintenance of different releases of the software. In the next couple of
sections I’ll cover some of things to consider when choosing a branching strategy and
policy for your project.

Branching strategies
Every software project needs a trunk or main code line, which is the enduring repository
of the project’s source code. Branches are made from this trunk code line for individual
releases or for development work that must be isolated from the next release. This model
supports parallel development in which new features can be added to the project while
imminent releases can lock down changes and stabilize the existing feature set.
    There are many different branching schemes that can be devised. Each engineering
team will normally adapt a strategy for its own individual needs, process, and workflow.
However, Fig. 10.2 provides one example branching strategy that’s frequently seen. In
this case, major releases are branched off the trunk and minor releases occur along that
code line. If an emergency patch is required while work is happening for the next minor
release, then a new branch may be created for that specific hotfix. Longer-term devel-
opment work that needs to skip the next release because it won’t be ready in time is
often done in its own branch and then landed at the appropriate time. Note the
resemblance between Figs. 10.1 and 10.2. This similarity is, of course, not accidental.

Branching policies
This basic structure is used by many projects to support parallel development and
release management. However, there are many policy decisions that can be used to
customize the actual workflow, such as in which branches developers work, how many
development branches are in flight at once, at what point in the process are release
branches created, how often changes are merged between branches, and whether
automatic merges between branches are attempted.

                                                                 2.0.1
       Hotfix

                              1.0     1.1             2.0       2.1            3.0    3.1
     Release

       Trunk

 Development
                                                3.0 dev
          FIGURE 10.2 An example branching diagram for multiple releases of a software product.

    Although different branching policies make sense for different situations, I’ll
comment that in my experience, ongoing development work should happen in the trunk
code line, with development branches used where necessary for longer-term work.
Quality assurance (QA) should also be focused on trunk, particularly during periods of
development between releases. The trunk is where your project’s crown jewels live: this
is the code that will live on past individual releases. If no developers or QA engineers are
working in trunk, and merges are allowed to take place into trunk unattended, the trunk
will soon become unstable and buggy. Another arrangement is to have only release
branches, although even in that case the advice is the same, that most of your active
work should be happening on the most recent release branch.
    Your choice of revision control system also has an impact on your branching policy,
because different source control management (SCM) products make certain branching
strategies easier than others. For example, supporting and merging between branches in
Subversion can be a painful endeavor, whereas in distributed SCM systems such as Git or
Mercurial, branching is designed into the core of the system. For example, using an SCM
such as Git it’s possible to consider merging between branches daily because this is an
easy and low-impact operation. The more often you merge between branches, the less
code divergence occurs and the easier it will be eventually to land the branch into trunk,
if that’s the end goal. Release branches will normally just be end of lifed when the release
is done, as represented by the X symbol after the 1.1 release in Fig. 10.2. Another decision
factor that relates to your SCM system is whether all of your engineers are on-site, in
which case a server-based solution such as Perforce is acceptable, or whether you have
open source engineers working out of their homes, in which case a distributed solution
such as Git will be more appropriate.

    TIP: Branch only when necessary, and branch late. Prefer branching to freezing a code line.
    Merge between branches early and often. (From the Perforce High-Level Best Practices white
    paper).

APIs and parallel branches
Once an API has been released, changes to that API should appear (at least externally) to
follow a serialized process. That is, you do not release incompatible nonlinear versions of
your API: the functionality in version N should be a strict superset of the functionality in
version N-1. Although this may seem obvious, large software projects tend to involve
developers working in several parallel branches of the code, and there can be several
concurrently supported releases of an API. It’s therefore important that the teams
working in different parallel branches do not introduce incompatible features. There are
several policy approaches to deal with this potential problem, such as:
n    Target development branches. Your project will generally have development
     branches and release branches. By enforcing that no API changes occur directly in
     release branches, you minimize the chance that an API change is made in one
     release but is lost in the next release because it was never merged down to trunk. If
     an API change is needed in a release branch, it should be committed to trunk and
     then merged up from there. This is generally true of any change in a release
     branch, but interface changes have a higher cost if they’re lost between releases.
n    Merge to trunk often. Any changes to a public API should be developed in the
     common trunk code line or merged into trunk as early as possible. This also as-
     sumes that teams are regularly syncing their development branches to the trunk
     code, which is good practice anyway. This avoids surprises further down the line
     when two teams try to merge development branches with conflicting APIs.
n    Review process. A single API review committee should oversee and vet all changes
     to public APIs before they’re released. It’s the job of this committee to ensure that
     no conflicting or nonebackward compatible changes have been made to APIs.
     They are the gatekeepers and the last line of defense. This group should be suffi-
     ciently empowered to slip release deadlines if necessary to address API problems.
     I’ll discuss how to run an API review process later in this chapter.
   These solutions attempt to keep a one true definition of the API in the trunk code line
rather than fracture changes across multiple branches. This may not always be possible,
but if you strive for this goal, you will make your life easier later.
   The problems become more difficult if you have an open source product in which
users may create many forks of your source code and make changes to your APIs that are
beyond your control. You obviously cannot do too much about this situation. However, if

these changes are to be merged back into your source repository, then you can and
should apply the same thoughtful review process to community patches as you would to
internally developed changes. It can be difficult or awkward to deny changes from open
source developers, but you can minimize any hurt feelings by clearly documenting the
review process and expectations, offering advice on technical direction early on, and
providing constructive feedback on how a patch can be changed to make it more
acceptable.

File formats and parallel products
A colleague once described to me a project that he worked on in which a decision was
made to support two different variants of the product: a Basic version and an Advanced
version. Until that point, there was a single variant of the product and a single file format.
The team had a policy of increasing the file format major version number when an
incompatible change was introduced into the format, with the last single-variant version
being 3.0. The file format was XML based and included a version tag, so it was known
which version of the product generated the file. The file format reader would ignore tags
that it didn’t understand in versions that differed only by minor version number, so that
it could still read files that were generated from newer but compatible versions of the
product. Both the Basic and Advanced variants could read all files from 3.0 and earlier.
    This all seems reasonable so far.
    It wasn’t long before the Advanced variant introduced new features that required
nonebackward compatible additions to the file format. So the team decided to incre-
ment the major version number to 4.x. However, then there was a need to evolve the
entire file format in an incompatible way (i.e., to require a major version bump for Basic
and Advanced files). To deal with this, the Basic variant format was updated to 5.x and
the Advanced variant was bumped to 6.x. This meant that:
n   3.x builds couldn’t read any of 4.x through 6.x formats, which is fine.
n   4.x builds (old Advanced) couldn’t read 5.x files (new Basic) or 6.x files (new
    Advanced).
n   5.x builds (new Basic) couldn’t read 4.x files (old Advanced).
n   6.x builds (new Advanced) could read any existing format, which is also fine.
   Then, of course, eventually another major version bump was required, introducing a
7.x (newer Basic) and 8.x (newer Advanced). Things then started to get really messy.
   With the benefit of hindsight, we talked about how this situation could’ve been
avoided. The key observation is that in this case, the information about which variant
had created the file was being conflated with the file format version. One solution would
have been to tease apart those two concepts and to write both into the file (i.e., a version
number, such as 3.2 and a variant name such as Basic). In this way, the Basic variant
could easily know whether it could read a format: it could read any file with an empty or
Basic variant name. This essentially creates two version number spaces, in which the

version numbers for the two variants can advance independently of each other. A
product first checks the variant name for compatibility, then version number compati-
bility works in the usual linear fashion.
    Learning from this experience, I offer this advice: when supporting different variants
of a product, store the variant’s name in any files that should be shared between the
variants in addition to the version number of the variant that wrote the file.

 TIP: When creating Basic versus Advanced versions of the same APIs, accompany the version
 number with a Basic or Advanced string in any generated files. Don’t try to use the version
 number solely to glean whether the file was generated by the Basic or Advanced API.

Life cycle of an API
In this section I’ll examine the life of an API and the various phases it goes through, from
conception to end of life.
    Maintaining an API is not necessarily the same as maintaining a normal software
product. That’s because of the extra constraints that are placed on API development to
not break existing clients. In a normal end user software product, if you change the name
of a method or class in your code, this doesn’t affect the user-visible features of the
application. However, if you change the name of a class or method in an API, you may
break the code of all of your existing clients. An API is a contract, and you must make
sure that you uphold your end of the contract.
    Fig. 10.3 provides an overview of the life span of a typical API. The most important
event in this life span is the initial release, marked by the thick vertical bar in the figure.
Before this pivotal point, it’s fine to make major changes to the design and interface.
However, after the initial release, once your users can write code using your API, you
have committed to providing backward compatibility, and the extent of the changes you
can make is greatly limited. Looking at the life span as a whole, there are four general
stages of API development (Tulach, 2008):

                Plan       Design                  Iterate    Test               Bug Fix

  Initial                             Release                                                       Code          API
Planning                                1.0                                                        Frozen       Obsoleted

                Test      Implement             Release       Review   Release             Test

                  PRE-RELEASE                         MAINTENANCE                     COMPLETION            DEPRECATION

FIGURE 10.3 The life cycle of an application programming interface (API). Before the initial release, extensive
redesign of the API can be performed. After the initial release, only incremental changes can be tolerated.

1. Prerelease: Before the initial release, an API can progress through a standard soft-
   ware cycle, including requirements gathering, planning, design, implementation,
   and testing. Most notably, as I’ve stated, the interface can go through major
   changes and redesigns during this period. You may release these early versions of
   your API to your users to get their feedback and suggestions. You should use a
   version number of 0.x for these prerelease versions to make it clear to users that
   the API is still under active development and may change radically before 1.0 is
   delivered.
2. Maintenance: An API can still be modified after it has been released, but to main-
   tain backward compatibility any changes must be restricted to adding new
   methods and classes, as well as fixing bugs in the implementation of existing
   methods. In other words, during the maintenance phase you should seek to evolve
   an API, not change it incompatibly. To ensure that changes do not break backward
   compatibility, it is good practice to conduct API reviews before a new version is
   released.
3. Completion: At some point, the project leads will decide that the API has reached
   maturity and that no further changes should be made to the interface. This may be
   because the API solves the problems it was designed to solve, or it may be because
   team members have moved on to other projects and can no longer support the
   API. Stability is the most important quality at this point in the life span. As such,
   only bug fixes will generally be considered. API reviews could still be run at this
   stage, but if changes are indeed restricted to implementation code and not public
   headers, then they may not be necessary. Ultimately, the API will reach the point
   where it’s considered to be complete and no further changes will be made.
4. Deprecation: Some APIs eventually reach an end of life state where they’re depre-
   cated and then removed from circulation. Deprecation means that an API should
   not be used for any new development and that existing clients should migrate
   away from the API. This can happen if the API no longer serves a useful purpose or
   if a newer, incompatible API has been developed to take its place.

 TIP: After release, you can evolve an API but not change it.

Levels of compatibility
Up to this point I’ve talked only vaguely about what backward compatibility means. It’s
now time to get concrete and define our terms more precisely. Accordingly, the next few
sections will detail what is meant by the specific terms backward compatibility, forward

compatibility, functional compatibility, source (or API) compatibility, and application
binary interface (ABI) compatibility.
    Often you’ll provide different levels of compatibility promises for major, minor, and
patch releases of your API. For example, you may promise that patch releases will be
both backward and forward compatible (Subversion promises this), or you may promise
only to break binary compatibility for major releases (KDE promises this for core
libraries).

Backward compatibility
Backward compatibility can be defined simply as an API that provides the same func-
tionality as a previous version of the API. In other words, an API is backward compatible
if it can fully take the place of a previous version of the API without requiring the user to
make changes.
     This implies that the newer API is a superset of the older API. It can add new func-
tionality, but it cannot incompatibly change functionality that is already defined by the
older API. The cardinal rule of API maintenance is never to remove anything from your
interface.
     There are different types of API backward compatibility, including:
1. Functional compatibility,
2. Source compatibility, and
3. Binary compatibility.
   I will define each of these in more detail in the following sections. In addition, there
are also data-oriented backward compatibility issues, such as:
1. Client/server compatibility, and
2. File format compatibility.
    For example, if your API involves communication over a network, then you also need
to consider the compatibility of the client/server protocol you use. This means that a
client using an older release of the API will still be able to communicate with a newer
version of the server. Also a client using a newer release of the API will still be able to
communicate with an older version of the server (Rooney, 2005).
    Additionally, if your API stores data in a file or database, then you will need to
consider the compatibility of that file format or database schema. For example, more
recent versions of the API need to be able to read files generated by older versions of the
API.
    These data-oriented features should also have version numbers, and these don’t have
to be the same as your API version number (e.g., you may make a change to your API but
not make a change to the underlying file format in that release, so the API version
number changes while the file format version number stays the same).

 TIP: Backward compatibility means that client code that uses version N of your API can be
 upgraded without change to version Nþ1.

Functional compatibility
Functional compatibility is concerned with the runtime behavior of an implementation.
An API is functionally compatible if it behaves exactly the same as a previous version of
the API. However, as Jaroslav Tulach notes, an API will hardly ever be 100% backward
compatible in this respect. Even a release that fixes only bugs in implementation code
will have changed the behavior of the API, behavior that some clients may be depending
on.
   For example, if your API provides the function:

   void SetImage(Image *img);

    this function may have a bug in version 1.0 of your API, causing it to crash if you pass
it a nullptr. In version 1.1, you fix this bug so that your code no longer crashes in this
case. This has changed the behavior of the API, so it’s not strictly functionally
compatible. However, it has changed the behavior in a good way: it’s fixed a crashing
bug. So, although this metric is useful as a basic measure of change in the runtime
behavior of an API, that functional change may not necessarily be a bad thing. Most API
updates will intentionally break functional compatibility.
    As an example of a case in which functional compatibility is useful, consider a new
version of an API that focused solely on performance. In this case, the behavior of the API
is not changed at all. However, the algorithms behind the interface are improved to
deliver the same results in less time. In this respect, the new API could be considered
100% functionally compatible.

 TIP: Functional compatibility means that version Nþ1 of your API behaves the same as
 version N.

Source compatibility
Source compatibility is a looser definition of backward compatibility. It basically states
that users can recompile their programs using a newer version of the API without making
any change to their code. This says nothing about the behavior of the resulting program,

only that it can be successfully compiled and linked. Source compatibility is also
sometimes referred to as API compatibility.
   For example, these two functions are source compatible, even though their function
signatures are different:

   // version 1.0
   void SetImage(Image *img);

   // version 1.1
   void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect = true);

   This is because any user code that was written to call the 1.0 version of the function
will also compile against version 1.1 (the new argument is optional). In contrast, the next
two functions are not source compatible because users will be forced to go through their
code to find all instances of the SetImage() method and add the required second
parameter:

   // version 1.0
   void SetImage(Image *img);

   // version 1.1
   void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect);

   Any changes that are completely restricted to implementation code, and therefore do
not involve changes to public headers, will obviously be 100% source compatible,
because the interfaces are the same in both cases.

 TIP: Source compatibility means that a user who wrote code against version N of your API can
 also compile that code against version Nþ1 without changing their source.

Binary/application binary interface compatibility
Binary compatibility implies that clients only need to relink their programs with a newer
version of a static library or simply drop a new shared library into the install directory of
their end user application. This contrasts with source compatibility, in which users must
recompile their programs whenever any new version of your API is released.
   This implies that any changes to the API must not affect the representation of any
classes, methods, or functions in the library file. The binary representation of all API
elements must remain the same, including the type, size, and alignment of structures
and the signatures of all functions. This is also often called ABI compatibility.

   Binary compatibility can be difficult to attain using Cþþ. Most changes that you
make to an interface in Cþþ will cause changes to its binary representation. For
example, here are the mangled names of two different functions (i.e., the symbol names
that are used to identify a function in an object or library file):

     // version 1.0
     void SetImage(Image *img)
     -> _Z8SetImageP5Image

     // version 1.1
     void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect = false)
     -> _Z8SetImageP5Imageb

    These two methods are source compatible but they are not binary compatible, as
evidenced by the different mangled names that each produce. This means that code
compiled against version 1.0 cannot simply use the version 1.1 libraries because the
_Z8SetImageP5Image symbol is no longer defined.
    The binary representation of an API can also change if you use different compile flags.
It tends to be compiler specific, too. One reason for this is that the Cþþ standards
committee decided not to dictate the specifics of name mangling. As a result, the
mangling scheme used by one compiler may differ from that of another compiler, even
on the same platform. (The mangled names presented earlier were produced by GNU
Cþþ 4.3.)

    TIP: Binary compatibility means that an application written against version N of your API
    can be upgraded to version Nþ1 simply by replacing or relinking against the new dynamic li-
    brary for your API.

    Next I provide two lists of specific API changes, detailing those that will require users
to recompile their code and those that should be safe to perform without breaking binary
compatibility.

Binary incompatible API changes
n    Removing a class, method, or function.
n    Adding, removing, or reordering member variables for a class.
n    Adding or removing base classes from a class.
n    Changing the type of any member variable.
n    Changing the signature of an existing method in any way.
n    Adding, removing, or reordering template arguments.
n    Changing a noninlined method to be inlined.

n   Changing a nonvirtual method to be virtual, and vice versa.
n   Changing the order of virtual methods
n   Adding a virtual method to a class with no existing virtual methods.
n   Adding new virtual methods (some compilers may preserve binary compatibility if
    you add only new virtual methods after existing ones).
n   Overriding an existing virtual method (this may be possible in some cases, but is
    best avoided).

Binary compatible API changes
n   Adding new classes, nonvirtual methods, or free functions.
n   Adding new static variables to a class.
n   Removing private static variables (if they are never referenced from an inline
    method).
n   Removing nonvirtual private methods (if they are never called from an inline
    method).
n   Changing the implementation of an inline method.
n   Changing an inline method to be noninline.
n   Changing the default arguments of a method (however, this requires recompilation
    to use the new default argument).
n   Adding or removing friend declarations from a class.
n   Adding a new enum to a class.
n   Appending new enumerations to an existing enum
n   Using unclaimed remaining bits of a bit field.
   Restricting any API changes to only those listed in this second list should allow you to
maintain binary compatibility between your API releases. Some further tips to help you
achieve binary compatibility include:
n   Rather than adding parameters to an existing method, you can define a new over-
    loaded version of the method. This ensures that the original symbol continues to
    exist but provides the newer calling convention, too. Inside your .cpp file, the older
    method may be implemented simply by calling the new overloaded method:

    // version 1.0
    void SetImage(Image *img)

    // version 1.1
    void SetImage(Image *img)
    void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect)

   (This technique may affect source compatibility if the method is not already over-
loaded, because client code can no longer reference the function pointer &SetImage
without an explicit cast).
n   The pimpl idom can be used to help preserve binary compatibility of your in-
    terfaces, because it moves all implementation detailsdthose elements that are
    most likely to change in the futuredinto the .cpp file where they don’t affect the
    public.h files.
n   Adopting a flat C style API can make it much easier to attain binary compatibility
    (and also cross-compiler compatibility), simply because C does not offer you fea-
    tures such as inheritance, optional parameters, overloading, exceptions, and tem-
    plates. To get the best of both worlds, you may decide to develop your API using
    an object-oriented Cþþ style and then provide a flat C style wrapping of the Cþþ
    API.
n   If you do need to make a binary incompatible change, then you might consider
    naming the new library differently so that you don’t break existing applications.
    This approach was taken by the libz library. Builds before version 1.1.4 were called
    ZLIB.DLL on Windows. However, a binary incompatible compiler setting was used
    to build later versions of the library, and so the library was renamed to ZLIB1.DLL,
    in which the 1 indicates the API major version number.
    Binary compatibility is transitive, so the ABI compatibility of your library de-
pendencies can affect the compatibility of your library. For example, the clang compiler
lets you choose between different Cþþ runtimes: libcþþ (the LLVM runtime) or
libstdcþþ (the GNU runtime). However, these are not binary compatible: a library
compiled against one will not link against the other. In particular, libcþþ uses an inlined
namespace of std::__1 for all of its symbols but libstdcþþ does not. So, even if you used
a plain C API for your library, if you have a Cþþ library dependency that was linked
against libcþþ, then your clients will not be able to link against libstdcþþ because it’s
not binary compatible with your dependencies.

Forward compatibility
An API is forward compatible if client code written using a future version of the API can
be compiled without modification using an older version of the API. Forward compat-
ibility therefore means that users can downgrade to a previous release and still have their
code work without modification.
    Adding new functionality to an API breaks forward compatibility because client code
written to take advantage of these new features will not compile against the older release
where those changes are not present.

    For example, these two versions of a function are forward compatible:

    // version 1.0
    void SetImage(Image *img, bool unused = false);

    // version 1.1
    void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect);

   This is because code written using the 1.1 version of the function, in which the second
argument is required, can compile successfully in the 1.0 version. However, these two
versions are not forward compatible:

    // version 1.0
    void SetImage(Image *img);

    // version 1.1
    void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect = false);

   This is because code written using the 1.1 version can provide an optional second
argument, which if specified will not compile against the 1.0 version of the function.
   Forward compatibility is obviously a difficult quality to provide any guarantees about
because you can’t predict what will happen to the API in the future. You can, however,
give this your best effort before the 1.0 version of your API is released. In fact, this is an
excellent activity to engage in before your first public release, to try to make your API as
future-proof as possible.
   This means that you must give thought to the question of how the API could evolve in
the future. What new functionality might your users request? How would performance
optimizations affect the API? How might the API be misused? Is there a more general
concept that you may want to expose in the future? Are you aware of functionality that
you plan to implement in the future that will affect the API?
   Here are some ways in which you can make an API forward compatible:
n   If you know that you’ll need to add a parameter to a method in the future, then
    you can use the technique shown in the first example mentioned earlier: that is,
    you can add the parameter even before the functionality is implemented and sim-
    ply document (and name) this parameter as unused.
n   You can use an opaque pointer or typedef instead of using a built-in type directly
    if you anticipate switching to a different built-in type in the future. For example,
    create a typedef for the float type called Real, so that you can change the typedef to
    double in a future version of the API without causing the API to change.
n   The data-driven style of API design, described in the Styles chapter, is inherently
    forward compatible. A method that simply accepts an ArgList variant container
    essentially allows any collection of arguments to be passed to it at runtime. The
    implementation can therefore add support for new named arguments without
    requiring changes to the function signature.

 TIP: Forward compatibility means that client code that uses version N of your API can be
 downgraded without change to version N-1.

How to maintain backward compatibility
Now that I’ve defined the various types of compatibility, I’ll describe some strategies for
maintaining backward compatibility when releasing newer versions of your APIs.

Adding functionality
In terms of source compatibility, adding new functionality to an API is generally a safe
thing to do. Adding new classes, new methods, or new free functions does not change the
interface for preexisting API elements and so will not break existing code.
   As an exception to this rule, adding new pure virtual member functions to an abstract
base class is not backward compatible: that is,

   class ABC
   {
   public:
       virtual ~ABC();
       virtual void ExistingCall() = 0;
       virtual void NewCall() = 0; // added in new release of API
   };

  This is because all existing clients must now define an implementation for this new
method; otherwise their derived classes will not be concrete and their code will not
compile. The workaround for this is simply to provide a default implementation for any
new methods that you add to an abstract base class (i.e., to make them virtual but not
pure virtual). For example:

   class ABC
   {
   public:
       virtual ~ABC();
       virtual void ExistingCall() = 0;
       virtual void NewCall(); // added in new release of API
   };

 TIP: Do not add new pure virtual member functions to an abstract base class after the initial
 release of your API.

    In terms of binary (ABI) compatibility, the set of elements that you can add to the API
without breaking compatibility is more restricted. For example, adding the first virtual
method to a class will cause the size of the class to increase, normally by the size of one
pointer, to include a pointer to the vtable for that class. Similarly, adding new base
classes, adding template parameters, or adding new member variables will break binary
compatibility. Some compilers will let you add virtual methods to a class that already has
virtual methods without breaking binary compatibility, as long as you add the new
virtual method after all other virtual methods in the class.
    Refer to the list in the Binary Compatible section for a more detailed breakdown of
API changes that will break binary compatibility.

Changing functionality
Changing functionality without breaking existing clients is a trickier proposition. If you
only care about source compatibility, then it’s possible to add new parameters to a
method as long as you order them after all previous parameters and declare them as
optional. This means that users are not forced to update all existing calls to add the extra
parameter. I gave an example of this earlier, which I will replicate here for convenience:

   // version 1.0
   void SetImage(Image *img);

   // version 1.1
   void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect = true);

   Also, changing the return type of an existing method, in which the method previously
had a void return type, is a source compatible change because no existing code should
be checking that return value:

   // version 1.0
   void SetImage(Image *img);

   // version 1.1
   bool SetImage(Image *img);

    If you wish to add a parameter that doesn’t appear after all of the existing parameters,
or if you are writing a flat C API in which optional parameters are not available, then you
can introduce a differently named function and perhaps refactor the implementation of
the old method to call the new method. As an example, the Win32 API uses this tech-
nique extensively by creating functions that have an Ex suffix to represent extended
functionality. For example:

            HWND CreateWindow(                      HWND CreateWindowEx(
                LPCTSTR lpClassName,                    DWORD dwExStyle,
                LPCTSTR lpWindowName,                   LPCTSTR lpClassName,
                DWORD dwStyle,                          LPCTSTR lpWindowName,
                int x,                                  DWORD dwStyle,
                int y,                                  int x,
                int nWidth,                             int y,
                int nHeight,                            int nWidth,
                HWND hWndParent,                        int nHeight,
                HMENU hMenu,                            HWND hWndParent,
                HINSTANCE hInstance,                    HMENU hMenu,
                LPVOID lpParam                          HINSTANCE hInstance,
            );                                          LPVOID lpParam
                                                    );

   The Win32 API also provides examples of deprecating older functions and intro-
ducing an alternative name for the newer functions, instead of simply appending Ex to
the end of the name. For example, the OpenFile() method is deprecated, and instead the
CreateFile() function should be used for all modern applications.
   In terms of template use, adding new explicit template instantiations to your API can
potentially break backward compatibility because your clients may already have added
an explicit instantiation for that type. If this is the case, those clients will receive a
duplicate explicit instantiation error when trying to compile their code.
   In terms of maintaining binary compatibility, any changes you make to an existing
function signature will break binary compatibility, such as changing the order, type,
number, or constness of parameters, or changing the return type. If you need to change
the behavior of an existing method and maintain binary compatibility, then you must
resort to creating a new method for that purpose, potentially overloading the name of the
existing function. This technique was shown earlier in this chapter:

   // version 1.0
   void SetImage(Image *img);

   // version 1.1
   void SetImage(Image *img);
   void SetImage(Image *img, bool keep_aspect);

    Finally, it will be common to change the behavior of an API without changing the
signature of any of its methods. This could be done to fix a bug in the implementation or
to change the valid values or error conditions that a method supports. These kinds of
changes will be source and binary compatible, but they will break functional compati-
bility for your API. Often, these will be desired changes that your affected clients will find
agreeable. However, in cases where the change in behavior may not be desirable to all
clients, you can make the new behavior opt-in. For example, if you have added

multithreaded locking to your API, you could allow clients to opt-in to this new behavior
by calling a SetLocking() method to turn on this functionality (Tulach, 2008).
Alternatively, you could integrate the ability to turn on/off features with the HasFeature()
method I introduced earlier for the Version class. For example:

   // version.h
   class Version
   {
   public:
       ...

         static bool HasFeature(const std::string &name);
         static void EnableFeature(const std::string &name, bool);
         static bool IsFeatureEnabled(const std::string &name);
   };

    With this capability, your clients could explicitly enable new functionality while the
original behavior is maintained for existing clients, thus preserving functional compat-
ibility. For example,

   Version::EnableFeature("LOCKING", true);

Deprecating functionality
A deprecated feature is one that clients are actively discouraged from using, normally
because it’s been superseded by newer, preferred functionality. A deprecated feature
remains in the API, so users can still call it, although doing so may generate some kind of
warning. The expectation is that deprecated functionality may be completely removed
from a future version of the API.
    Deprecation is a way to start the process of removing a feature while giving your
clients time to update their code to remove their dependency on the feature.
    There are various reasons to deprecate functionality, including addressing security
flaws, introducing a more powerful feature, simplifying the API, or supporting a refac-
toring of the API’s functionality. For example, the standard C function tmpnam() has been
deprecated in preference to more secure implementations such as tmpnam_s() or
mkstemp().
    When you deprecate an existing method you should mark this fact in the docu-
mentation for the method, along with a note on any newer functionality that should be
used instead. In addition to this documentation task, there are ways to produce warning
messages if the function is ever used. As of Cþþ14, there’s a standard way to do this with
the [[deprecated]] attribute. For example:

   class MyObject
   {
   public:
       [[deprecated("Use GetValues() instead")]] int GetValue() const;
       std::vector<int> GetValues() const;
   };

   You can use [[deprecated]] in front of a function signature, whether it is a free
function, a function template, or a class method. You can also use it in front of a variable
definition to deprecate any of your API constants. However, you cannot currently use it
to deprecate an entire class, struct, or enum.
   If you’re unable to use Cþþ14, most compilers provide their own way to decorate a
class, method, or variable as being deprecated and will output a compile-time warning if
a program tries to access a symbol decorated in this fashion. In Visual Studio Cþþ, you
prefix a method declaration with __declspec(deprecated), whereas in the GNU Cþþ
compiler you use __attribute__ ((deprecated)). This code defines a DEPRECATED macro
that will work for either compiler:

   // deprecated.h
   #ifdef __GNUC__
   #define DEPRECATED __attribute__((deprecated))
   #elif defined(_MSC_VER)
   #define DEPRECATED __declspec(deprecated) func
   #else
   #define DEPRECATED
   #pragma message("DEPRECATED is not defined for this compiler")
   #endif

   Using this definition, you can mark certain methods as being deprecated:

   #include "deprecated.h"

   #include <string>

   class MyClass
   {
   public:
       DEPRECATED std::string GetName();
       std::string GetFullName();
   };

   If users try to call the GetName() method, their compiler will output a warning message
indicating that the method is deprecated. For example, this warning is emitted by the
GNU Cþþ 4.3 compiler:

   In function ‘int main(int, char**)’:
   warning: ‘GetName’ is deprecated (declared at myclass.h:21)

   As an alternative to providing a compile-time warning, you could write code to issue a
deprecation warning at runtime. One reason to do this is so you can provide more in-
formation in the warning message, such as an indication of an alternative method to use.
For example, you could declare a function that you call as the first statement of each
function you wish to deprecate, such as:

   void Deprecated(const std::string oldfunc,
                   const std::string newfunc = "");

   ...

   std::string MyClass::GetName()
   {
       Deprecated("MyClass::GetName", "MyClass::GetFullName");
       ....
   }

   The implementation of Deprecated() could maintain an std::set with the name of
each function for which a warning has already been emitted. This would allow you to
output a warning on only the first invocation of the deprecated method, to avoid
spewage to the terminal if the method gets called a lot. Noel Llopis describes a similar
technique in his Game Gem, except that his solution also keeps track of the number of
unique call sites and batches up the warnings to output a single report at the end of the
program’s execution (DeLoura, 2001).

Removing functionality
Some functionality may eventually be removed from an API after it’s gone through at
least one release of being deprecated. Removing a feature will break all existing clients
that depend upon that feature, which is why it’s important to give users a warning about
your intention to remove the functionality, by first marking it as deprecated.
    Removing functionality from an API is a drastic step, but it’s sometimes warranted
when the methods should no longer be called for security reasons, if that functionality is
simply no longer supported, or if it’s restricting the ability of the API to evolve.
    One way to remove functionality and yet still allow legacy users to access the old
functionality is to bump the major version number and declare that the new version is
not backward compatible. Then you can completely remove the functionality from the
latest version of the API but still provide old versions of the API for download, with the
understanding that they are deprecated and unsupported and should be used only by
legacy applications. You may even consider storing the API headers in a different
directory and renaming the libraries so that the two APIs do not conflict with each other.
This is a big deal, so don’t do it often. Once in the lifetime of the API is best. Never is even
better.

   This technique was used by the Qt library when it transitioned from version 3.x to 4.x.
Qt 4 introduced several new features at the cost of source and binary compatibility with
Qt 3. Many functions and enums were renamed to be more consistent, some func-
tionality was simply removed from the API, whereas other features were isolated into a
new Qt3Support library. A thorough porting guide was also provided to help clients
transition to the new release. This allowed Qt to make a radical step forward and improve
the consistency of the API while providing support for certain Qt 3 features to legacy
applications.
   Another option when deciding to remove some functionality is to leave it in the code
so that legacy code continues to compile, but remove it from the associated API docu-
mentation so that its existence is no longer advertised to clients. The Qt library provides
another good example of this, with the use of a preprocessor define that can compile out
parts of a header during documentation generation, such as:

   QGraphicsItem(QGraphicsItem *parent = 0
   #ifndef Q_QDOC
                  , QGraphicsScene *scene = 0       // obsolete argument
   #endif
   );

    You can also achieve this with the Doxygen tool by surrounding the function decla-
ration with the \cond and \endcond commands, such as:

   /// \cond TestFunctions
   void MyDeprecatedFunction();
   /// \endcond

Inline namespaces for versioning
Cþþ11 introduced the concept of inline namespaces, in which all members of an inlined
namespace are added to the enclosing namespace. This feature can be used to help with
versioning of an API by enclosing all of its symbols within a version namespace, such as:

   namespace MyLibrary {
   inline namespace v1 {

   void MyFunction();

   }   // namespace v1
   }   // namespace MyLibrary

   The function in this example is available as MyLibrary::v1::MyFunction() and also
simply MyLibrary::MyFunction(). Now, if we release a new version of the API, we can
preserve the original implementation as well as introduce the newer version. For
example:

   namespace MyLibrary {
   namespace v1 {

   void MyFunction();

   } // namespace v1
   inline namespace v2 {

   void MyFunction();

   }   // namespace v2
   }   // namespace MyLibrary

    Here I’ve introduced a new v2 namespace and made it be the inlined namespace
instead of v1. As a result, the MyLibrary::v2::MyFunction() is now the version that is
available as MyLibrary::MyFunction(). However, your clients can still access the previous
version by referring explicitly to MyLibrary::v1::MyFunction(), or they could use using
namespace MyLibrary::v1 to use only the v1 symbols consistently, even though v2 is the
default inlined version.
    When your clients refer to MyLibrary::MyFunction() in their code, the compiler will use
the full namespace with the version number in the object file. This means that if you
were to break the binary compatibility of your API in a newer version, you wouldn’t
actually break your clients’ projects because they would be explicitly linking against the
previous version symbols. This approach therefore gives you the ability to insulate your
clients from binary breaking changes, although at the cost of having to maintain an
entire set of symbols for every version that you distribute. You could reduce this cost by
employing this technique only for major version number changes of your API, or only for
breaking version changes.
    However, if you plan to use inline namespaces for versioning, you should use them
from the very first version of your API. Otherwise, you could break ABI compatibility for
your clients. For example, if they were originally linking against MyLibrary::MyFunction(),
but you moved to using inline namespaces, then that symbol would no longer exist and
instead there would be MyLibrary::v1::MyFunction() and MyLibrary::v2::MyFunction().

API reviews
Backward compatibility doesn’t just happen. It requires dedicated and diligent effort to
ensure that no new changes to an API have silently broken existing code. This is best
achieved by adding API reviews to your development process. In this section, I’ll present

the argument for performing API reviews, discuss how to implement these successfully,
and describe a number of tools that can be used to make the job of reviewing API
changes more manageable.
   There are two models for performing API reviews. One is to hold a single prerelease
meeting to review all changes since the previous release. The other model is to enforce a
precommit change request process in which changes to the API must be requested and
approved before being checked in. You can do both, of course.

The purpose of API reviews
You wouldn’t release source code to your users without at least compiling it. In the same
way, you shouldn’t release API changes to your clients without checking that they don’t
break their applications. API reviews are a critical and essential step for anyone who is
serious about API development. In case you need further encouragement, here are a few
reasons to enforce explicit checks of your API before you release it to clients:
n   Maintain backward compatibility. The primary reason to review your API before
    it’s released is to ensure that you’ve not unknowingly changed the API in a way
    that breaks backward compatibility. As I mentioned, if you have many engineers
    working on fixing bugs and adding new features, it’s possible that some will not
    understand the vital importance of preserving the public interface.
n   Maintain design consistency. It’s crucial that the architecture and design plans
    that you obsessed about for the version 1.0 release are maintained throughout sub-
    sequent releases. There are two issues here. The first is that changes that don’t fit
    into the API design should be caught and recast; otherwise the original design will
    become diluted and deformed until you eventually end up with a system that has
    no cohesion or consistency. The second issue is that change is inevitable, and if
    the structure of the API must change, then this requires revisiting the architecture
    to update it for the new functional requirements and use cases. As a caution, John
    Lakos points out that if you implement one new feature for 10 clients, then every
    client gets nine features they didn’t ask for, and you must implement, test, and
    support 10 features that you did not originally design for (Lakos, 1996).
n   Change control. Sometimes a change may simply be too risky. For example, an
    engineer may try to add a major new feature for a release that’s focused on bug
    fixing and stability. Changes may also be too extensive or poorly tested, appear too
    late in the release process, violate API principles such as exposing implementation
    details, or not conform to the coding standards for the API. The maintainers of an
    API should be able to reject changes that they feel are inappropriate for the current
    API release and target them for a future release, perhaps with feedback on ways to
    improve the change.
n   Allow future evolution. A single change to the source code can often be imple-
    mented in several different ways. Some of those ways may be better than others in
    that they consider future evolution and put in place a more general mechanism

     that will allow future improvements to be added without breaking the API. The API
     maintainers should be able to demand that a change be reimplemented in more
     future-proof fashion. Tulach calls this being evolution ready (Tulach, 2008).
n    Revisit solutions. Once your API has been used in real situations and you’ve
     received feedback from your clients on its usability, you may come up with better
     solutions. API reviews can also be a place where you revisit previous decisions to
     see if they’re still valid and appropriate.
    If your API is so successful that it becomes a standard, then other vendors may write
alternative implementations. This makes the need for API change control even more
critical. For example, the creators of OpenGL recognized this need, and so they formed
the OpenGL Architecture Review Board (ARB) to govern the standard. The ARB was
responsible for changes to the OpenGL API, advancing the standard, and defining
conformance tests. This ran from 1992 until 2006, at which point control of the API
specification was passed to the Khronos Group.

    TIP: Introduce an API review process to check all changes before releasing new version of the
    API.

Prerelease API reviews
A prerelease API review is a meeting that you hold just before the API is finally released.
It’s often a good activity to perform right before or during the alpha release stage. The
best process for these reviews for your organization will obviously differ from what works
best elsewhere. However, here are some general suggestions to help guide you. First, you
should identify who the critical attendees are for such a review meeting. For example:
1. Product owner. This is the person who has overall responsibility for product plan-
   ning and representing the needs of clients. Obviously, this person must be tech-
   nical, because your users are technical. In Scrum terminology, the product owner
   represents the stakeholders and the business.
2. Technical lead. The review will generate questions about why a particular change
   was added and whether it was done in the best way. This requires deep technical
   knowledge of the code base and strong software design skills. This person should
   be intimately familiar with the architectural and design rationale for the API, if
   they didn’t develop this themselves.
3. Documentation lead. An API is more than code. It’s also documentation. Not all
   issues that are raised in the review meeting need to be fixed by changing the code.
   Many will require documentation fixes. Strong documentation is a critical

   component of any API, and so the presence of a person with technical writing
   skills at the review is very important.
4. Testing lead. One way to feel confident that you’re not breaking backward compat-
   ibility is to ensure that all existing tests have been run and continue to pass. It is
   also important to be sure that new tests have been written that cover any new
   functionality. The developer will normally be responsible for maintaining unit tests,
   but a separate QA engineer may also be involved to deal with higher-level auto-
   mated testing such as integration or performance tests.
    You may decide to add further optional attendees to the review meeting, to try and
cast a wider net in your effort to ensure that the new API release is the best it can be. At
Pixar, we performed API reviews for all of the animation system public APIs we delivered
to our film production users. In addition to those attendees, we would include a couple
of senior engineers who work daily in the source code. You’ll obviously also want
someone from project management present to capture all of the notes for the meeting so
that nothing is forgotten.
    Depending upon the size of your API and the extent of the changes, these meetings
can be long and grueling. We would regularly have several 2-hour meetings to cover all
API changes for a release. You shouldn’t rush these meetings or continue them when
everyone is getting tired. Assume that they’ll take several days to complete, and ensure
that developers and technical writers have time to implement any required changes
coming out of the meeting before the API is released.
    For larger organizations, it’s particularly important to have a good process for engi-
neers to submit proposals for new public APIs or changes to existing public APIs. It’s also
vital to have a dedicated team focused on reviewing and enforcing the organization’s
best practices for API design. One large company where I worked has a particularly good
API review process. They have an internal website where proposals for new or changed
APIs can be submitted. The submissions are managed through GitHub, allowing re-
viewers and stakeholders to collaborate through comments, to enforce rules such as
requiring two reviewer approvals, and to have an entire revision history for all API de-
cisions. The format of these submissions is also well-defined and is composed of sec-
tions such as:
  Metadata: Each submission has a unique ID, a list of authors and sponsors, the
  target software release, any related bug tracking system IDs, and so on.
  Introduction: Provides a short elevator pitch for the API change.
  Motivation: Goes into detail about the problem being solved.
  Proposed Solution: Provides an overview of the solution, ideally with examples.
  Detailed Design: Declarations of new or changed public symbols, lifted verbatim
  from the code.
  Impacts on Quality: Any concerns on the usability or testing of the API.
  Alternatives Considered: Summarizes decisions that were made to get to the cur-
  rent proposal.

   In terms of activities that should be performed during an API review, the most important
thing is to focus on the interface being delivered, not on the specifics of the imple-
mentation. In other words, the primary focus should be on the public symbols and the
documentation, such as the automatically generated API documentation (see Chapter 11
on Documentation for specifics on using Doxygen for this purpose). More specifically, you
are most interested in changes to the API since the last release. This may involve the cre-
ation of a tool to report the differences between the current API and the previous version.
For each change, the review committee should ask various questions, such as:
n   Does this change break backward compatibility?
n   Does this change break binary compatibility (if this is a goal)?
n   Does this change have sufficient documentation?
n   Could this change have been implemented in a more future-proof manner?
n   Does this change have negative performance implications?
n   Does this change break the architecture model?
n   Does this change conform to the API coding standards?
n   Does this change introduce cyclic dependencies into the code?
n   Should the API change include upgrade scripts to help clients update their code or
    data files?
n   Are there existing automated tests for the changed code to verify that functional
    compatibility has not been affected?
n   Does the change need automated tests, and have they been written?
n   Is this a change we want to release to clients?

Precommit API reviews
Of course, you don’t have to wait until right before release to catch these problems. The
prerelease API review meeting is the last line of defense to ensure that undesirable
changes aren’t released to users. However, the work of the API review can be greatly
decreased if the API owners are constantly vigilant during the development process,
watching checkins to the source code and flagging problems early on so that they can be
addressed before they reach the API review meeting.
    Many organizations or projects will therefore institute precommit API reviews. That
is, they will put in place a change request process, in which engineers wishing to make a
change to the public API must formally request permission for the change from the API
review committee. Implementation-only changes that do not affect the public API do not
normally need to go through this additional process. This is particularly useful for open
source software projects, in which patches can be submitted from many engineers with
differing backgrounds and skills.
    For example, the open-source Symbian mobile device OS imposes a change control
process for all Symbian platform public API changes. The stated goal of this process is to
ensure that the public API evolves in a controlled manner. The process is started by
submitting a change request with the following information:

FIGURE 10.4 The public interface change request (CR) process for the Symbian platform. Copyright (c) 2009
Symbian Foundation limited. Licensed under the Creative commons license 2.0 by Stichbury.

n   A description of the change and why it’s necessary.
n   An impact analysis for any clients of the API.
n   A porting guide to the new version of the API.
n   Updates to the backward compatibility test cases.
   This is then reviewed by the architecture council, who will either approve or reject the
request and provide the rationale for the decision. Once approved, the developer can
submit the code, documentation, and test updates. Fig. 10.4 provides an overview of this
process.
   As another example, the Java-based NetBeans project defines an API review process
for accepting patches from developers. This is done to supervise the architecture of the
NetBeans IDE and related products. Changes to existing APIs, or requests for new APIs,
are required to be reviewed before they are accepted into the trunk code line. This
process is managed through the NetBeans bug tracking system, in which requests for
review are marked with the keyword API_REVIEW or API_REVIEW_FAST. The review
process will result in a change being either accepted or rejected. In the case of rejection,
the developer is normally given direction on improvements to the design, imple-
mentation, or documentation that would make the change more acceptable. Of course,
similar feedback may still be provided for accepted changes. For details on this process,
see https://netbeans.apache.org/wiki/main/wiki/APIReviews/.
   You can also rely on automation to make precommit checks easier. For example,
using an SCM such as GitHub you can set up various commit hooks to enforce coding

conventions, run automated tests, perform static analysis checks, and require approval
from specific reviewers. Pull requests can then be merged only if all automated checks
pass and sufficient approvals have been gained. You can also define a CODEOWNERS file to
have various reviewers for different parts of the code base, such as including a group of
API reviewers for any .h file changes.
    Precommit reviews are a good way to stay on top of the incoming stream of API
changes during the development process. However, it’s still useful to schedule a single
prerelease API review meeting as well. This can be used to catch any changes that
slipped through the cracks because an engineer was unaware of the process or didn’t
realize that it applied to his or her change.
