Appendix A: Libraries
      A library lets you package the compiled code and data that implement your application
programming interface (API) so that your clients can embed these into their own applica-
tions. Libraries are the instruments of modularization. This appendix will cover the different
types of libraries that you can use and how you can create them on various platforms. It also
covers physical aspects of API design, namely exposing the public symbols of your API in the
symbol export table of its library file.
      The characteristics, usage, and supporting tools for libraries are inherently platform-
specific. How you work with a Dynamic Link Library (DLL) on Windows is different from
how you work with a Dynamic Shared Objects (DSO) on Unix. I have therefore decided to
organize the bulk of the content in this appendix by platform, specifically Windows, Linux,
and macOS. This also has the benefit of not distracting you with platform-specific details that
you don’t care about for your current project.

Static versus dynamic libraries
There are two main forms of libraries that you can create. The decision about which one you
employ can have a significant impact on your clients’ applications in terms of tangible factors
such as load time, executable size, and robustness to different versions of your API. These two
basic types are static libraries and dynamic (or shared) libraries. I will describe each in detail
over the following sections.

Static libraries
A static library contains object code that’s linked with an end-user application and then
becomes part of that executable. Fig. A.1 illustrates this concept. A static library is sometimes
called an archive because it’s essentially just a package of compiled object files. These

FIGURE A.1 Linking a static library into an application causes the library code to be embedded in the resulting
executable.

                                                                                                          565

libraries normally have a file extension of .a on Unix and macOS machines or .lib on
Windows (e.g., libjpeg.a or jpeg.lib).
      Some implications of distributing your API’s implementation as a static library are:

n   A static library is needed only to link an application. It is not needed to run that
    application because the library code is essentially embedded inside the application.
    As a result, your clients can distribute their applications without additional run-
    time dependencies.
n   If your clients wish to link your library into multiple executables, each one will
    embed a copy of your code. If your library is 10 MB in size and your client wishes
    to link this into five separate programs, then you could be adding up to 50 MB to
    the total size of the product. Note that only the object files in the static library that
    are actually used are copied to the application. So in reality the total size of each
    application could be less than this worst case.
n   Your clients can distribute their applications without concerns that it will find an
    incompatible library version on the end user’s machine or a completely different li-
    brary with the same name from another vendor. This avoids the library version and
    dependency issues that were often described as “DLL hell” on early Windows
    platforms.
n   On the other hand, if your clients want to be able to hot patch their application
    (i.e., they want to update the version of your API used by their application), they
    must replace the entire executable to achieve this. If this is done as an Internet-
    based update, the end user may have to download a much larger update and
    hence wait longer for the update to complete.

Dynamic libraries
Dynamic libraries are files that are linked against at compile time to resolve undefined ref-
erences and then distributed with the end user application so that the application can load
the library code at run time (Fig. A.2). This normally requires the use of a dynamic linker on

FIGURE A.2 A dynamic library is used to link an application and is then distributed with that application so that
the library can be loaded at run time.

the end user’s machine to find and load all dynamic library dependencies at run time,
perform the necessary symbol relocations, and then pass control to the application. For
example, the Linux dynamic linker is called ld.so, and on the Mac it is called dyld. Often, the
dynamic linker supports several environment variables to modify or debug its behavior. For
example, refer to man dyld on the Mac.
      Dynamic libraries are sometimes called shared libraries because they can be shared by
multiple programs. On Unix machines they can be called DSOs and on Windows they’re
referred to as DLLs. They have an .so file extension on Unix platforms, .dll on Windows, and
.dylib on macOS (e.g., libjpeg.so or jpeg.dll).
      Some implications of using dynamic libraries to distribute your API include:

n    Your clients must distribute your dynamic library with their application (as well as
     any dynamic libraries on which your library depends) so that it can be discovered
     when the application is run.
n    Your clients’ applications will not run if the dynamic library can’t be found: for
     example, if the library is deleted or moved to a directory that’s not in the dynamic
     library search path. Furthermore, the application may not run if the dynamic li-
     brary is upgraded to a newer version or overwritten with an older version.
n    Using dynamic libraries can often be more efficient than static libraries in terms of
     disk space if more than one application needs to use the library. This is because
     the library code is stored in a single shared file and not duplicated inside each
     executable. Note that this is not a hard and fast rule, however. As I noted earlier,
     the executable only needs to include the object code from the static library that’s
     actually used. So if each application uses only a small fraction of the total static li-
     brary, the disk space efficiency can still rival that of a complete dynamic library.
n    Dynamic libraries may also be more efficient in terms of memory. Most modern
     operating systems will attempt only to load the dynamic library code into memory
     once and share it across all applications that depend upon it. This may also lead to
     better cache utilization. By comparison, every application that’s linked against a
     static library will load duplicate copies of the library code into memory.
n    If your clients wish to hot patch their application with a new (backward-
     compatible) version of your shared library, they can simply drop in the replace-
     ment library file and all of their applications will use this new library without
     having to recompile or relink.

    TIP: You should prefer to distribute your library as a dynamic library to give your users
    greater flexibility. If your library is sufficiently small and stable, you may additionally decide
    to provide a static library version.

FIGURE A.3 A plugin library is a dynamic library that can be compiled separately from the application and
explicitly loaded by the application on demand.

      It’s also important to understand the behavior of dynamic libraries that depend upon
other dynamic libraries. If your library depends upon other dynamic libraries, then you must
also ship those libraries with your software development kit (SDK), unless you can reasonably
expect the end user’s platform to have those libraries preinstalled. This is a transitive prop-
erty: you must also ship all of the dependencies of your dependencies. Essentially, the entire
chain of dynamic libraries must be available to the application at run time for it to be able to
run. Of course, if your dynamic library links against a static library, then you don’t need to
provide that static library to your clients because the code from the static library is added
directly to your dynamic library.

Dynamic libraries as plugins
Dynamic libraries are normally linked against an application and then distributed with that
application so that the operating system can load the library when the application is
launched. However, it’s also possible for an application to load a dynamic library on demand,
without the application having been compiled and linked against that library.
      This can be used to create plugin interfaces, in which the application can load addi-
tional code at run time that extends the basic capabilities of the program. For example, most
Web browsers support plugins to handle specific content types, such as viewing Apple
QuickTime movies. This use of dynamic libraries is illustrated in Fig. A.3.
      In terms of API development, this gives you the capability to create extensible APIs that
allow your clients to drop in new functionality that your API will then load and execute. The
Netscape Plugin API is an example of this: it’s the API that you develop against to create a
plugin (i.e., dynamic library) that browsers such as Firefox, Safari, Opera, and Chrome can
then load and run. I discussed the use of plugins to create extensible APIs in Chapter 15.

Libraries on Windows
On Windows, static libraries are represented with .lib files, whereas dynamic libraries have
.dll file extensions. Additionally, you must accompany each .dll file with an import library,
or .lib file. The import library is used to resolve references to symbols exported in the DLL.
For example, the Win32 User Interface API is implemented in user32.dll, with an accom-
panying user32.lib. Note that although they share the same .lib file extension, a static

library and an import library are different file types. If you plan to distribute both static and
dynamic library versions of your API, then you will need to avoid a filename collision by either
naming the static library differently or placing each in a separate directory. For example:

              static:           foo_static.lib or static:  static/foo.lib
              dynamic:          foo.dll           dynamic: dynamic/foo.dll
              import:           foo.lib           import:  dynamic/foo.lib
      On Windows, several other file formats are implemented as DLLs:

n   ActiveX Controls files (.ocx)
n   Device driver files (.drv)
n   Control Panel files (.cpl)

Importing and exporting functions
As I discussed in Chapter 6, if you want a function to be callable from a DLL on Windows, you
must explicitly mark its declaration with this keyword:

    __declspec(dllexport)

      For example,

    __declspec(dllexport) void MyFunction();
    class __declspec(dllexport) MyClass;

     Conversely, if you want to use an exported DLL function in an application, then you
must prefix the function prototype with this keyword:

    __declspec(dllimport)

       It’s therefore common to employ preprocessor macros to use the export decoration
when building an API and the import decoration when using the same API in an application.
It’s also important to note that these __declspec decorations may cause compile errors on
non-Windows compilers, so you should use them only when compiling under Windows. The
next preprocessor code provides a simple demonstration of this (see the Exporting Symbols
Section in Chapter 6 for a more complete cross-platform example):

    // On Windows, compile with /D "_EXPORTING" to build the DLL
    #ifdef _WIN32
    #ifdef _EXPORTING
    #define DECLSPEC __declspec(dllexport)
    #else
    #define DECLSPEC __declspec(dllimport)
    #endif
    #else
    #define DECLSPEC
    #endif

       You can then decorate the symbols you want to export from your DLL as:

   DECLSPEC void MyFunction();
   class DECLSPEC MyClass;

     As an alternative to modifying your source code with these __declspec declarations, you
can create a module definition .def file to specify the symbols to export. A minimal DEF file
contains a LIBRARY statement to specify the name of the DLL with which the file is associated,
and an EXPORTS statement followed by a list of symbol names to export:

   // MyLIB.def
   LIBRARY "MyLIB"
   EXPORTS
       MyFunction1
       MyFunction2

      The DEF file syntax also supports more powerful manipulations of your symbols, such
as renaming symbols or using an ordinal number as the export name to help minimize the
size of the DLL. The ordinal number represents the position of a symbol’s address pointer in
the DLL’s export table. Using ordinal numbers for your DLL symbols can produce slightly
faster and smaller libraries. However, from an API stability perspective this can be risky
because seemingly innocuous changes to the DEF file can then change the exported symbols
for your API. Therefore, I recommend using full symbol names rather than ordinal values
when specifying your DLL exports.

The Dynamic Link Library entry point
DLLs can provide an optional entry point function to initialize data structures when a thread
or process loads the DLL, or to clean up memory when the DLL is unloaded. This is managed
by a function called DllMain() that you define and export within the DLL. If the entry point
function returns FALSE, this is assumed to be a fatal error and the application will fail to start.
This code provides a DLL entry point template:

   BOOL APIENTRY DllMain(HANDLE dllHandle,
                         DWORD reason,
                         LPVOID lpReserved)
   {
       switch (reason) {
       case DLL_PROCESS_ATTACHED:
           // A process is loading the DLL
           break;

         case DLL_PROCESS_DETACH:
             // A process unloads the DLL
             break;

         case DLL_THREAD_ATTACHED:
             // A process is creating a new thread
             break;

         case DLL_THREAD_DETACH:
             // A thread exits normally
             break;
         }

         return TRUE;
   }

Creating libraries on Windows
The next steps describe how to create a static library on Windows. These steps are for
Microsoft Visual Studio 2017, although the steps are similar for other versions of Visual
Studio:

1. Select the menu File > New > Project.
2. Select the Visual CDD > Win32 option and the Win32 Project icon.
3. The Win32 Application Wizard should appear.
4. Select the Static library option under Application type (see Fig. A.4).
      You can then add new or existing source files to your project under the Source Files
folder in the left-hand pane. Then, when you perform a build for your project, the result will
be a static library .lib file.

        FIGURE A.4 Creating a new static library or Dynamic Link Library (DLL) in Visual Studio 2017.

     The steps to create a DLL are very similar. The only difference is during Step 4, where
you will select the DLL option instead of Static library. Then, when you build your project,
Visual Studio will generate a .dll file and an associated .lib import file.

Useful Windows utilities
There are various programs that can help you manage DLLs on Windows and to investigate
DLL problems. Many of these are command-line tools that you can run from the MS-DOS
prompt. A few of these DLLs utilities are:

•   tasklist.exe: This program can be used to find out which dynamic libraries a
    running Windows EXE file depends upon, for example:

    tasklist /m /fi "IMAGENAME eq APPNAME.EXE"

•   depends.exe: The dependency walker utility will recursively scan an executable to
    discover all of its dependent DLLs. It will check for missing DLLs, invalid DLLs,
    and circular dependencies, among other error conditions.
•   dlister.exe: This utility provides a log of all the DLLs installed on your computer.
    This can be output as a text file or a database file.
•   dcomp.exe: Displays the differences between two DLL listings produced by the
    dlister.exe program.

Loading plugins on Windows
On the Windows platform, the LoadLibrary() or LoadLibraryEx() functions can be used to
load a dynamic library into a process, and the GetProcAddress() function is used to obtain the
address of an exported symbol in the DLL. Note that you do not need an import library .lib
file to load a dynamic library in this way. To demonstrate this, consider this simple plugin
interface that’s used to create a plugin.dll library:

    #ifndef PLUGIN_H
    #define PLUGIN_H

    #include <string>

    extern "C" __declspec(dllexport) void DoSomething(const char *name);

    #endif

     Then the following code snippet illustrates how to load this DLL on demand and call the
DoSomething() method from that library:

   // open the dynamic library
   HINSTANCE handle = LoadLibrary("plugin.dll");
   if (!handle) {
       std::cout << "Cannot load plugin!" << std::endl;
       exit(1);
   }

   // get the DoSomething() function from the plugin
   FARPROC fptr = GetProcAddress(handle, "DoSomething");
   if (fptr == (FARPROC) NULL) {
       std::cout << "Cannot find function in plugin: " << error;
       std::cout << std::endl;
       FreeLibrary(handle);
       exit(1);
   }

   // call the DoSomething() function
   (*fptr)("Hello There!");

   // close the shared library
   FreeLibrary(handle);

Libraries on Linux
In the following sections, I’ll provide an overview of creating and managing static and dy-
namic libraries on Linux. The emphasis here is to surface the important issues and tech-
niques. However, for a deeper treatment, I recommend reading Ulrich Drepper’s excellent
article, “How to write shared libraries,” available online at:
      https://akkadia.org/drepper/dsohowto.pdf

Creating static libraries on Linux
On Unix, a static library is simply an archive of object (.o) files. You can use the Unix ar
command to compile several object files into a static library. For example, the following
commands demonstrate how to compile three .cpp files to .o files using the GNU Cþþ
compiler and then creating a static library from those object files:

   g++ -c file1.cpp
   g++ -c file2.cpp
   g++ -c file3.cpp
   ar -crs libmyapi.a file1.o file2.o file3.o

      The -c option to gþþ tells the compiler to produce an .o file from the input .cpp file. The
options to ar are: -c creates an archive, -r inserts the supplied .o files into that archive, and
-s creates an index for the archive (equivalent to the older convention of running ranlib on
the resulting archive).

      Your users can then link against your library using the -l option to ld or gþþ. This
specifies the name of the library to link against. The -L linker option can also be used to
specify the directory where your library can be found. For example:

   g++ usercode.cpp -o userapp -L. -lmyapi

       In this example, the end user application userapp is created by compiling usercode.cpp
and linking against the libmyapi.a static library in the same directory.
       The order of archives on this command line is significant. For each archive that the
linker finds on the command line, it looks to see if that archive defines any symbols that were
referenced from any object files that were specified earlier on the command line. If it does
define any needed symbols, the object files with those symbols are copied into the executable.
It’s therefore best practice to specify libraries at the end of the command line (Mitchell et al.,
2001).
       While I’m discussing the creation of static libraries, it’s worth noting the proper usage of
the -static compiler option. This flag is used for the creation of executables, not libraries. It’s
therefore applicable to users of your API, but not to the building of your API itself. This flag
instructs the compiler to prefer linking the static versions of all dependent libraries into the
executable so that it depends upon no dynamic libraries at run time.

Creating dynamic libraries on Linux
Creating a dynamic library on Linux is very similar to creating a static library. Using the GNU
Cþþ compiler, you can simply use the -shared linker option to generate an .so file instead of
an executable.
      On platforms where it’s not the default behavior, you should also specify either the
-fpic or -fPIC command line option to instruct the compiler to emit position-independent
code (PIC). This is needed because the code in a shared library may be loaded into a
different memory location for different executables. It’s therefore important to generate PIC
code for shared libraries so that that user code doesn’t depend upon the absolute memory
address of symbols. The following example illustrates how to compile three source files into a
dynamic library:

   g++ -c -fPIC file1.c
   g++ -c -fPIC file2.c
   g++ -c -fPIC file3.c
   g++ -shared -o libmyapi.so -fPIC file1.o file2.o file3.o

    Users can then link your dynamic library into their code using the same compile line
shown earlier for the static library case: i.e.,

   g++ usercode.cpp -o userapp -L. -lmyapi

      If you have both a static library and a dynamic library with the same base name in the
same directory (i.e., libmyapi.a and libmyapi.so), the linker will use the dynamic library. To
favor the use of a static library over a dynamic library with the same base name, you can use
the -static linker option, or you could place the static library in a different directory and
ensure that this directory appears earlier in the library search path (using the -L linker
option).

      Note that in a dynamic library, all code is essentially flattened into a single object file.
This contrasts with static libraries that are represented as a collection of object files that can
be individually copied into an executable as needed (i.e., object files in a static archive that
are not needed are not copied into the executable image). As a result, loading a dynamic
library will involve loading all the code defined in that .so file (Mitchell et al., 2001).
      By default, all symbols in a DSO are exported publicly (unless you specify the
-fvisibility¼hidden compiler option). However, the GNU Cþþ compiler supports the
concept of export maps to explicitly define the set of symbols in a dynamic library that will be
visible to client programs. This is a simple ASCII format where symbols can be listed indi-
vidually or using glob-style expressions. For example, the following map file, export.map,
specifies that only the DoSomething() function should be exported, and all other symbols
should be hidden:

   {
        global: DoSomething;
        local: *
   };

     This map file can then be passed to the compiler when building a dynamic library using
the –version-script linker option, as in this example:

   g++ -shared -o libmyapi.so -fPIC file1.o file2.o file3.o \
       -Wl,--version-script=export.map

Shared library entry points
It’s possible to define functions that will be called automatically when your shared library is
loaded or unloaded. This can be used to perform library initialization and cleanup operations
without requiring your users to call explicit functions to perform this.
      One way to do this is using static constructors and destructors. This will work for any
compiler and any platform, although you should remember that the order of initialization of
static constructors is not defined across translation unit boundaries (i.e., you should never
depend upon static variables in other .cpp files being initialized). Bearing this caveat in mind,
you could create a shared library entry point in one of your .cpp files as:

   class APIInitMgr
   {
   public:
       APIInitMgr()
       {
           std::cout << "APIInitMgr Initialized." << std::endl;
       }

        ~APIInitMgr()
        {
            std::cout << "APIInitMgr Destroyed." << std::endl;
        }
   };

   static APIInitMgr sInitMgr;

     There is an alternative, more elegant approach. However, it’s specific to the GNU
compiler. This involves using the constructor and destructor __attribute__ decorations for
functions. For example, the following code shows you how to define library initialization and
cleanup routines and hide these within one of your .cpp files:

   static void __attribute__((constructor)) APIInitialize()
   {
       std::cout << "API Initialized." << std::endl;
   }

   static void __attribute__((destructor)) APICleanup()
   {
       std::cout << "API Cleaned Up." << std::endl;
   }

    If you use this approach, you should be aware that your shared library must not be
compiled with the GNU GCC arguments -nostartfiles or -nostdlib.

Useful Linux utilities
There are several standard Linux utilities that can help you work with static and shared li-
braries. Of note is the GNU libtool shell script. This command provides a consistent and
portable interface for creating libraries on different Unix platforms. The libtool script can be
used in various ways, but in its simplest form you can just give libtool a list of object files,
specify either the -static or -dynamic option, and it will then create a static or dynamic li-
brary, respectively. For example,

   libtool -static -o libmyapi.a file1.o file2.o file3.o

      The libtool script can be very useful if you want your source code to compile easily on a
range of Unix platforms without worrying about the idiosyncrasies of creating libraries on
each platform.
      Another useful command for working with libraries is nm, which can be used to display
the symbol names in an object file or library. This is useful to find out whether a library
defines or uses a given symbol. For example, this command line will output all global
(external) symbols in a library:

   nm -g libmyapi.a

      This will produce output such as:

   00000000 T _DoSomething
   00000118 S _DoSomething.eh
            U __ZNSolsEPFRSoS_E
            U __ZNSt8ios_base4InitC1Ev
            U __ZNSt8ios_base4InitD1Ev
            U __ZSt4cout
   ...

      The character in the second column specifies the symbol type, where “T” refers to a text
section symbol that’s defined in this library and “U” refers to a symbol that’s referenced by
the library but is not defined by it. An uppercase letter represents an external symbol, whereas
a lowercase character represents an internal symbol. The string in the third column provides
the mangled symbol name. This can be unmangled using the cþþfilt command. For example,

   c++filt __ZNSt8ios_base4InitD1Ev
   std::ios_base::Init::~Init()

      Another useful command is ldd. This can be used to display the list of dynamic libraries
on which an executable depends. This will display the full path that will be used for each
library, so you can see which version of a dynamic library will be loaded and whether any
dynamic libraries cannot be found by the operating system. For example, the following
output is produced on Linux for a simple executable:

   % ldd userapp
       linux-gate.so.1 => (0xb774a000)
       libstdc++.so.6 => /usr/lib/libstdc++.so.6 (0xb7645000)
       libm.so.6 => /lib/tls/i686/cmov/libm.so.6 (0xb761f000)
       libgcc_s.so.1 => /lib/libgcc_s.so.1 (0xb7600000)
       libc.so.6 => /lib/tls/i686/cmov/libc.so.6 (0xb74bb000)
       /lib/ld-linux.so.2 (0xb774b000)

    An executable that’s been linked with the -static option will not depend upon any
dynamic libraries. Running ldd on such an executable produces this output on Linux:

   % ldd userapp
       not a dynamic executable

       Finally, if you have a static library, it’s possible to convert it to a dynamic library. Recall that a
static archive (.a) is just a packaging of object files (.o). You can therefore extract the individual
object files using the ar command and then relink them as a dynamic library. For example,

   ar -x libmyapi.a
   g++ -shared -o libmyapi.so *.o

Loading plugins on Linux
On Linux platforms, you can use the dlopen() function call to load an .so file into the current
process. Then you can use the dlsym() function to access symbols within that library. This lets
you create plugin interfaces, as described earlier in the book. For example, consider the
following very simple plugin interface:

   #ifndef PLUGIN_H
   #define PLUGIN_H

   #include <string>

   extern "C" void DoSomething(const char *name);

   #endif

      You can build a dynamic library for this API, such as libplugin.so. Then the following
code demonstrates how to load this library and call the DoSomething() function within that
.so file:

   using FuncPtrT = void (*)(const char *);
   const char *error;

   // open the dynamic library
   void *handle = dlopen("libplugin.so", RTLD_LOCAL | RTLD_LAZY);
   if (!handle) {
       std::cout << "Cannot load plugin!" << std::endl;
       exit(1);
   }
   dlerror();

   // get the DoSomething() function from the plugin
   FuncPtrT fptr = (FuncPtrT) dlsym(handle, "DoSomething");
   if ((error = dlerror())) {
       std::cout << "Cannot find function in plugin: " << error;
       std::cout << std::endl;
       dlclose(handle);
       exit(1);
   }

   // call the DoSomething() function
   (*fptr)("Hello There!");

   // close the shared library
   dlclose(handle);

Finding dynamic libraries at run time
When you run an executable that depends upon a dynamic library, the system will search for
this library in various standard locations, normally /lib and /usr/lib. If the .so file cannot be
found in any of these locations the executable will fail to launch. Recall that the ldd command
can be used to tell you if the system cannot find any dependent dynamic library. This is
obviously a concern for creating executable programs that depend upon your API. There are
three main options available to your clients to ensure that any executable they build using
your API can find your library at run time:

1. The client of your API ensures that your library is installed in one of the standard
   library directories on the end user’s machine, such as /usr/lib. This will require
   the end user to perform an installation process and to have root privileges to copy
   files into a system directory.
2. The LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable can be set to augment the default library
   search path with a colon-separated list of directories. Your clients could therefore
   distribute a shell script to run their application where that script sets the
   LD_LIBRARY_PATH variable to an appropriate directory where your dynamic library
   can be found.
3. Your clients can use the rpath (run path) linker option to compile the preferred
   path to search for dynamic libraries into their executable. For example, this

   compile line will produce an executable that will cause the system to search in
   /usr/local/lib for any dynamic libraries:

   g++ usercode.cpp -o userapp -L. -lmyapi -Wl,-rpath,/usr/local/lib

Libraries on macOS
The macOS operating system is built upon a version of BSD Unix called Darwin. As such,
many of the details that I’ve presented earlier for Linux apply equally well to the Mac.
However, there are a few differences that are worth highlighting between Darwin and other
Unix platforms such as Linux. Note that I’ll refer to macOS here for simplicity, but everything
I present applies equally well to all other Apple operating systems, such as iOS, iPadOS,
watchOS, tvOS, and visionOS.

Creating static libraries on macOS
Static libraries can be created on macOS in the same way as for Linux (i.e., using ar or
libtool). However, there are some different behaviors when linking a static library into an
application.
       Apple discourages the use of the -static compiler option to generate executables with
all library dependencies linked statically. This is because Apple wants to ensure that appli-
cations always pull in the latest system libraries that they distribute. In fact the gcc man page
states that -static "will not work on macOS unless all libraries (including libgcc.a) have also
been compiled with -static. Since neither a static version of libSystem.dylib nor crt0.o are
provided, this option is not useful to most people."
       Essentially, the -static option on the Mac is reserved for building the kernel, or for the
very brave.
       Related to this situation, by default the Mac linker will scan through all paths in the
library search path looking for a dynamic library. If it fails, it will then scan the paths again
looking for a static library. This means that you cannot use the trick of favoring a static library
by placing it in a directory that appears earlier in the library search path. However, there is a
linker option called -search-paths-first that will cause the linker to look in each search path
for a dynamic library and then, if not found, to look for a static library in the same directory.
This option makes the Mac linker behavior more like the Linux linker in this respect. Note,
however, that there is no way to favor linking against a static library over a dynamic library on
the Mac when both are located in the same directory.

Creating dynamic libraries on macOS
Dynamic libraries can be created on macOS in a way very similar to that in the Linux in-
structions given earlier. There’s one important difference that you should use the -dynamiclib
option to gþþ to create dynamic libraries on the Mac, instead of -shared:

   g++ -c -fPIC file1.c
   g++ -c -fPIC file2.c
   g++ -c -fPIC file3.c
   g++ -dynamiclib -o libmyapi.so -fPIC file1.o file2.o file3.o \
       -headerpad_max_install_names

     Also, note the use of the -headerpad_max_install_names option. This flag is highly rec-
ommended when building dynamic libraries on the Mac, for reasons I’ll explain in a moment.
     It should also be noted that the ldd command is not available on macOS. Instead, you
can use the otool command to list the collection of dynamic libraries that an executable
depends upon, such as:

   otool -L userapp

Frameworks on macOS
The macOS operating system also introduces the concept of frameworks to distribute all of
the files necessary to compile and link against an API in a single package. A framework is
simply a directory with a .framework extension that can contain various resources such as
dynamic libraries, header files, and reference documentation. It’s essentially a bundle, in the
NSBundle sense. This bundling of all necessary development files in a single package can make
it easier to install and uninstall a library. Also, a framework can contain multiple versions of a
library in the same bundle to make it easier to maintain backward compatibility for older
applications.
       The following directory listing gives an example layout for a framework bundle, where
the -> symbol represents a symbol link:

   MyAPI.framework/
       Headers -> Versions/Current/Headers
       MyAPI   -> Versions/Current/MyAPI
       Versions/
           A/
               Headers/
                    MyHeader.h
               MyAPI
           B/
               Headers/
                    MyHeader.h
               MyAPI
           Current -> B

      Most of Apple’s APIs are distributed as frameworks, including Cocoa, Foundation, and
Core Services. You may therefore wish to distribute your API as a framework on the Mac to
make it appear more like a system Mac library.
      You can build your API as a framework using Apple’s XCode development environment.
This can be done by selecting the File > New Project menu and then selecting Framework in
the left-hand panel (Fig. A.5). By default, you can choose to have your project setup to use
either the Carbon or Cocoa frameworks. If you don’t need either of these (i.e., you are writing
a pure Cþþ library), you can simply remove these frameworks after XCode has created the
project for you.
      Clients can link against your framework by supplying the -framework option to gþþ or
ld. They can also specify the -F option to specify the directory to find your framework bundle.

  FIGURE A.5 Creating a framework project using Apple’s XCode integrated development environment (IDE).

Text-based InstallAPI
When you install Xcode on your Mac you are installing a version of the clang compiler, but
you are also installing one or more SDKs that let your code compile against the system li-
braries for different OS types (e.g., macOS, iOS, tvOS, watchOS) and different OS versions. You
can find all these SDKs inside of the Xcode app bundle. For example,

   Xcode.app/
     Contents/
       Developer/
         Platforms/
           MacOSX.platform/               <- platform
              Developer/
                SDKs/
                  MacOSX13.sdk/           <- OS version

      Originally, Apple included all of the actual Mach-O library binary files for each of these
SDKs, such as the .dylib files for your code to link against. However, this produced very large
SDK sizes, and those sizes would be compounded if you installed many SDKs for different
platforms and OS versions. So Apple introduced the Text-based InstallAPI to address this
issue.

      When compiling a library with the “Supports Text-Based InstallAPI” Xcode setting
turned on, Xcode will generate a .tbd file for your library. This is a plain text YAML file that
contains all the information needed to link code against the library, without any of the actual
executable code. This includes information such as the filesystem path where the library lives
in an OS distribution as well as the names of all of the exported symbols in the library. These
.tbd files can be vastly smaller than the actual library files themselves, often by two orders of
magnitude, so Apple was able to reduce the size of their SDK distributions drastically.
      This feature is not likely to be something that you’ll use yourself. It’s more useful within
Apple for distributing OS SDKs. However, it’s useful to know about these files in case you
come across them in an SDK and wonder what they are, or in case you’re pondering why you
can’t find any .dylib files in an SDK.
      It’s also worth noting that in recent versions of Apple operating systems, you will no
longer find most system libraries in /usr/lib. For example, even though the .tbd file for
libxml2 says that the library lives at /usr/lib/libxml2.2.dylib, that file is no longer present
as of macOS Big Sur. The reason is that the OS now ships with a built-in dynamic library
cache of all system libraries. So checking for the library’s existence on the file system will fail.
However, if you attempt to dlopen() the library, then it will work.

Finding dynamic libraries at run time
The same Linux principles for finding dynamic libraries at run time apply to applications that
are run under macOS, with a couple of small differences. The first is that the environment
variable that is used to augment the library search path is called DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH (although
LD_LIBRARY_PATH is now also supported by more recent versions of macOS).
      Also, Apple added support for the -rpath linker option only in recent versions of macOS.
Traditionally, you would instead use the notion of install names. An install name is a path that
is burned into a Mach-O binary to specify the path to search for dependent dynamic libraries.
This path can be specified relative to the executable program by starting the install name with
the special string @executable_path.
      You can specify an install name when you build your dynamic library, but your clients
may also change this path using the install_name_tool utility. However, they cannot specify a
path that is longer than the original path in the .dylib. This is why it is always advisable to
build your dynamic libraries with the -headerpad_max_install_names option on the Mac: to
give your clients the flexibility to change the library’s install name to whatever they wish.
      The following commands demonstrate how a client could change the install name for
your library, and change the install name for their executable:

   install_name_tool -id @executable_path/../Libs/libmyapi.dylib \
      libmyapi.dylib

   install_name_tool -change libmyapi.dylib \
      @executable_path/../Libs/libmyapi.dylib \
      UserApp.app/Contents/MacOS/executable
