Foreword

                                  By Ron Minnich
                                  Creator of LinuxBIOS (later renamed coreboot)
                                  Software Engineer at Google, Inc.

I started the coreboot project at Los Alamos National Lab in 1999. At the time, it was
seen by hardware vendors as an impractical idea that would soon vanish. Now, 15 years
later, it is mainstream: millions of x86- and ARM-based Chromebooks and Chromeboxes
run coreboot, as its speed and reliability are an essential part of the Chrome OS user
experience. coreboot is now a key component of the fastest-growing consumer laptop
segment.
      It might come as a surprise to embedded programmers that the initial goal of
coreboot was to make very large supercomputing clusters manageable. We had a 128-
node VA Linux cluster at Los Alamos in 1999 that had no keyboards or displays. BIOS
upgrades required that we wheel around a “crash cart” with a keyboard and monitor;
boot DOS on a floppy, which in turn started an autoexec.bat script; and wait 5 to 10
minutes for the process to complete for each node. If anything went wrong, it got more
fun: we had to crack open the case, move a jumper, and do the recovery with no working
graphics. As if this were not bad enough, the vendor BIOS had a habit of coming up
displaying “No keyboard present—hit F1 to continue” on a nonexistent monitor, asking us
to hit F1 on a keyboard that it had already discovered was not there!
      Could this possibly get any worse? It could, and did, on the Thunderbird cluster at
Sandia National Labs: 4400 nodes, none having a keyboard or a monitor, came up one
day with that same vendor BIOS message. The fix? Dispatch 20 people with 20 keyboards
to 220 machines each; they had to plug in the keyboard, hit F1, and hope it all went well.
      By 2002, we had a 1024-node Linux cluster using coreboot. The reflash process for
all 1024 nodes took 30 seconds total, not five days. If something went wrong, coreboot
would figure it out on the next boot, switch to a backup BIOS image, and boot up: the
nodes could not be put into an unrecoverable state. There was no longer a need to open
the nodes and move a jumper. coreboot represented a huge jump in the manageability of
cluster nodes.

                                                                                      xxi
■ Foreword

      coreboot has had many uses since its inception: everything from the smallest
systems (Apache Military Modem II) to some of the largest supercomputers. While there
is wide adoption in Chrome OS systems, coreboot’s earliest and continuing use is in
embedded systems such as televisions, network switches, and robotic systems. In fact,
about the same time we deployed a supercomputer using coreboot, iRobot had ported
coreboot to its Packbot robot.
      Embedded systems used to be very simple: a low-power CPU connected to low-
performance memory and peripherals, used in low-performance and limited applications
such as digital clocks and automobile computers. But in the last ten years, we can see
low-power embedded CPUs used in unexpected places. The highest-end systems—such
as IBM Blue Gene supercomputers, which were the fastest in the world for many years—
used 65,536 embedded PowerPC CPUs with 18 cores each. We now see higher-power
CPUs used in small embedded systems such as Chromebox videoconferencing systems—
an inexpensive system with a very powerful Intel CPU.
      These embedded Intel CPUs have memory bandwidth much higher than classic Cray
vector supercomputers and hence are fiendishly complex to design. Once designed, this
high-performance hardware is quite difficult to initialize, and even should we wish to
write the code to manage the initialization, the programming information is not public.
      This has led to a dilemma: How can we enable coreboot on complex systems that are
not fully open?
      This book shows one path. Intel has released in binary form a basic set of functions
to initialize the messiest—and hardest to program—bits of the Intel chipset. The calling
conventions and behavior of the binary are completely and clearly documented. The
developer is freed from having to deal with very difficult chipset setup. Upgrades of this
software are simple: just replace the old binary with a new one. This code is called the
Firmware Support Package, a.k.a. FSP.
      The result is that high-performance Intel chipsets can be used with coreboot in all
kinds of systems, including embedded ones, with a binary supplied by Intel that removes
much of the porting difficulty.
      Wearable embedded systems are a growing area right now, and many use the CPU
described in this book. This book is an ideal companion for those wishing to be current
with current and future embedded technology.
      coreboot has succeeded because of the efforts of the many talented people involved
in the project for the last 15 years. The reader is fortunate that this book is written by four
of the best minds in the business. There is a lot to learn here and it will stand you in good
stead if you continue to work in embedded systems.
      I’d like to thank Jiming Sun and the team for conceiving FSP and bringing it to
fruition. Without their tireless efforts and diplomacy, we would not have FSP or this book.

xxii
