Introduction

Since the publication of Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming, First Edition, I have been asked
on numerous occasions, “Do programmers still use assembly language?” The answer to this question is a
resounding yes, but with a few caveats.
     Over the past several decades, software developers have used x86 assembly language to create
innovative solutions for a wide variety of programming challenges. I can recall an era when it was common
practice to code significant portions of a program (or even a complete application) using x86 assembly
language. Nowadays, modern compilers can routinely generate machine code that is extremely efficient,
both spatially and temporally, which means that the epoch of large assembly language programming
projects is ancient history. However, use cases still exist where explicit assembly language coding is both
feasible and computationally advantageous.
     One scenario where assembly language programming is potentially beneficial is in an application that
wants to fully exploit the single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) capabilities of a modern x86 processor.
A SIMD-capable x86 processor incorporates hardware components and instructions that perform
simultaneous calculations using multiple data values, which can significantly improve the performance of a
computationally intense function or algorithm. Unfortunately, many compilers are unable to wholly utilize
the SIMD capabilities of an x86 processor. Assembly language programming, on the other hand, empowers
the software developer to fully exploit these computational resources.

 Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming
Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming, Third Edition is an instructional text that teaches you
how to code x86-64 assembly language functions. It also explains how you can algorithmically exploit
the SIMD capabilities of an x86-64 processor. The content of this book is organized to help you quickly
understand x86-64 assembly language code. In addition, the accompanying source code is structured to
accelerate comprehension of x86-64 assembly language instruction syntax, programming constructs, and
data structures. After reading this book, you will be able to code performance-accelerated functions and
algorithms using x86-64 assembly language and the AVX, AVX2, and AVX-512 instruction sets.
      While it is still theoretically possible to write large sections or an entire application program using
assembly language, the demanding requirements of contemporary software development mean that such
an approach is both impractical and ill-advised. Instead, this book accentuates the coding x86-64 assembly
language functions that are callable from C++. The downloadable software package for this book includes
source code that works on both Windows (Visual C++ and MASM) and Linux (GNU C++ and NASM).
      Before proceeding, it warrants mentioning that this edition of the Modern X86 Assembly Language
Programming book doesn’t cover x86-32 assembly language programming. It also doesn’t discuss legacy
x86 technologies such as the x87 floating-point unit, MMX, and X86-SSE (Streaming SIMD Extensions). The
first edition of this text remains relevant if you’re interested in learning about these topics. This book doesn’t
explain x86 architectural features or privileged instructions that are used in operating systems and device
drivers. However, if your goal is to develop x86-64 assembly language code for these use cases, you’ll need to
thoroughly comprehend the material that’s presented in this book.

                                                                                                              xvii
■ Introduction

     While perusing Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming, Third Edition, you should keep in mind
that explicit assembly language coding is often a trade-off between performance gains, development effort,
and future maintainability. Perhaps the most important reason for writing this book is to impart the x86
programming savoir faire that you’ll need to make informed decisions regarding these trade-offs.

 Target Audience
The target audience for Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming, Third Edition includes:
        •   Software developers who are creating programs for x86 platforms and want to learn
            how to code performance-enhanced algorithms using the core x86-64 instruction set
        •   Software developers who need to learn how to write SIMD functions or accelerate
            the performance of new or existing code using the AVX, AVX2, and AVX-512
            instruction sets
        •   Computer science/engineering students or hobbyists who want to learn or better
            understand x86-64 assembly language programming and the AVX, AVX2, and
            AVX-512 instruction sets
    Readers of Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming, Third Edition should have previous
programming experience with modern C++ (i.e., ISO C++11 or later). To run or modify the source code
examples, some familiarity with Microsoft’s Visual Studio or the GNU toolchain will be helpful.

 Content Overview
The primary objective of this book is to teach you x86 64-bit assembly language programming and how to
exploit AVX, AVX2, and AVX-512 instruction sets. Here’s a brief overview of what you can expect to learn.
     X86 Core Architecture – Chapter 1 explains the core architecture of an x86-64 processor. Topics
discussed include fundamental data types, registers, status flags, memory addressing modes, and other
important architectural details.
     X86-64 Core Programming – Chapter 2 introduces the fundamentals of x86-64 assembly language
programming. The source code examples illustrate essential x86-64 assembly language programming
concepts including integer arithmetic, bitwise logical operations, and shift instructions. This chapter also
explains basic assembler usage and assembly language syntax. Chapter 3 explores additional core x86-64
assembly language programming concepts including advanced integer arithmetic, memory addressing
modes, and condition codes. This chapter also covers stack usage and for-loops. Chapter 4 explains
x86-64 assembly language coding using arrays and structures. It also describes how to utilize x86-64 string
processing instructions.
     AVX Programming – Scalar Floating-Point – Chapter 5 explains scalar floating-point arithmetic and
other operations using x86-64 assembly language and the AVX instruction set. It also outlines the C++ calling
convention requirements for scalar floating-point arguments and return values.
     Run-Time Calling Conventions – Chapter 6 formally describes the run-time calling conventions for
x86-64 assembly language functions. The first section explains the requirements for Windows and Visual
C++, while the second section covers Linux and GNU C++.
     Introduction to x86-AVX – Chapter 7 introduces the SIMD capabilities of Advanced Vector Extensions
(AVX). It includes a detailed discussion of AVX architecture and related topics. This chapter also explicates
fundamental SIMD arithmetic and other SIMD programming concepts.
     AVX Programming – Chapter 8 spotlights packed integer arithmetic and other operations using AVX. It
also describes how to code packed integer calculating functions using arrays and the AVX instruction set.
Chapter 9 illustrates packed floating-point arithmetic and other operations using AVX. This chapter also
demonstrates how to use AVX instructions to perform calculations using floating-point arrays and matrices.
xviii
                                                                                                   ■ Introduction

     AVX2 Programming – Chapter 10 describes AVX2 packed integer programming. Additionally, it
elucidates the coding of several image processing algorithms using the AVX2 instruction set. Chapter 11
teaches you how to enhance the performance of universal floating-point array and matrix calculations using
x86-64 assembly language and the AVX2 instruction set. You’ll also learn how to accelerate these types of
calculations using fused-multiply-add (FMA) instructions. Chapter 12 explicates the coding of advanced
algorithms including matrix inversions and convolutions using the AVX2 and FMA instruction sets.
     AVX-512 Programming – Chapter 13 presents an overview of AVX-512. It also explains basic packed
integer arithmetic using 512-bit wide operands. Chapter 14 explores AVX-512 packed floating-point
arithmetic and other operations. Chapter 15 illustrates the use of AVX-512 instructions to accelerate the
performance of common matrix and signal processing operations.
     Advanced Topics – Chapter 16 demonstrates the use of the cpuid instruction. It also explains how to
use non-temporal store instructions and perform SIMD text processing. Chapter 17 discusses guidelines that
you can use to optimize the performance of your x86-64 assembly language code. This chapter also reviews
several issues related to assembly language software development workflow.
     Appendixes – Appendix A explains how to download, install, and execute the source code examples.
This appendix additionally includes some brief usage notes about the software development tools that were
used to create the source code examples. Appendix B contains a list of references that were consulted during
the writing of this book. It also provides some supplemental resources that you can consult for additional
x86-64 assembly language programming information.

 Source Code
The source code published in this book is available on GitHub at https://github.com//apress/
modern-x86-assembly-language-programming-3e.

■■Caution The sole purpose of the source code is to elucidate programming topics that are directly related
to the content of this book. Minimal attention is given to essential software engineering concerns such as
robust error handling, security risks, numerical stability, rounding errors, or ill-conditioned functions. You
are responsible for addressing these concerns should you decide to use any of the source code in your own
programs.

     The Windows source code examples were developed using Visual Studio 2022, MASM, and Windows
11. The source code examples will also work with Windows 10. The Linux source code examples were
developed using GNU C++, Make, and NASM on Debian 11. They were also tested with Ubuntu 22.10. To
execute the source code, the processor in your computer and its host operating system must support one or
more of the following x86 instruction set extensions: AVX, AVX2, or AVX-512. Appendix A contains additional
information about the source code and software development tools.

 Terminology
Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming, Third Edition uses the expressions x86-64 and x86-32
to signify the 64-bit and 32-bit execution environments (i.e., registers, instructions, operands, memory
addresses, data types, etc.) of an x86 processor. As mentioned earlier, the latter is not covered in this book,
except for a few comparison references to aid those migrating from the 32-bit platform. The term x86 is
employed for features that apply to both execution environments. The appellation x86-AVX is utilized as
an umbrella expression for features that pertain to AVX, AVX2, and AVX-512. The individual acronyms

                                                                                                              xix
■ Introduction

are employed when discussing functional aspects or computational capabilities of a specific x86-AVX
instruction set extension. Similarly, the terms x86-SSE or SSE, SSE2, SSE3, etc., are applied when describing
similarities or differences between these legacy SIMD technologies and x86-AVX.

 Additional Resources
An extensive set of x86-related programming documentation is available from both AMD and Intel.
Appendix B lists several important resources that both aspiring and experienced x86 assembly language
programmers will find useful. Of all the resources listed in Appendix B, the most valuable reference is
Volume 2 of Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Combined Volumes: 1, 2A,
2B, 2C, 2D, 3A, 3B, 3C, 3D, and 4 (www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/processors/architectures-
software-developer-manuals.html). This tome contains comprehensive programming information for
every x86 processor instruction including detailed operational descriptions, lists of valid operands, affected
status flags, and potential exceptions. You are strongly encouraged to consult this indispensable resource
when developing your own x86 assembly language code to verify correct instruction usage and execution
outcomes.

xx
