CHAPTER 17

Assembly Language Optimization
and Development Guidelines

Congratulations if you have made it this far. I hope that your x86-64 assembly language journey has been
informative and worthwhile. In this final chapter, you’ll learn some practical techniques that can boost the
performance of your x86-64 assembly language code. You’ll also encounter a few helpful guidelines related
to assembly language software development and workflow.

 Assembly Language Optimization Guidelines
This section discusses guidelines and techniques that you can exploit to improve the performance of your
x86-64 assembly language code. The guidelines and techniques covered in this section are suitable for
use in code that targets processors based on microarchitectures from both AMD and Intel. A processor’s
microarchitecture is characterized by the organization and operation of its internal hardware components
including instruction pipelines, decoders, schedulers, execution units, data buses, and memory caches.
Contemporary AMD processor microarchitectures include Zen, Zen+, and Zen2 (Family 17h) along with Zen
3, Zen 3+, and Zen 4 (Family 19h). Modern Intel processor microarchitectures include Cypress Cove, Golden
Cove, and Raptor Cove. Microarchitectures are often optimized for processors that target specific use cases
such as notebook, desktop, workstation, and server computers.
     It is important to recognize that different processor microarchitectures exhibit different performance
characteristics. This means that it’s possible for a recommended technique or a specific sequence of
instructions to improve performance on one microarchitecture but not yield any performance gains on
another. You should always benchmark your x86-64 assembly language code to confirm any performance
gains. If you have the resources, try benchmarking your code using a variety of processors from both AMD
and Intel.
     It is also important to keep in mind that none of the recommendations mentioned in this chapter will
ameliorate the performance of an inappropriate or poorly designed algorithm. The design of an algorithm is
often the most critical component of its ultimate performance.
     The content of this section is not intended to be a comprehensive examination of x86-64 assembly
language optimization topics. Such an undertaking would minimally require several lengthy chapters or
conceivably an entire book. You are encouraged to consult the AMD and Intel programming reference
manuals listed in Appendix B for more information regarding the development of optimized x86-64
assembly language code.

© Daniel Kusswurm 2023
D. Kusswurm, Modern X86 Assembly Language Programming,                                                   639
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-9603-5_17

    The remainder of this section presents x86-64 assembly language optimization guidelines and
techniques. They are organized into the following five categories:
       •    Basic Techniques
       •    Floating-Point Arithmetic
       •    Branch Instructions
       •    Data Alignment
       •    SIMD Techniques
     All optimization guidelines and techniques must be applied in a prudent manner. For example, it rarely
makes sense to add extra mov, push, pop, or other instructions to a function just to use a recommended
instruction form only once.

 Basic Techniques
The following coding techniques are frequently employed to improve the performance of x86-64 assembly
language code:
       •    Use an xor or sub instruction to zero a register instead of a mov instruction. For
            example, use xor r10,r10 or sub r10,r10 instead of mov r10,0. The mov instruction
            can be used when it’s necessary to avoid modifying the status flags in RFLAGS.
       •    To reduce code size, use 32-bit forms of the xor or sub instructions to zero registers
            RAX, RBX, RCX, RDX, RSI, RDI, and RBP (e.g., use xor eax,eax instead of xor
            rax,rax). The machine encodings of the 32-bit forms are shorter.
       •    Use 32-bit instead of 64-bit instruction forms and general-purpose registers when
            possible. For example, if the maximum number of for-loop iterations does not
            exceed the range limits of a 32-bit integer, use a 32-bit instead of a 64-bit general-
            purpose register for the loop counter.
       •    When appropriate, use 32-bit instruction forms to load 64-bit registers with positive
            constants. For example, the instructions mov eax,16 and mov r8d,42 effectively set
            RAX to 16 and R8 to 42.
       •    When possible, use a test instruction instead of a cmp instruction. Also, use test
            instead of an and instruction when the bitwise logical result is not needed.
       •    Use a test instruction instead of a cmp instruction to carry out a simple less than,
            equal to, or greater than zero check (e.g., use test eax,eax instead of cmp eax,0).
       •    Avoid memory-immediate forms of the cmp and test instructions (e.g., cmp
            [RAX],42, test [RSP],01h, etc.). However, don’t add extra instructions to eschew
            the memory-immediate form.
       •    Use the two- or three-operand form of the imul instruction to multiply two signed
            integers when the full-width product is not needed. For example, use imul rax,rcx
            when a 64-bit truncated product is sufficient instead of imul rcx, which returns a
            128-bit product in RDX:RAX. This guideline also applies to 32-bit signed integer
            multiplication (e.g., imul eax,ecx instead of imul ecx).
       •    Use the two-operand form of the imul instruction instead of mul to perform unsigned
            integer multiplication when the full-width product is not needed.

       •   Minimize the use of the inc and dec instructions either before or after other
           instructions that modify the status flags in RFLAGS. Instead, use an add or sub
           instruction with an immediate value of one (e.g., use add eax,1 instead of inc eax).
       •   In performance-critical for-loops, avoid use of a lea instruction that contains
           three effective address components (e.g., lea rax,[rbx+rcx*8+Disp]). The three-
           component form of the lea instruction can be used to perform one-time address
           loads prior to the start of a performance-critical for-loop.
       •   When possible, use the lea instruction to carry out simple integer arithmetic using
           multiple operands. For example, use lea rax,[rbx+rcx*8] to load RBX + RCX * 8
           into register RAX.
       •   Exploit the lea instruction to multiply an unsigned integer by 3. For example, the lea
           rax,[rcx+rcx*2] calculates RAX = RCX * 3. Similarly, use the lea rax,[rcx+rcx*4]
           and lea rax,[rcx+rcx*8] instructions to calculate RAX = RCX * 5 and RAX = RCX *
           9, respectively.
       •   Load memory values that are needed for multiple calculations into a register. If
           a memory value is needed only for a single calculation, use the register-memory
           instruction form (e.g., add eax,[rcx], cmp rax,[rdx], vpaddd xmm0, xmm1,[r8],
           vmulps ymm0,ymm1,[r9], etc.).
       •   Avoid declaring data values inside a code section. In situations where it’s necessary
           to do this (e.g., when defining a read-only jump table), position the data after a jmp
           or ret instruction. Declaring data values in a code section may cause the processor
           to unnecessarily consume limited instruction cache memory. Positioning jump table
           data after a jmp or ret instruction prevents the jump table’s data bytes from being
           accidentally executed as instructions.
       •   Arrange code in performance-critical for-loops, especially ones that utilize x86-AVX
           SIMD instructions, to preclude loop-carried data dependencies.
       •   Avoid using instructions that require an operand-size prefix to load a 16-bit register
           since these instructions take longer to decode. Use an equivalent 32-bit register
           instead. For example, use mov edx,42 instead of mov dx,42.
       •   Create and use macros for recurrent arithmetic or other calculations (e.g., SIMD
           reductions) to avoid the run-time overhead of a function call.
       •   Use the vmov[d|q] instruction to spill a general-purpose register to an unused
           volatile XMM register. Use local stack space when a register (general-purpose or
           SIMD) spill to memory is required. (A register spill preserves the current value in a
           register so that the same register can be used for other calculations.)

 Floating-Point Arithmetic
The following coding techniques can be employed to improve the performance of x86-64 assembly language
code that performs floating-point operations. These guidelines apply to both scalar and packed floating-
point calculations.
       •   Use x86-AVX instructions and the XMM register set to perform scalar floating-point
           arithmetic. Do not use the legacy x87 FPU to perform these types of calculations.
       •   When possible, use single-precision values instead of double-precision
           floating-point.

       •    Arrange floating-point instruction sequences to minimize data dependencies.
            Exploit multiple destination registers to save intermediate results.
       •    Partially unroll performance-critical for-loops that carry out arithmetic operations,
            especially for-loops that contain data-dependent sequences of floating-point
            addition, multiplication, FMA, or other arithmetic operations.
       •    Consider fully unrolling small for-loops when the iteration count is a known
            assembly-time constant.
       •    Avoid using floating-point denormal constants.
       •    When possible, prevent floating-point underflows and denormal values from
            occurring during arithmetic calculations.
       •    If excessive arithmetic underflows are expected, consider enabling the flush-to-zero
            (MXCSR.FTZ) and denormals-are-zero (MXCSR.DAZ) modes.

 Branch Instructions
Assembly language branch instructions such as jmp, call, and ret are potentially time-consuming
operations to perform since they can affect the contents of the processor’s front-end pipelines and internal
caches. The conditional jump instruction jcc is also a performance concern given its frequency of use. The
following optimization techniques can be employed to minimize the adverse performance effects of branch
instructions:
       •    Organize code to minimize the number of possible branch instructions.
       •    Partially unroll simple for-loops to reduce the number of executed conditional
            jump instructions. Avoid excessive loop unrolling since this may result in slower
            executing code.
       •    Eliminate unpredictable data-dependent branches using the setcc or cmovcc
            instructions.
       •    In performance-critical for-loops, align the target labels of conditional jump
            instructions (e.g., jz, jnz, jb, jbe, etc.) on a 16-byte boundary. To prevent large
            increases in code size, restrict the use of this technique to conditional jump
            instructions that regulate the number of times a for-loop executes.
       •    Move conditional code that is unlikely to execute (e.g., error handling code) to
            another program section or memory page.

 Branch Prediction Unit
All modern x86 processors include a hardware component called the branch prediction unit (BPU). This
component helps select the next set of instructions to execute by predicting which branch targets are
most likely to execute based on recent code execution patterns. A branch target is simply the destination
operand of a transfer control instruction such as jcc, jmp, call, or ret. The BPU enables a processor core to
speculatively execute the micro-ops of other instructions before the outcome of a branch decision is known.

     The BPU employs both static and dynamic techniques to predict the target of a conditional jump
instruction. Incorrect branch predictions can be minimized if blocks of code containing conditional jump
instructions are arranged such that they’re consistent with the BPU’s static prediction algorithm:
       •    Use forward conditional jumps when the fall-through code is more likely to execute.
       •    Use backward conditional jumps when the fall-through code is less likely to execute.
    The forward conditional jump approach is frequently used in code blocks that perform argument
checking. The backward conditional jump technique is often employed at the bottom of a calculating code
block following a counter update or other for-loop terminating test decision. Listing 17-1 contains a short
assembly language function that exemplifies these practices.

Listing 17-1. Example Ch17_01 MASM Code

;------------------------------------------------------------------------------
; Ch17_01_fasm.asm
;------------------------------------------------------------------------------

;------------------------------------------------------------------------------
; bool CalcResult_avx(double* y, const double* x, size_t n);
;------------------------------------------------------------------------------

NSE     equ            8                                 ;num_simd_elements

        .const
F64_2p0  real8 2.0

        .code
CalcResult_avx proc

; Forward conditional jumps are used in this code block since
; the fall-through cases are more likely to occur
        test r8,r8
        jz Error                                ;jump if n == 0
        test r8,07h
        jnz Error                               ;jump if (n % NSE) != 0
        test rcx,1fh
        jnz Error                               ;jump if y not 32-byte aligned
        test rdx,1fh
        jnz Error                               ;jump if x not 32-byte aligned

; Initialize
        mov rax,-NSE*8                          ;rax = common array offset
        vbroadcastsd ymm5,[F64_2p0]             ;packed 2.0

; Simple array processing loop
        align 16
Loop1:  add rax,NSE*8                           ;update offset for x[] and y[]

        vmovapd ymm0,ymmword ptr [rdx+rax]      ;load x[i:i+3]
        vdivpd ymm1,ymm0,ymm5
        vsqrtpd ymm2,ymm1
        vmovapd ymmword ptr [rcx+rax],ymm2      ;save y[i:i+3]

        vmovapd ymm0,ymmword ptr [rdx+rax+32]   ;load x[i+4:i+7]
        vdivpd ymm1,ymm0,ymm5
        vsqrtpd ymm2,ymm1
        vmovapd ymmword ptr [rcx+rax+32],ymm2   ;save y[i+4:i+7]

; A backward conditional jump is used in this code block since
; the fall-through case is less likely to occur
        sub r8,NSE
        jnz Loop1

        mov eax,1                              ;set success return code
        vzeroupper
        ret

; Error handling code that's unlikely to execute
Error:  xor eax,eax                            ;set error return code
        ret
CalcResult_avx endp
        end

 Data Alignment
It’s been mentioned multiple times in this book, but the importance of using properly aligned data cannot
be overemphasized. Functions that reference improperly aligned data values in memory are likely to trigger
the processor into performing additional memory cycles, which can adversely affect overall performance.
The following data alignment practices should be considered universal truths and always observed:
       •    Align multibyte integer and scalar floating-point values on their proper boundaries.
       •    Align 128-, 256-, and 512-bit wide packed integer and floating-point values on their
            proper boundaries.
       •    Exploit the C++ alignas specifier to ensure proper alignment of a data structure that
            contains packed integer or floating-point values.
       •    Pad assembly language data structures to ensure that each member is properly
            aligned.
       •    Arrange the members of a data structure to avoid cache line splits. A cache line split
            occurs when a structure member crosses a cache line (64-byte) boundary.
       •    Use the aligned memory allocation library functions _aligned_malloc() (Visual
            C++) or aligned_alloc() (GNU C++) to dynamically allocate arrays aligned on a
            specific boundary.
       •    Evaluate the performance effects of different data layouts such as a structure of
            arrays vs. an array of structures.

 SIMD Techniques
The following techniques should be observed, when appropriate, by any function that performs SIMD
computations using AVX, AVX2, or AVX-512 instructions:
       •   Do not code assembly language functions that intermix x86-AVX and x86-SSE
           instructions.
       •   Arrange sequences of x86-AVX assembly language instructions to reduce SIMD
           register dependencies.
       •   Load multiple-use variables or constants into a SIMD register.
       •   Use broadcast instructions to load an integer or floating-point constant into the
           elements of a SIMD register.
       •   On systems that support AVX-512, exploit the extra SIMD registers to reduce or
           eliminate data dependencies and register spills.
       •   Use vpxor (e.g., vpxor xmm0,xmm0,xmm0) to zero the integer elements of an x86-AVX
           SIMD register.
       •   Use vxorp[d|s] (e.g., vxorps ymm0,ymm0,ymm0) to zero the floating-point elements
           of an x86-AVX SIMD register.
       •   Use vcmpeq[b|w|d|q] (e.g., vcmpeqb xmm0,xmm0,xmm0) to load all ones into an x86-
           AVX SIMD register.
       •   Use x86-AVX masking and Boolean operations to implement data-dependent
           calculations (e.g., a SIMD ternary operation).
       •   Perform packed data loads and stores using the aligned move instructions (e.g.,
           vmovdqa, vmovap[d|s], etc.).
       •   Process SIMD arrays using small data blocks to maximize reuse of resident
           cache data.
       •   Use the vzeroupper instruction when required to avoid potential x86-AVX to x86-SSE
           state transition penalties.
       •   Avoid the use of x86-AVX gather and scatter instructions with known array indices
           (i.e., indices that can be defined as assembly-time constants). Instead, use standard
           memory load and store instructions.
       •   Use x86-AVX gather instructions well ahead of when the data is needed.
       •   When possible, use the doubleword forms of the gather and scatter instructions
           instead of the quadword forms (e.g., use vgatherdp[d|s] instead of
           vgatherqp[d|s]).
       •   Consider the use of non-temporal load (e.g., vmovntdq) and store instructions
           (e.g., vmovntdqa, vmovntp[d|s], etc.) to minimize cache pollution. Always perform
           function benchmarking to verify the performance gains of any non-temporal
           instruction usage.

 Assembly Language Development Guidelines
The discussions and source code examples imparted in this book were designed to help you understand
x86-64 assembly language programming and the computational capabilities of x86-AVX. At this juncture,
you may be asking yourself when it is appropriate to explicitly code a function using assembly language.
As mentioned in the Introduction, software development using x86-64 assembly language to accelerate
the performance of a computationally intense algorithm or function should be regarded as a specialized
programming tool that must be sagaciously exploited. Assembly language coding typically requires extra
effort, even for software developers who are well versed with the intricacies of the x86-64 instruction set
and SIMD programming techniques. Explicit x86-64 assembly language coding is often a trade-off between
development effort, performance gains, and future maintainability.
     For the most part, the development of assembly language code is no different than other programming
languages. When creating x86-64 assembly language code, you still need to perform normal software design,
coding, and test activities. However, x86-64 assembly language coding typically requires additional testing
and benchmarking to substantiate any performance gains.
     The remainder of this section outlines a simple workflow for x86-64 assembly language software
development. You are encouraged to scrutinize the suggested workflow and adapt it for a specific project or
development environment. Here are the workflow steps:
       •    Identify Functions for x86-64 Assembly Language Coding
       •    Select Target x86-AVX Instruction Set
       •    Establish Benchmark Timing Objectives
       •    Code x86-64 Assembly Language Functions
       •    Benchmark x86-64 Assembly Language Code
       •    Optimize x86-64 Assembly Language Code
       •    Repeat Benchmarking and Optimization Steps

 Identify Functions for x86-64 Assembly Language Coding
The first step of assembly language software development is to identify existing bottleneck functions that
may benefit from x86-64 assembly language coding. Functions most likely to benefit from x86-64 assembly
language coding are those that can exploit the x86-AVX instruction set to carry out calculations using large
arrays or matrices. For example, coding an x86-AVX image processing function that enables the end user
to see the resultant image appreciably sooner is something worth considering. If you are creating a new
calculating algorithm or function, code a C++ variant first. There are two reasons for this. First, debugging a
C++ function is generally easier than debugging an assembly language function. Second, once the C++ code
is working, it can be used to verify the correctness of the assembly language code. It can also be used for
benchmarking purposes.

 Select Target x86-AVX Instruction Set
The next step is to determine which x86-AVX instruction set extension to use. What to select here depends
mostly on your target users. If you are developing a mainstream application for Windows or Linux, you
might want to select AVX or AVX2. If you are developing an application that targets processors in recently
marketed workstations or servers, you could select AVX2 or AVX-512. Always verify that the host processor
supports any required x86 instruction set extensions. For example, if your assembly language code utilizes
AVX2 instructions, you should test for the presence of this instruction set extension during application

startup, possibly inside function main(). It is also a good idea to include a test for AVX2 or any other required
x86 instruction set extensions during program installation.

 Establish Benchmark Timing Objectives
Following selection of the target x86-AVX instruction set, try to establish some benchmark timing objectives
for your explicitly coded assembly language functions. If possible, use unambiguous and quantifiable
objectives. For example, function Foo_avx2() must complete its calculations within x milliseconds (useful
for functions with real-time constraints) or be y percent faster than baseline function Foo_cpp().

 Code x86-64 Assembly Language Functions
Once you have established your benchmark timing objectives, you can code your x86-64 assembly language
functions. To minimize future maintenance activities, you may want to use a common library for a project’s
x86-64 assembly language coded functions. Doing this also simplifies code reuse on future projects.

 Benchmark x86-64 Assembly Language Code
The next workflow step is to perform benchmark timing measurements of an x86-64 assembly language
function and its counterpart C++ function. There are several ways of doing this. One method is to employ
a simple software stopwatch like the C++ class BmThreadTimer that was used in many of this book’s source
code examples. The advantage of this approach is that it does not require any special drivers, compiler
settings, or third-party tools to carry out the requisite timing measurements. For more precise timing
measurements and/or insights into potential software bottlenecks, one of the AMD or Intel processor
profiling tools listed in Appendix B may be helpful.

 Optimize x86-64 Assembly Language Code
During this workflow phase, experiment with different x86-AVX assembly language instructions or
different sequences of instructions. The reason for this is that different x86-AVX instructions or sequences
of x86-AVX instructions sometimes yield different performance results, especially on different processor
microarchitectures. You should also exploit the optimization techniques discussed earlier in this chapter.
When performing x86-AVX assembly language function optimization, focus on the code blocks inside
performance-critical for-loops. Optimizing a code block that performs a one-time data initialization or a
single transformation operation is unlikely to result in a noticeable increase in performance.

 Repeat Benchmarking and Optimization Steps
The last phase of the workflow is to repeat the benchmarking and optimization steps until you have
achieved your benchmark timing objective or continued optimization attempts fail to yield any meaningful
performance gains.

 Summary
Here are the key learning points for Chapter 17:
       •    X86-64 assembly language programming is often a trade-off between development
            effort, performance gains, and future maintainability.
       •    Application of this chapter’s assembly language optimization guidelines and
            techniques often yields in improved performance. However, it is not uncommon to
            encounter coding situations where a recommended guideline or technique is not the
            best approach.
       •    When developing assembly language code, don’t spend an excessive amount of time
            trying to achieve maximum performance. Instead, focus on performance gains that
            are relatively easy to attain (e.g., implementing an algorithm using SIMD instead of
            scalar arithmetic).
       •    Always compare benchmark timing measurements of functions coded using x86-64
            assembly language vs. baseline functions using C++ or another language. Always
            verify any expected performance gains.
       •    To achieve optimal performance for a specific algorithm or function, it may be
            necessary to code and benchmark multiple versions that utilize different sequences
            of x86-64 or x86-AVX instructions.
       •    None of the optimization guidelines and techniques presented in this chapter will
            ameliorate an inappropriate or poorly designed algorithm.

