                                                                   CHAPTER 6

This chapter describes the facilities in the Intel 64 and IA-32 architectures for executing calls to procedures or
subroutines. It also describes how interrupts and exceptions are handled from the perspective of an application
programmer.

6.1         PROCEDURE CALL TYPES
The processor supports procedure calls in the following two different ways:
•   CALL and RET instructions.
•   ENTER and LEAVE instructions, in conjunction with the CALL and RET
    instructions.
Both of these procedure call mechanisms use the procedure stack, commonly referred to simply as “the stack,” to
save the state of the calling procedure, pass parameters to the called procedure, and store local variables for the
currently executing procedure.
The processor’s facilities for handling interrupts and exceptions are similar to those used by the CALL and RET
instructions.

6.2         STACKS
The stack (see Figure 6-1) is a contiguous array of memory locations. It is contained in a segment and identified by
the segment selector in the SS register. When using the flat memory model, the stack can be located anywhere in
the linear address space for the program. A stack can be up to 4 GBytes long, the maximum size of a segment.
Items are placed on the stack using the PUSH instruction and removed from the stack using the POP instruction.
When an item is pushed onto the stack, the processor decrements the ESP register, then writes the item at the new
top of stack. When an item is popped off the stack, the processor reads the item from the top of stack, then incre-
ments the ESP register. In this manner, the stack grows down in memory (towards lesser addresses) when items
are pushed on the stack and shrinks up (towards greater addresses) when the items are popped from the stack.
A program or operating system/executive can set up many stacks. For example, in multitasking systems, each task
can be given its own stack. The number of stacks in a system is limited by the maximum number of segments and
the available physical memory.
When a system sets up many stacks, only one stack—the current stack—is available at a time. The current stack
is the one contained in the segment referenced by the SS register.

                                                   Stack Segment
                                                                               Bottom of Stack
                                                                               (Initial ESP Value)

                        Local Variables
                            for Calling
                            Procedure                                          The Stack Can Be
                                                                               16 or 32 Bits Wide

                           Parameters
                            Passed to                                          The EBP register is
                               Called                                          typically set to point
                            Procedure                                          to the return
                                                                               instruction pointer.
                     Frame Boundary
                                                 Return Instruction                    EBP Register
                                                      Pointer
                                                                                       ESP Register
                                                    Top of Stack

                                      Pushes Move the              Pops Move the
                                      Top Of Stack to              Top Of Stack to
                                      Lower Addresses              Higher Addresses

                                               Figure 6-1. Stack Structure

The processor references the SS register automatically for all stack operations. For example, when the ESP register
is used as a memory address, it automatically points to an address in the current stack. Also, the CALL, RET, PUSH,
POP, ENTER, and LEAVE instructions all perform operations on the current stack.

6.2.1        Setting Up a Stack
To set a stack and establish it as the current stack, the program or operating system/executive must do the
following:
1. Establish a stack segment.
2. Load the segment selector for the stack segment into the SS register using a MOV, POP, or LSS instruction.
3. Load the stack pointer for the stack into the ESP register using a MOV, POP, or LSS instruction. The LSS
   instruction can be used to load the SS and ESP registers in one operation.
See “Segment Descriptors” in Chapter 3, “Protected-Mode Memory Management,” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32
Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, for information on how to set up a segment descriptor and
segment limits for a stack segment.

6.2.2        Stack Alignment
The stack pointer for a stack segment should be aligned on 16-bit (word) or 32-bit (double-word) boundaries,
depending on the width of the stack segment. The D flag in the segment descriptor for the current code segment
sets the stack-segment width (see “Segment Descriptors” in Chapter 3, “Protected-Mode Memory Management,” of
the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A). The PUSH and POP instructions
use the D flag to determine how much to decrement or increment the stack pointer on a push or pop operation,
respectively. When the stack width is 16 bits, the stack pointer is incremented or decremented in 16-bit increments;
when the width is 32 bits, the stack pointer is incremented or decremented in 32-bit increments. Pushing a 16-bit
value onto a 32-bit wide stack can result in stack misaligned (that is, the stack pointer is not aligned on a double-

word boundary). One exception to this rule is when the contents of a segment register (a 16-bit segment selector)
are pushed onto a 32-bit wide stack. Here, the processor automatically aligns the stack pointer to the next 32-bit
boundary.
The processor does not check stack pointer alignment. It is the responsibility of the programs, tasks, and system
procedures running on the processor to maintain proper alignment of stack pointers. Misaligning a stack pointer
can cause serious performance degradation and in some instances program failures.

6.2.3       Address-Size Attributes for Stack Accesses
Instructions that use the stack implicitly (such as the PUSH and POP instructions) have two address-size attributes
each of either 16 or 32 bits. This is because they always have the implicit address of the top of the stack, and they
may also have an explicit memory address (for example, PUSH Array1[EBX]). The attribute of the explicit address
is determined by the D flag of the current code segment and the presence or absence of the 67H address-size
prefix.
The address-size attribute of the top of the stack determines whether SP or ESP is used for the stack access. Stack
operations with an address-size attribute of 16 use the 16-bit SP stack pointer register and can use a maximum
stack address of FFFFH; stack operations with an address-size attribute of 32 bits use the 32-bit ESP register and
can use a maximum address of FFFFFFFFH. The default address-size attribute for data segments used as stacks is
controlled by the B flag of the segment’s descriptor. When this flag is clear, the default address-size attribute is 16;
when the flag is set, the address-size attribute is 32.

6.2.4       Procedure Linking Information
The processor provides two pointers for linking of procedures: the stack-frame base pointer and the return instruc-
tion pointer. When used in conjunction with a standard software procedure-call technique, these pointers permit
reliable and coherent linking of procedures.

6.2.4.1      Stack-Frame Base Pointer
The stack is typically divided into frames. Each stack frame can then contain local variables, parameters to be
passed to another procedure, and procedure linking information. The stack-frame base pointer (contained in the
EBP register) identifies a fixed reference point within the stack frame for the called procedure. To use the stack-
frame base pointer, the called procedure typically copies the contents of the ESP register into the EBP register prior
to pushing any local variables on the stack. The stack-frame base pointer then permits easy access to data struc-
tures passed on the stack, to the return instruction pointer, and to local variables added to the stack by the called
procedure.
Like the ESP register, the EBP register automatically points to an address in the current stack segment (that is, the
segment specified by the current contents of the SS register).

6.2.4.2      Return Instruction Pointer
Prior to branching to the first instruction of the called procedure, the CALL instruction pushes the address in the EIP
register onto the current stack. This address is then called the return-instruction pointer and it points to the
instruction where execution of the calling procedure should resume following a return from the called procedure.
Upon returning from a called procedure, the RET instruction pops the return-instruction pointer from the stack back
into the EIP register. Execution of the calling procedure then resumes.
The processor does not keep track of the location of the return-instruction pointer. It is thus up to the programmer
to insure that stack pointer is pointing to the return-instruction pointer on the stack, prior to issuing a RET instruc-
tion. A common way to reset the stack pointer to the point to the return-instruction pointer is to move the contents
of the EBP register into the ESP register. If the EBP register is loaded with the stack pointer immediately following
a procedure call, it should point to the return instruction pointer on the stack.
The processor does not require that the return instruction pointer point back to the calling procedure. Prior to
executing the RET instruction, the return instruction pointer can be manipulated in software to point to any address

in the current code segment (near return) or another code segment (far return). Performing such an operation,
however, should be undertaken very cautiously, using only well defined code entry points.

6.2.5        Stack Behavior in 64-Bit Mode
In 64-bit mode, address calculations that reference SS segments are treated as if the segment base is zero. Fields
(base, limit, and attribute) in segment descriptor registers are ignored. SS DPL is modified such that it is always
equal to CPL. This will be true even if it is the only field in the SS descriptor that is modified.
Registers E(SP), E(IP) and E(BP) are promoted to 64-bits and are re-named RSP, RIP, and RBP respectively. Some
forms of segment load instructions are invalid (for example, LDS, POP ES).
PUSH/POP instructions increment/decrement the stack using a 64-bit width. When the contents of a segment
register is pushed onto 64-bit stack, the pointer is automatically aligned to 64 bits (as with a stack that has a 32-
bit width).

6.3          CALLING PROCEDURES USING CALL AND RET
The CALL instruction allows control transfers to procedures within the current code segment (near call) and in a
different code segment (far call). Near calls usually provide access to local procedures within the currently running
program or task. Far calls are usually used to access operating system procedures or procedures in a different task.
See “CALL—Call Procedure” in Chapter 3, “Instruction Set Reference, A-L,” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A, for a detailed description of the CALL instruction.
The RET instruction also allows near and far returns to match the near and far versions of the CALL instruction. In
addition, the RET instruction allows a program to increment the stack pointer on a return to release parameters
from the stack. The number of bytes released from the stack is determined by an optional argument (n) to the RET
instruction. See “RET—Return from Procedure” in Chapter 4, “Instruction Set Reference, M-U,” of the Intel® 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2B, for a detailed description of the RET instruction.

6.3.1        Near CALL and RET Operation
When executing a near call, the processor does the following (see Figure 6-2):
1. Pushes the current value of the EIP register on the stack.
2. Loads the offset of the called procedure in the EIP register.
3. Begins execution of the called procedure.
When executing a near return, the processor performs these actions:
1. Pops the top-of-stack value (the return instruction pointer) into the EIP register.
2. If the RET instruction has an optional n argument, increments the stack pointer by the number of bytes
   specified with the n operand to release parameters from the stack.
3. Resumes execution of the calling procedure.

6.3.2        Far CALL and RET Operation
When executing a far call, the processor performs these actions (see Figure 6-2):
1. Pushes the current value of the CS register on the stack.
2. Pushes the current value of the EIP register on the stack.
3. Loads the segment selector of the segment that contains the called procedure in the CS register.
4. Loads the offset of the called procedure in the EIP register.
5. Begins execution of the called procedure.
When executing a far return, the processor does the following:

1. Pops the top-of-stack value (the return instruction pointer) into the EIP register.
2. Pops the top-of-stack value (the segment selector for the code segment being returned to) into the CS register.
3. If the RET instruction has an optional n argument, increments the stack pointer by the number of bytes
   specified with the n operand to release parameters from the stack.
4. Resumes execution of the calling procedure.

                              Stack During                                   Stack During
                   Stack        Near Call                                      Far Call
                                                                 Stack
                   Frame
                                                                 Frame
                   Before                                        Before
                   Call         Param 1                                           Param 1
                                                                 Call
                                Param 2                                           Param 2
                                Param 3            ESP Before Call                Param 3        ESP Before Call
                   Stack       Calling EIP         ESP After Call                Calling CS
                   Frame                                        Stack            Calling EIP     ESP After Call
                   After                                        Frame
                   Call                                         After
                                                                Call
                              Stack During                                   Stack During
                              Near Return                                     Far Return

                                                   ESP After Return                              ESP After Return
                                Param 1                                           Param 1
                                Param 2                                           Param 2
                                Param 3                                           Param 3
                               Calling EIP         ESP Before Return             Calling CS
                                                                                 Calling EIP     ESP Before Return

                            Note: On a near or far return, parameters are
                                  released from the stack based on the
                                  optional n operand in the RET n instruction.

                                             Figure 6-2. Stack on Near and Far Calls

6.3.3       Parameter Passing
Parameters can be passed between procedures in any of three ways: through general-purpose registers, in an
argument list, or on the stack.

6.3.3.1     Passing Parameters Through the General-Purpose Registers
The processor does not save the state of the general-purpose registers on procedure calls. A calling procedure can
thus pass up to six parameters to the called procedure by copying the parameters into any of these registers
(except the ESP and EBP registers) prior to executing the CALL instruction. The called procedure can likewise pass
parameters back to the calling procedure through general-purpose registers.

6.3.3.2     Passing Parameters on the Stack
To pass a large number of parameters to the called procedure, the parameters can be placed on the stack, in the
stack frame for the calling procedure. Here, it is useful to use the stack-frame base pointer (in the EBP register) to
make a frame boundary for easy access to the parameters.
The stack can also be used to pass parameters back from the called procedure to the calling procedure.

6.3.3.3      Passing Parameters in an Argument List
An alternate method of passing a larger number of parameters (or a data structure) to the called procedure is to
place the parameters in an argument list in one of the data segments in memory. A pointer to the argument list can
then be passed to the called procedure through a general-purpose register or the stack. Parameters can also be
passed back to the calling procedure in this same manner.

6.3.4        Saving Procedure State Information
The processor does not save the contents of the general-purpose registers, segment registers, or the EFLAGS
register on a procedure call. A calling procedure should explicitly save the values in any of the general-purpose
registers that it will need when it resumes execution after a return. These values can be saved on the stack or in
memory in one of the data segments.
The PUSHA and POPA instructions facilitate saving and restoring the contents of the general-purpose registers.
PUSHA pushes the values in all the general-purpose registers on the stack in the following order: EAX, ECX, EDX,
EBX, ESP (the value prior to executing the PUSHA instruction), EBP, ESI, and EDI. The POPA instruction pops all the
register values saved with a PUSHA instruction (except the ESP value) from the stack to their respective registers.
If a called procedure changes the state of any of the segment registers explicitly, it should restore them to their
former values before executing a return to the calling procedure.
If a calling procedure needs to maintain the state of the EFLAGS register, it can save and restore all or part of the
register using the PUSHF/PUSHFD and POPF/POPFD instructions. The PUSHF instruction pushes the lower word of
the EFLAGS register on the stack, while the PUSHFD instruction pushes the entire register. The POPF instruction
pops a word from the stack into the lower word of the EFLAGS register, while the POPFD instruction pops a double
word from the stack into the register.

6.3.5        Calls to Other Privilege Levels
The IA-32 architecture’s protection mechanism recognizes four privilege levels, numbered from 0 to 3, where a
greater number mean less privilege. The reason to use privilege levels is to improve the reliability of operating
systems. For example, Figure 6-3 shows how privilege levels can be interpreted as rings of protection.

                                                                   Protection Rings

                                        Operating
                                          System
                                           Kernel                      Level 0
                                Operating System
                                 Services (Device
                                    Drivers, Etc.)                      Level 1

                                      Applications                      Level 2

                                                                        Level 3
                            Highest                       Lowest
                               0         1           2      3

                                       Privilege Levels

                                              Figure 6-3. Protection Rings

In this example, the highest privilege level 0 (at the center of the diagram) is used for segments that contain the
most critical code modules in the system, usually the kernel of an operating system. The outer rings (with progres-
sively lower privileges) are used for segments that contain code modules for less critical software.
Code modules in lower privilege segments can only access modules operating at higher privilege segments by
means of a tightly controlled and protected interface called a gate. Attempts to access higher privilege segments
without going through a protection gate and without having sufficient access rights causes a general-protection
exception (#GP) to be generated.
If an operating system or executive uses this multilevel protection mechanism, a call to a procedure that is in a
more privileged protection level than the calling procedure is handled in a similar manner as a far call (see Section
6.3.2, “Far CALL and RET Operation”). The differences are as follows:
•   The segment selector provided in the CALL instruction references a special data structure called a call gate
    descriptor. Among other things, the call gate descriptor provides the following:
    — access rights information
    — the segment selector for the code segment of the called procedure
    — an offset into the code segment (that is, the instruction pointer for the called procedure)
•   The processor switches to a new stack to execute the called procedure. Each privilege level has its own stack.
    The segment selector and stack pointer for the privilege level 3 stack are stored in the SS and ESP registers,
    respectively, and are automatically saved when a call to a more privileged level occurs. The segment selectors
    and stack pointers for the privilege level 2, 1, and 0 stacks are stored in a system segment called the task state
    segment (TSS).
The use of a call gate and the TSS during a stack switch are transparent to the calling procedure, except when a
general-protection exception is raised.

6.3.6       CALL and RET Operation Between Privilege Levels
When making a call to a more privileged protection level, the processor does the following (see Figure 6-4):
1. Performs an access rights check (privilege check).
2. Temporarily saves (internally) the current contents of the SS, ESP, CS, and EIP registers.

                                    Stack for                                       Stack for
                               Calling Procedure                                Called Procedure

                                                                                    Calling SS
                                                                                    Calling ESP
                                   Param 1                                           Param 1
                 Stack Frame
                                   Param 2                                           Param 2       Stack Frame
                 Before Call
                                   Param 3          ESP Before Call                  Param 3       After Call
                                                                                    Calling CS
                                                            ESP After Call          Calling EIP

                                                                                    Calling SS
                                                    ESP After Return                Calling ESP
                                   Param 1                                           Param 1
                                   Param 2                                           Param 2
                                   Param 3                                           Param 3
                                                                                    Calling CS
                                                        ESP Before Return           Calling EIP

                                             Note: On a return, parameters are
                                                   released on both stacks based on the
                                                   optional n operand in the RET n instruction.

                          Figure 6-4. Stack Switch on a Call to a Different Privilege Level

3. Loads the segment selector and stack pointer for the new stack (that is, the stack for the privilege level being
   called) from the TSS into the SS and ESP registers and switches to the new stack.
4. Pushes the temporarily saved SS and ESP values for the calling procedure’s stack onto the new stack.
5. Copies the parameters from the calling procedure’s stack to the new stack. A value in the call gate descriptor
   determines how many parameters to copy to the new stack.
6. Pushes the temporarily saved CS and EIP values for the calling procedure to the new stack.
7. Loads the segment selector for the new code segment and the new instruction pointer from the call gate into
   the CS and EIP registers, respectively.
8. Begins execution of the called procedure at the new privilege level.
When executing a return from the privileged procedure, the processor performs these actions:
1. Performs a privilege check.
2. Restores the CS and EIP registers to their values prior to the call.
3. If the RET instruction has an optional n argument, increments the stack pointer by the number of bytes
   specified with the n operand to release parameters from the stack. If the call gate descriptor specifies that one
   or more parameters be copied from one stack to the other, a RET n instruction must be used to release the
   parameters from both stacks. Here, the n operand specifies the number of bytes occupied on each stack by the
   parameters. On a return, the processor increments ESP by n for each stack to step over (effectively remove)
   these parameters from the stacks.
4. Restores the SS and ESP registers to their values prior to the call, which causes a switch back to the stack of
   the calling procedure.
5. If the RET instruction has an optional n argument, increments the stack pointer by the number of bytes
   specified with the n operand to release parameters from the stack (see explanation in step 3).
6. Resumes execution of the calling procedure.

See Chapter 5, “Protection,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, for
detailed information on calls to privileged levels and the call gate descriptor.

6.3.7       Branch Functions in 64-Bit Mode
The 64-bit extensions expand branching mechanisms to accommodate branches in 64-bit linear-address space.
These are:
•   Near-branch semantics are redefined in 64-bit mode
•   In 64-bit mode and compatibility mode, 64-bit call-gate descriptors for far calls are available
In 64-bit mode, the operand size for all near branches (CALL, RET, JCC, JCXZ, JMP, and LOOP) is forced to 64 bits.
These instructions update the 64-bit RIP without the need for a REX operand-size prefix.
The following aspects of near branches are controlled by the effective operand size:
•   Truncation of the size of the instruction pointer
•   Size of a stack pop or push, due to a CALL or RET
•   Size of a stack-pointer increment or decrement, due to a CALL or RET
•   Indirect-branch operand size
In 64-bit mode, all of the above actions are forced to 64 bits regardless of operand size prefixes (operand size
prefixes are silently ignored). However, the displacement field for relative branches is still limited to 32 bits and the
address size for near branches is not forced in 64-bit mode.
Address sizes affect the size of RCX used for JCXZ and LOOP; they also impact the address calculation for memory
indirect branches. Such addresses are 64 bits by default; but they can be overridden to 32 bits by an address size
prefix.
Software typically uses far branches to change privilege levels. The legacy IA-32 architecture provides the call-gate
mechanism to allow software to branch from one privilege level to another, although call gates can also be used for
branches that do not change privilege levels. When call gates are used, the selector portion of the direct or indirect
pointer references a gate descriptor (the offset in the instruction is ignored). The offset to the destination’s code
segment is taken from the call-gate descriptor.
64-bit mode redefines the type value of a 32-bit call-gate descriptor type to a 64-bit call gate descriptor and
expands the size of the 64-bit descriptor to hold a 64-bit offset. The 64-bit mode call-gate descriptor allows far
branches that reference any location in the supported linear-address space. These call gates also hold the target
code selector (CS), allowing changes to privilege level and default size as a result of the gate transition.
Because immediates are generally specified up to 32 bits, the only way to specify a full 64-bit absolute RIP in 64-
bit mode is with an indirect branch. For this reason, direct far branches are eliminated from the instruction set in
64-bit mode.
64-bit mode also expands the semantics of the SYSENTER and SYSEXIT instructions so that the instructions
operate within a 64-bit memory space. The mode also introduces two new instructions: SYSCALL and SYSRET
(which are valid only in 64-bit mode). For details, see “SYSENTER—Fast System Call,” “SYSEXIT—Fast Return from
Fast System Call,” “SYSCALL—Fast System Call,” and “SYSRET—Return From Fast System Call” in Chapter 4,
“Instruction Set Reference, M-U,” of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume
2B.

6.4         INTERRUPTS AND EXCEPTIONS
The processor provides two mechanisms for interrupting program execution, interrupts and exceptions:
•   An interrupt is an asynchronous event that is typically triggered by an I/O device.
•   An exception is a synchronous event that is generated when the processor detects one or more predefined
    conditions while executing an instruction. The IA-32 architecture specifies three classes of exceptions: faults,
    traps, and aborts.

The processor responds to interrupts and exceptions in essentially the same way. When an interrupt or exception
is signaled, the processor halts execution of the current program or task and switches to a handler procedure that
has been written specifically to handle the interrupt or exception condition. The processor accesses the handler
procedure through an entry in the interrupt descriptor table (IDT). When the handler has completed handling the
interrupt or exception, program control is returned to the interrupted program or task.
The operating system, executive, and/or device drivers normally handle interrupts and exceptions independently
from application programs or tasks. Application programs can, however, access the interrupt and exception
handlers incorporated in an operating system or executive through assembly-language calls. The remainder of this
section gives a brief overview of the processor’s interrupt and exception handling mechanism. See Chapter 6,
“Interrupt and Exception Handling,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume
3A, for a description of this mechanism.
The IA-32 Architecture defines 18 predefined interrupts and exceptions and 224 user defined interrupts, which are
associated with entries in the IDT. Each interrupt and exception in the IDT is identified with a number, called a
vector. Table 6-1 lists the interrupts and exceptions with entries in the IDT and their respective vectors. Vectors 0
through 8, 10 through 14, and 16 through 19 are the predefined interrupts and exceptions; vectors 32 through 255
are for software-defined interrupts, which are for either software interrupts or maskable hardware inter-
rupts.
Note that the processor defines several additional interrupts that do not point to entries in the IDT; the most
notable of these interrupts is the SMI interrupt. See Chapter 6, “Interrupt and Exception Handling,” in the Intel®
64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, for more information about the interrupts
and exceptions.
When the processor detects an interrupt or exception, it does one of the following things:
•    Executes an implicit call to a handler procedure.
•    Executes an implicit call to a handler task.

6.4.1         Call and Return Operation for Interrupt or Exception Handling Procedures
A call to an interrupt or exception handler procedure is similar to a procedure call to another protection level (see
Section 6.3.6, “CALL and RET Operation Between Privilege Levels”). Here, the vector references one of two kinds
of gates in the IDT: an interrupt gate or a trap gate. Interrupt and trap gates are similar to call gates in that they
provide the following information:
•    Access rights information
•    The segment selector for the code segment that contains the handler procedure
•    An offset into the code segment to the first instruction of the handler procedure
The difference between an interrupt gate and a trap gate is as follows. If an interrupt or exception handler is called
through an interrupt gate, the processor clears the interrupt enable (IF) flag in the EFLAGS register to prevent
subsequent interrupts from interfering with the execution of the handler. When a handler is called through a trap
gate, the state of the IF flag is not changed.

                                          Table 6-1. Exceptions and Interrupts
    Vector    Mnemonic                   Description                                               Source
      0       #DE        Divide Error                                 DIV and IDIV instructions.
      1       #DB        Debug                                        Any code or data reference.
      2                  NMI Interrupt                                Non-maskable external interrupt.
      3       #BP        Breakpoint                                   INT 3 instruction.
      4       #OF        Overflow                                     INTO instruction.
      5       #BR        BOUND Range Exceeded                         BOUND instruction.
      6       #UD        Invalid Opcode (UnDefined Opcode)            UD2 instruction or reserved opcode.1
      7       #NM        Device Not Available (No Math Coprocessor)   Floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT instruction.

                                         Table 6-1. Exceptions and Interrupts (Contd.)
  Vector     Mnemonic                       Description                                              Source
     8       #DF          Double Fault                                    Any instruction that can generate an exception, an NMI, or
                                                                          an INTR.
     9       #MF          CoProcessor Segment Overrun (reserved)          Floating-point instruction.2
    10       #TS          Invalid TSS                                     Task switch or TSS access.
    11       #NP          Segment Not Present                             Loading segment registers or accessing system segments.
    12       #SS          Stack Segment Fault                             Stack operations and SS register loads.
    13       #GP          General Protection                              Any memory reference and other protection checks.
    14       #PF          Page Fault                                      Any memory reference.
    15                    Reserved
    16       #MF          Floating-Point Error (Math Fault)               Floating-point or WAIT/FWAIT instruction.
    17       #AC          Alignment Check                                 Any data reference in memory.3
    18       #MC          Machine Check                                   Error codes (if any) and source are model dependent.4
    19       #XM          SIMD Floating-Point Exception                   SIMD Floating-Point Instruction5
    20       #VE          Virtualization Exception                        EPT violations6
  21-31                   Reserved
  32-255                  Maskable Interrupts                             External interrupt from INTR pin or INT n instruction.
NOTES:
1. The UD2 instruction was introduced in the Pentium Pro processor.
2. IA-32 processors after the Intel386 processor do not generate this exception.
3. This exception was introduced in the Intel486 processor.
4. This exception was introduced in the Pentium processor and enhanced in the P6 family processors.
5. This exception was introduced in the Pentium III processor.
6. This exception can occur only on processors that support the 1-setting of the “EPT-violation #VE” VM-execution control.

If the code segment for the handler procedure has the same privilege level as the currently executing program or
task, the handler procedure uses the current stack; if the handler executes at a more privileged level, the
processor switches to the stack for the handler’s privilege level.
If no stack switch occurs, the processor does the following when calling an interrupt or exception handler (see
Figure 6-5):
1. Pushes the current contents of the EFLAGS, CS, and EIP registers (in that order) on the stack.
2. Pushes an error code (if appropriate) on the stack.
3. Loads the segment selector for the new code segment and the new instruction pointer (from the interrupt gate
   or trap gate) into the CS and EIP registers, respectively.
4. If the call is through an interrupt gate, clears the IF flag in the EFLAGS register.
5. Begins execution of the handler procedure.

                                                        Stack Usage with No
                                                       Privilege-Level Change
                             Interrupted Procedure’s
                               and Handler’s Stack

                                                        ESP Before
                                    EFLAGS              Transfer to Handler
                                       CS
                                       EIP
                                   Error Code           ESP After
                                                        Transfer to Handler

                                                          Stack Usage with
                                                       Privilege-Level Change
                             Interrupted Procedure’s                            Handler’s Stack
                                      Stack

                                                        ESP Before
                                                        Transfer to Handler          SS
                                                                                    ESP
                                                                                 EFLAGS
                                                                                    CS
                                                                                    EIP
                                                                 ESP After       Error Code
                                                       Transfer to Handler

                Figure 6-5. Stack Usage on Transfers to Interrupt and Exception Handling Routines

If a stack switch does occur, the processor does the following:
1. Temporarily saves (internally) the current contents of the SS, ESP, EFLAGS, CS, and EIP registers.
2. Loads the segment selector and stack pointer for the new stack (that is, the stack for the privilege level being
   called) from the TSS into the SS and ESP registers and switches to the new stack.
3. Pushes the temporarily saved SS, ESP, EFLAGS, CS, and EIP values for the interrupted procedure’s stack onto
   the new stack.
4. Pushes an error code on the new stack (if appropriate).
5. Loads the segment selector for the new code segment and the new instruction pointer (from the interrupt gate
   or trap gate) into the CS and EIP registers, respectively.
6. If the call is through an interrupt gate, clears the IF flag in the EFLAGS register.
7. Begins execution of the handler procedure at the new privilege level.
A return from an interrupt or exception handler is initiated with the IRET instruction. The IRET instruction is similar
to the far RET instruction, except that it also restores the contents of the EFLAGS register for the interrupted proce-
dure. When executing a return from an interrupt or exception handler from the same privilege level as the inter-
rupted procedure, the processor performs these actions:
1. Restores the CS and EIP registers to their values prior to the interrupt or exception.
2. Restores the EFLAGS register.
3. Increments the stack pointer appropriately.
4. Resumes execution of the interrupted procedure.
When executing a return from an interrupt or exception handler from a different privilege level than the interrupted
procedure, the processor performs these actions:
1. Performs a privilege check.

2. Restores the CS and EIP registers to their values prior to the interrupt or exception.
3. Restores the EFLAGS register.
4. Restores the SS and ESP registers to their values prior to the interrupt or exception, resulting in a stack switch
   back to the stack of the interrupted procedure.
5. Resumes execution of the interrupted procedure.

6.4.2       Calls to Interrupt or Exception Handler Tasks
Interrupt and exception handler routines can also be executed in a separate task. Here, an interrupt or exception
causes a task switch to a handler task. The handler task is given its own address space and (optionally) can
execute at a higher protection level than application programs or tasks.
The switch to the handler task is accomplished with an implicit task call that references a task gate descriptor.
The task gate provides access to the address space for the handler task. As part of the task switch, the processor
saves complete state information for the interrupted program or task. Upon returning from the handler task, the
state of the interrupted program or task is restored and execution continues. See Chapter 6, “Interrupt and Excep-
tion Handling,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, for more infor-
mation on handling interrupts and exceptions through handler tasks.

6.4.3       Interrupt and Exception Handling in Real-Address Mode
When operating in real-address mode, the processor responds to an interrupt or exception with an implicit far call
to an interrupt or exception handler. The processor uses the interrupt or exception vector as an index into an inter-
rupt table. The interrupt table contains instruction pointers to the interrupt and exception handler procedures.
The processor saves the state of the EFLAGS register, the EIP register, the CS register, and an optional error code
on the stack before switching to the handler procedure.
A return from the interrupt or exception handler is carried out with the IRET
instruction.
See Chapter 20, “8086 Emulation,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume
3B, for more information on handling interrupts and exceptions in real-address mode.

6.4.4       INT n, INTO, INT 3, and BOUND Instructions
The INT n, INTO, INT 3, and BOUND instructions allow a program or task to explicitly call an interrupt or exception
handler. The INT n instruction uses a vector as an argument, which allows a program to call any interrupt handler.
The INTO instruction explicitly calls the overflow exception (#OF) handler if the overflow flag (OF) in the EFLAGS
register is set. The OF flag indicates overflow on arithmetic instructions, but it does not automatically raise an over-
flow exception. An overflow exception can only be raised explicitly in either of the following ways:
•   Execute the INTO instruction.
•   Test the OF flag and execute the INT n instruction with an argument of 4 (the vector of the overflow exception)
    if the flag is set.
Both the methods of dealing with overflow conditions allow a program to test for overflow at specific places in the
instruction stream.
The INT 3 instruction explicitly calls the breakpoint exception (#BP) handler.
The BOUND instruction explicitly calls the BOUND-range exceeded exception (#BR) handler if an operand is found
to be not within predefined boundaries in memory. This instruction is provided for checking references to arrays
and other data structures. Like the overflow exception, the BOUND-range exceeded exception can only be raised
explicitly with the BOUND instruction or the INT n instruction with an argument of 5 (the vector of the bounds-
check exception). The processor does not implicitly perform bounds checks and raise the BOUND-range exceeded
exception.

6.4.5         Handling Floating-Point Exceptions
When operating on individual or packed floating-point values, the IA-32 architecture supports a set of six floating-
point exceptions. These exceptions can be generated during operations performed by the x87 FPU instructions or
by SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instructions. When an x87 FPU instruction (including the FISTTP instruction in SSE3) generates
one or more of these exceptions, it in turn generates floating-point error exception (#MF); when an
SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction generates a floating-point exception, it in turn generates SIMD floating-point exception
(#XM).
See the following sections for further descriptions of the floating-point exceptions, how they are generated, and
how they are handled:
•   Section 4.9.1, “Floating-Point Exception Conditions,” and Section 4.9.3, “Typical Actions of a Floating-Point
    Exception Handler”
•   Section 8.4, “x87 FPU Floating-Point Exception Handling,” and Section 8.5, “x87 FPU Floating-Point Exception
    Conditions”
•   Section 11.5.1, “SIMD Floating-Point Exceptions”
•   Interrupt Behavior

6.4.6         Interrupt and Exception Behavior in 64-Bit Mode
64-bit extensions expand the legacy IA-32 interrupt-processing and exception-processing mechanism to allow
support for 64-bit operating systems and applications. Changes include:
•   All interrupt handlers pointed to by the IDT are 64-bit code (does not apply to the SMI handler).
•   The size of interrupt-stack pushes is fixed at 64 bits. The processor uses 8-byte, zero extended stores.
•   The stack pointer (SS:RSP) is pushed unconditionally on interrupts. In legacy environments, this push is
    conditional and based on a change in current privilege level (CPL).
•   The new SS is set to NULL if there is a change in CPL.
•   IRET behavior changes.
•   There is a new interrupt stack-switch mechanism.
•   The alignment of interrupt stack frame is different.

6.5           PROCEDURE CALLS FOR BLOCK-STRUCTURED LANGUAGES
The IA-32 architecture supports an alternate method of performing procedure calls with the ENTER (enter proce-
dure) and LEAVE (leave procedure) instructions. These instructions automatically create and release, respectively,
stack frames for called procedures. The stack frames have predefined spaces for local variables and the necessary
pointers to allow coherent returns from called procedures. They also allow scope rules to be implemented so that
procedures can access their own local variables and some number of other variables located in other stack frames.
ENTER and LEAVE offer two benefits:
•   They provide machine-language support for implementing block-structured languages, such as C and Pascal.
•   They simplify procedure entry and exit in compiler-generated code.

6.5.1         ENTER Instruction
The ENTER instruction creates a stack frame compatible with the scope rules typically used in block-structured
languages. In block-structured languages, the scope of a procedure is the set of variables to which it has access.
The rules for scope vary among languages. They may be based on the nesting of procedures, the division of the
program into separately compiled files, or some other modularization scheme.
ENTER has two operands. The first specifies the number of bytes to be reserved on the stack for dynamic storage
for the procedure being called. Dynamic storage is the memory allocated for variables created when the procedure
is called, also known as automatic variables. The second parameter is the lexical nesting level (from 0 to 31) of the

procedure. The nesting level is the depth of a procedure in a hierarchy of procedure calls. The lexical level is unre-
lated to either the protection privilege level or to the I/O privilege level of the currently running program or task.
ENTER, in the following example, allocates 2 Kbytes of dynamic storage on the stack and sets up pointers to two
previous stack frames in the stack frame for this procedure:

   ENTER 2048,3
The lexical nesting level determines the number of stack frame pointers to copy into the new stack frame from the
preceding frame. A stack frame pointer is a doubleword used to access the variables of a procedure. The set of
stack frame pointers used by a procedure to access the variables of other procedures is called the display. The first
doubleword in the display is a pointer to the previous stack frame. This pointer is used by a LEAVE instruction to
undo the effect of an ENTER instruction by discarding the current stack frame.
After the ENTER instruction creates the display for a procedure, it allocates the dynamic local variables for the
procedure by decrementing the contents of the ESP register by the number of bytes specified in the first parameter.
This new value in the ESP register serves as the initial top-of-stack for all PUSH and POP operations within the
procedure.
To allow a procedure to address its display, the ENTER instruction leaves the EBP register pointing to the first
doubleword in the display. Because stacks grow down, this is actually the doubleword with the highest address in
the display. Data manipulation instructions that specify the EBP register as a base register automatically address
locations within the stack segment instead of the data segment.
The ENTER instruction can be used in two ways: nested and non-nested. If the lexical level is 0, the non-nested
form is used. The non-nested form pushes the contents of the EBP register on the stack, copies the contents of the
ESP register into the EBP register, and subtracts the first operand from the contents of the ESP register to allocate
dynamic storage. The non-nested form differs from the nested form in that no stack frame pointers are copied. The
nested form of the ENTER instruction occurs when the second parameter (lexical level) is not zero.
The following pseudo code shows the formal definition of the ENTER instruction. STORAGE is the number of bytes
of dynamic storage to allocate for local variables, and LEVEL is the lexical nesting level.

PUSH EBP;
FRAME_PTR ← ESP;
IF LEVEL > 0
    THEN
        DO (LEVEL − 1) times
             EBP ← EBP − 4;
             PUSH Pointer(EBP); (* doubleword pointed to by EBP *)
        OD;
    PUSH FRAME_PTR;
FI;
EBP ← FRAME_PTR;
ESP ← ESP − STORAGE;
The main procedure (in which all other procedures are nested) operates at the highest lexical level, level 1. The
first procedure it calls operates at the next deeper lexical level, level 2. A level 2 procedure can access the variables
of the main program, which are at fixed locations specified by the compiler. In the case of level 1, the ENTER
instruction allocates only the requested dynamic storage on the stack because there is no previous display to copy.
A procedure that calls another procedure at a lower lexical level gives the called procedure access to the variables
of the caller. The ENTER instruction provides this access by placing a pointer to the calling procedure's stack frame
in the display.
A procedure that calls another procedure at the same lexical level should not give access to its variables. In this
case, the ENTER instruction copies only that part of the display from the calling procedure which refers to previ-
ously nested procedures operating at higher lexical levels. The new stack frame does not include the pointer for
addressing the calling procedure’s stack frame.
The ENTER instruction treats a re-entrant procedure as a call to a procedure at the same lexical level. In this case,
each succeeding iteration of the re-entrant procedure can address only its own variables and the variables of the
procedures within which it is nested. A re-entrant procedure always can address its own variables; it does not
require pointers to the stack frames of previous iterations.

By copying only the stack frame pointers of procedures at higher lexical levels, the ENTER instruction makes certain
that procedures access only those variables of higher lexical levels, not those at parallel lexical levels (see
Figure 6-6).

                                                   Main (Lexical Level 1)
                                               Procedure A (Lexical Level 2)
                                               Procedure B (Lexical Level 3)

                                                Procedure C (Lexical Level 3)
                                               Procedure D (Lexical Level 4)

                                            Figure 6-6. Nested Procedures

Block-structured languages can use the lexical levels defined by ENTER to control access to the variables of nested
procedures. In Figure 6-6, for example, if procedure A calls procedure B which, in turn, calls procedure C, then
procedure C will have access to the variables of the MAIN procedure and procedure A, but not those of procedure
B because they are at the same lexical level. The following definition describes the access to variables for the
nested procedures in Figure 6-6.
1. MAIN has variables at fixed locations.
2. Procedure A can access only the variables of MAIN.
3. Procedure B can access only the variables of procedure A and MAIN. Procedure B cannot access the variables of
   procedure C or procedure D.
4. Procedure C can access only the variables of procedure A and MAIN. Procedure C cannot access the variables of
   procedure B or procedure D.
5. Procedure D can access the variables of procedure C, procedure A, and MAIN. Procedure D cannot access the
   variables of procedure B.
In Figure 6-7, an ENTER instruction at the beginning of the MAIN procedure creates three doublewords of dynamic
storage for MAIN, but copies no pointers from other stack frames. The first doubleword in the display holds a copy
of the last value in the EBP register before the ENTER instruction was executed. The second doubleword holds a
copy of the contents of the EBP register following the ENTER instruction. After the instruction is executed, the EBP
register points to the first doubleword pushed on the stack, and the ESP register points to the last doubleword in
the stack frame.
When MAIN calls procedure A, the ENTER instruction creates a new display (see Figure 6-8). The first doubleword
is the last value held in MAIN's EBP register. The second doubleword is a pointer to MAIN's stack frame which is
copied from the second doubleword in MAIN's display. This happens to be another copy of the last value held in
MAIN’s EBP register. Procedure A can access variables in MAIN because MAIN is at level 1.
Therefore the base address for the dynamic storage used in MAIN is the current address in the EBP register, plus
four bytes to account for the saved contents of MAIN’s EBP register. All dynamic variables for MAIN are at fixed,
positive offsets from this value.

                                                       Old EBP           EBP
                                         Display
                                                      Main’s EBP

                                        Dynamic
                                         Storage
                                                                         ESP

                           Figure 6-7. Stack Frame After Entering the MAIN Procedure

                                                       Old EBP
                                                      Main’s EBP

                                                      Main’s EBP           EBP
                                       Display
                                                      Main’s EBP
                                                   Procedure A’s EBP
                                      Dynamic
                                       Storage
                                                                           ESP

                               Figure 6-8. Stack Frame After Entering Procedure A

When procedure A calls procedure B, the ENTER instruction creates a new display (see Figure 6-9). The first
doubleword holds a copy of the last value in procedure A’s EBP register. The second and third doublewords are
copies of the two stack frame pointers in procedure A’s display. Procedure B can access variables in procedure A
and MAIN by using the stack frame pointers in its display.
When procedure B calls procedure C, the ENTER instruction creates a new display for procedure C (see
Figure 6-10). The first doubleword holds a copy of the last value in procedure B’s EBP register. This is used by the
LEAVE instruction to restore procedure B’s stack frame. The second and third doublewords are copies of the two
stack frame pointers in procedure A’s display. If procedure C were at the next deeper lexical level from procedure
B, a fourth doubleword would be copied, which would be the stack frame pointer to procedure B’s local variables.
Note that procedure B and procedure C are at the same level, so procedure C is not intended to access procedure
B’s variables. This does not mean that procedure C is completely isolated from procedure B; procedure C is called
by procedure B, so the pointer to the returning stack frame is a pointer to procedure B’s stack frame. In addition,
procedure B can pass parameters to procedure C either on the stack or through variables global to both procedures
(that is, variables in the scope of both procedures).

                                                    Old EBP
                                                   Main’s EBP

                                                   Main’s EBP
                                                   Main’s EBP
                                                Procedure A’s EBP

                                                Procedure A’s EBP      EBP
                                                   Main’s EBP
                                    Display
                                                Procedure A’s EBP
                                                Procedure B’s EBP

                                   Dynamic
                                    Storage
                                                                       ESP

                              Figure 6-9. Stack Frame After Entering Procedure B

                                                       Old EBP
                                                      Main’s EBP

                                                      Main’s EBP
                                                      Main’s EBP
                                                   Procedure A’s EBP

                                                   Procedure A’s EBP
                                                      Main’s EBP
                                                  Procedure A’s EBP
                                                  Procedure B’s EBP

                                                   Procedure B’s EBP        EBP
                                                      Main’s EBP
                                     Display
                                                  Procedure A’s EBP
                                                  Procedure C’s EBP

                                    Dynamic
                                     Storage
                                                                            ESP

                               Figure 6-10. Stack Frame After Entering Procedure C

6.5.2       LEAVE Instruction
The LEAVE instruction, which does not have any operands, reverses the action of the previous ENTER instruction.
The LEAVE instruction copies the contents of the EBP register into the ESP register to release all stack space allo-
cated to the procedure. Then it restores the old value of the EBP register from the stack. This simultaneously
restores the ESP register to its original value. A subsequent RET instruction then can remove any arguments and
the return address pushed on the stack by the calling program for use by the procedure.

