                                                                       CHAPTER 10
                                                           PROGRAMMING WITH INTEL®
                                              STREAMING SIMD EXTENSIONS (INTEL® SSE)

The streaming SIMD extensions (SSE) were introduced into the IA-32 architecture in the Pentium III processor
family. These extensions enhance the performance of IA-32 processors for advanced 2-D and 3-D graphics, motion
video, image processing, speech recognition, audio synthesis, telephony, and video conferencing.
This chapter describes SSE. Chapter 11, “Programming with Intel® Streaming SIMD Extensions 2 (Intel® SSE2),”
provides information to assist in writing application programs that use SSE2 extensions. Chapter 12, “Program-
ming with Intel® SSE3, SSSE3, Intel® SSE4 and Intel® AESNI,” provides this information for SSE3 extensions.

10.1        OVERVIEW OF SSE EXTENSIONS
Intel MMX technology introduced single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) capability into the IA-32 architecture,
with the 64-bit MMX registers, 64-bit packed integer data types, and instructions that allowed SIMD operations to
be performed on packed integers. SSE extensions expand the SIMD execution model by adding facilities for
handling packed and scalar single-precision floating-point values contained in 128-bit registers.
If CPUID.01H:EDX.SSE[bit 25] = 1, SSE extensions are present.
SSE extensions add the following features to the IA-32 architecture, while maintaining backward compatibility with
all existing IA-32 processors, applications and operating systems.
•   Eight 128-bit data registers (called XMM registers) in non-64-bit modes; sixteen XMM registers are available in
    64-bit mode.
•   The 32-bit MXCSR register, which provides control and status bits for operations performed on XMM registers.
•   The 128-bit packed single-precision floating-point data type (four IEEE single-precision floating-point values
    packed into a double quadword).
•   Instructions that perform SIMD operations on single-precision floating-point values and that extend SIMD
    operations that can be performed on integers:
    — 128-bit Packed and scalar single-precision floating-point instructions that operate on data located in MMX
      registers
    — 64-bit SIMD integer instructions that support additional operations on packed integer operands located in
      MMX registers
•   Instructions that save and restore the state of the MXCSR register.
•   Instructions that support explicit prefetching of data, control of the cacheability of data, and control the
    ordering of store operations.
•   Extensions to the CPUID instruction.
These features extend the IA-32 architecture’s SIMD programming model in four important ways:
•   The ability to perform SIMD operations on four packed single-precision floating-point values enhances the
    performance of IA-32 processors for advanced media and communications applications that use computation-
    intensive algorithms to perform repetitive operations on large arrays of simple, native data elements.
•   The ability to perform SIMD single-precision floating-point operations in XMM registers and SIMD integer
    operations in MMX registers provides greater flexibility and throughput for executing applications that operate
    on large arrays of floating-point and integer data.
•   Cache control instructions provide the ability to stream data in and out of XMM registers without polluting the
    caches and the ability to prefetch data to selected cache levels before it is actually used. Applications that
    require regular access to large amounts of data benefit from these prefetching and streaming store capabilities.
•   The SFENCE (store fence) instruction provides greater control over the ordering of store operations when using
    weakly-ordered memory types.

SSE extensions are fully compatible with all software written for IA-32 processors. All existing software continues
to run correctly, without modification, on processors that incorporate SSE extensions. Enhancements to CPUID
permit detection of SSE extensions. SSE extensions are accessible from all IA-32 execution modes: protected
mode, real address mode, and virtual-8086 mode.
The following sections of this chapter describe the programming environment for SSE extensions, including: XMM
registers, the packed single-precision floating-point data type, and SSE instructions. For additional information,
see:
•   Section 11.6, “Writing Applications with SSE/SSE2 Extensions”.
•   Section 11.5, “SSE, SSE2, and SSE3 Exceptions,” describes the exceptions that can be generated with
    SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instructions.
•   Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volumes 2A & 2B, provide a detailed
    description of these instructions.
•   Chapter 13, “System Programming for Instruction Set Extensions and Processor Extended States,” in the
    Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, gives guidelines for integrating
    these extensions into an operating-system environment.

10.2          SSE PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT
Figure 10-1 shows the execution environment for the SSE extensions. All SSE instructions operate on the XMM
registers, MMX registers, and/or memory as follows:
•   XMM registers — These eight registers (see Figure 10-2 and Section 10.2.2, “XMM Registers”) are used to
    operate on packed or scalar single-precision floating-point data. Scalar operations are operations performed on
    individual (unpacked) single-precision floating-point values stored in the low doubleword of an XMM register.
    XMM registers are referenced by the names XMM0 through XMM7.

                                                                                 Address Space
                                                                            32
                                       XMM Registers                    2        -1
                                        Eight 128-Bit

                                 MXCSR Register           32 Bits

                                                   MMX Registers
                                                    Eight 64-Bit

                                                      General-Purpose
                                                         Registers
                                                        Eight 32-Bit

                                                                                 0
                                 EFLAGS Register           32 Bits

                                     Figure 10-1. SSE Execution Environment

•   MXCSR register — This 32-bit register (see Figure 10-3 and Section 10.2.3, “MXCSR Control and Status
    Register”) provides status and control bits used in SIMD floating-point operations.
•   MMX registers — These eight registers (see Figure 9-2) are used to perform operations on 64-bit packed
    integer data. They are also used to hold operands for some operations performed between the MMX and XMM
    registers. MMX registers are referenced by the names MM0 through MM7.
•   General-purpose registers — The eight general-purpose registers (see Figure 3-5) are used along with the
    existing IA-32 addressing modes to address operands in memory. (MMX and XMM registers cannot be used to

    address memory). The general-purpose registers are also used to hold operands for some SSE instructions and
    are referenced as EAX, EBX, ECX, EDX, EBP, ESI, EDI, and ESP.
•   EFLAGS register — This 32-bit register (see Figure 3-8) is used to record result of some compare operations.

10.2.1      SSE in 64-Bit Mode and Compatibility Mode
In compatibility mode, SSE extensions function like they do in protected mode. In 64-bit mode, eight additional
XMM registers are accessible. Registers XMM8-XMM15 are accessed by using REX prefixes. Memory operands are
specified using the ModR/M, SIB encoding described in Section 3.7.5.
Some SSE instructions may be used to operate on general-purpose registers. Use the REX.W prefix to access 64-
bit general-purpose registers. Note that if a REX prefix is used when it has no meaning, the prefix is ignored.

10.2.2      XMM Registers
Eight 128-bit XMM data registers were introduced into the IA-32 architecture with SSE extensions (see
Figure 10-2). These registers can be accessed directly using the names XMM0 to XMM7; and they can be accessed
independently from the x87 FPU and MMX registers and the general-purpose registers (that is, they are not aliased
to any other of the processor’s registers).

                         127                                                            0
                                                       XMM7

                                                       XMM6

                                                       XMM5

                                                       XMM4

                                                       XMM3

                                                       XMM2

                                                       XMM1

                                                       XMM0

                                           Figure 10-2. XMM Registers

SSE instructions use the XMM registers only to operate on packed single-precision floating-point operands. SSE2
extensions expand the functions of the XMM registers to operand on packed or scalar double-precision floating-
point operands and packed integer operands (see Section 11.2, “SSE2 Programming Environment,” and Section
12.1, “Programming Environment and Data types”).
XMM registers can only be used to perform calculations on data; they cannot be used to address memory.
Addressing memory is accomplished by using the general-purpose registers.
Data can be loaded into XMM registers or written from the registers to memory in 32-bit, 64-bit, and 128-bit incre-
ments. When storing the entire contents of an XMM register in memory (128-bit store), the data is stored in 16
consecutive bytes, with the low-order byte of the register being stored in the first byte in memory.

10.2.3      MXCSR Control and Status Register
The 32-bit MXCSR register (see Figure 10-3) contains control and status information for SSE, SSE2, and SSE3
SIMD floating-point operations. This register contains:
•   flag and mask bits for SIMD floating-point exceptions
•   rounding control field for SIMD floating-point operations

•   flush-to-zero flag that provides a means of controlling underflow conditions on SIMD floating-point operations
•   denormals-are-zeros flag that controls how SIMD floating-point instructions handle denormal source operands
The contents of this register can be loaded from memory with the LDMXCSR and FXRSTOR instructions and stored
in memory with STMXCSR and FXSAVE.
Bits 16 through 31 of the MXCSR register are reserved and are cleared on a power-up or reset of the processor;
attempting to write a non-zero value to these bits, using either the FXRSTOR or LDMXCSR instructions, will result
in a general-protection exception (#GP) being generated.

                                    31                                 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0

                                                                          F   R   P U O Z D I D P U O Z D I
                                                 Reserved                                     A
                                                                          Z   C   M M M M M M   E E E E E E
                                                                                              Z

                      Flush to Zero
                      Rounding Control
                      Precision Mask
                      Underflow Mask
                      Overflow Mask
                      Divide-by-Zero Mask
                      Denormal Operation Mask
                      Invalid Operation Mask
                      Denormals Are Zeros*
                      Precision Flag
                      Underflow Flag
                      Overflow Flag
                      Divide-by-Zero Flag
                      Denormal Flag
                      Invalid Operation Flag
                      * The denormals-are-zeros flag was introduced in the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor.

                                         Figure 10-3. MXCSR Control/Status Register

10.2.3.1      SIMD Floating-Point Mask and Flag Bits
Bits 0 through 5 of the MXCSR register indicate whether a SIMD floating-point exception has been detected. They
are “sticky” flags. That is, after a flag is set, it remains set until explicitly cleared. To clear these flags, use the
LDMXCSR or the FXRSTOR instruction to write zeroes to them.
Bits 7 through 12 provide individual mask bits for the SIMD floating-point exceptions. An exception type is masked
if the corresponding mask bit is set, and it is unmasked if the bit is clear. These mask bits are set upon a power-up
or reset. This causes all SIMD floating-point exceptions to be initially masked.
If LDMXCSR or FXRSTOR clears a mask bit and sets the corresponding exception flag bit, a SIMD floating-point
exception will not be generated as a result of this change. The unmasked exception will be generated only upon the
execution of the next SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instruction that detects the unmasked exception condition.
For more information about the use of the SIMD floating-point exception mask and flag bits, see Section 11.5,
“SSE, SSE2, and SSE3 Exceptions,” and Section 12.8, “SSE3/SSSE3 And SSE4 Exceptions.”

10.2.3.2      SIMD Floating-Point Rounding Control Field
Bits 13 and 14 of the MXCSR register (the rounding control [RC] field) control how the results of SIMD floating-point
instructions are rounded. See Section 4.8.4, “Rounding,” for a description of the function and encoding of the
rounding control bits.

10.2.3.3      Flush-To-Zero
Bit 15 (FZ) of the MXCSR register enables the flush-to-zero mode, which controls the masked response to a SIMD
floating-point underflow condition. When the underflow exception is masked and the flush-to-zero mode is
enabled, the processor performs the following operations when it detects a floating-point underflow condition:

•   Returns a zero result with the sign of the true result
•   Sets the precision and underflow exception flags
If the underflow exception is not masked, the flush-to-zero bit is ignored.
The flush-to-zero mode is not compatible with IEEE Standard 754. The IEEE-mandated masked response to under-
flow is to deliver the denormalized result (see Section 4.8.3.2, “Normalized and Denormalized Finite Numbers”).
The flush-to-zero mode is provided primarily for performance reasons. At the cost of a slight precision loss, faster
execution can be achieved for applications where underflows are common and rounding the underflow result to
zero can be tolerated.
The flush-to-zero bit is cleared upon a power-up or reset of the processor, disabling the flush-to-zero mode.

10.2.3.4     Denormals-Are-Zeros
Bit 6 (DAZ) of the MXCSR register enables the denormals-are-zeros mode, which controls the processor’s response
to a SIMD floating-point denormal operand condition. When the denormals-are-zeros flag is set, the processor
converts all denormal source operands to a zero with the sign of the original operand before performing any
computations on them. The processor does not set the denormal-operand exception flag (DE), regardless of the
setting of the denormal-operand exception mask bit (DM); and it does not generate a denormal-operand exception
if the exception is unmasked.
The denormals-are-zeros mode is not compatible with IEEE Standard 754 (see Section 4.8.3.2, “Normalized and
Denormalized Finite Numbers”). The denormals-are-zeros mode is provided to improve processor performance for
applications such as streaming media processing, where rounding a denormal operand to zero does not appre-
ciably affect the quality of the processed data.
The denormals-are-zeros flag is cleared upon a power-up or reset of the processor, disabling the denormals-are-
zeros mode.
The denormals-are-zeros mode was introduced in the Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor with the SSE2 exten-
sions; however, it is fully compatible with the SSE SIMD floating-point instructions (that is, the denormals-are-
zeros flag affects the operation of the SSE SIMD floating-point instructions). In earlier IA-32 processors and in
some models of the Pentium 4 processor, this flag (bit 6) is reserved. See Section 11.6.3, “Checking for the DAZ
Flag in the MXCSR Register,” for instructions for detecting the availability of this feature.
Attempting to set bit 6 of the MXCSR register on processors that do not support the DAZ flag will cause a general-
protection exception (#GP). See Section 11.6.6, “Guidelines for Writing to the MXCSR Register,” for instructions for
preventing such general-protection exceptions by using the MXCSR_MASK value returned by the FXSAVE instruc-
tion.

10.2.4      Compatibility of SSE Extensions with SSE2/SSE3/MMX and the x87 FPU
The state (XMM registers and MXCSR register) introduced into the IA-32 execution environment with the SSE
extensions is shared with SSE2 and SSE3 extensions. SSE/SSE2/SSE3 instructions are fully compatible; they can
be executed together in the same instruction stream with no need to save state when switching between instruc-
tion sets.
XMM registers are independent of the x87 FPU and MMX registers, so SSE/SSE2/SSE3 operations performed on the
XMM registers can be performed in parallel with operations on the x87 FPU and MMX registers (see Section 11.6.7,
“Interaction of SSE/SSE2 Instructions with x87 FPU and MMX Instructions”).
The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions save and restore the SSE/SSE2/SSE3 states along with the x87 FPU and
MMX state.

10.3        SSE DATA TYPES
SSE extensions introduced one data type, the 128-bit packed single-precision floating-point data type, to the IA-
32 architecture (see Figure 10-4). This data type consists of four IEEE 32-bit single-precision floating-point values

packed into a double quadword. (See Figure 4-3 for the layout of a single-precision floating-point value; refer to
Section 4.2.2, “Floating-Point Data Types,” for a detailed description of the single-precision floating-point format.)

                                                                               Contains 4 Single-Precision
                                                                               Floating-Point Values
                  127          96 95         64 63         32 31           0

                        Figure 10-4. 128-Bit Packed Single-Precision Floating-Point Data Type

This 128-bit packed single-precision floating-point data type is operated on in the XMM registers or in memory.
Conversion instructions are provided to convert two packed single-precision floating-point values into two packed
doubleword integers or a scalar single-precision floating-point value into a doubleword integer (see Figure 11-8).
SSE extensions provide conversion instructions between XMM registers and MMX registers, and between XMM
registers and general-purpose bit registers. See Figure 11-8.
The address of a 128-bit packed memory operand must be aligned on a 16-byte boundary, except in the following
cases:
•   The MOVUPS instruction supports unaligned accesses.
•   Scalar instructions that use a 4-byte memory operand that is not subject to alignment requirements.
Figure 4-2 shows the byte order of 128-bit (double quadword) data types in memory.

10.4          SSE INSTRUCTION SET
SSE instructions are divided into four functional groups
•   Packed and scalar single-precision floating-point instructions
•   64-bit SIMD integer instructions
•   State management instructions
•   Cacheability control, prefetch, and memory ordering instructions
The following sections give an overview of each of the instructions in these groups.

10.4.1        SSE Packed and Scalar Floating-Point Instructions
The packed and scalar single-precision floating-point instructions are divided into the following subgroups:
•   Data movement instructions
•   Arithmetic instructions
•   Logical instructions
•   Comparison instructions
•   Shuffle instructions
•   Conversion instructions
The packed single-precision floating-point instructions perform SIMD operations on packed single-precision
floating-point operands (see Figure 10-5). Each source operand contains four single-precision floating-point
values, and the destination operand contains the results of the operation (OP) performed in parallel on the corre-
sponding values (X0 and Y0, X1 and Y1, X2 and Y2, and X3 and Y3) in each operand.

                                X3             X2                  X1              X0

                                     Y3          Y2                  Y1             Y0

                                 OP             OP                 OP              OP

                              X3 OP Y3       X2 OP Y2            X1 OP Y1         X0 OP Y0

                          Figure 10-5. Packed Single-Precision Floating-Point Operation

The scalar single-precision floating-point instructions operate on the low (least significant) doublewords of the two
source operands (X0 and Y0); see Figure 10-6. The three most significant doublewords (X1, X2, and X3) of the first
source operand are passed through to the destination. The scalar operations are similar to the floating-point oper-
ations performed in the x87 FPU data registers with the precision control field in the x87 FPU control word set for
single precision (24-bit significand), except that x87 stack operations use a 15-bit exponent range for the result,
while SSE operations use an 8-bit exponent range.

                                 X3             X2                  X1             X0

                                     Y3             Y2                  Y1          Y0

                                                                                   OP

                                 X3             X2                  X1          X0 OP Y0

                           Figure 10-6. Scalar Single-Precision Floating-Point Operation

10.4.1.1    SSE Data Movement Instructions
SSE data movement instructions move single-precision floating-point data between XMM registers and between an
XMM register and memory.
The MOVAPS (move aligned packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction transfers a double quadword
operand containing four packed single-precision floating-point values from memory to an XMM register and vice
versa, or between XMM registers. The memory address must be aligned to a 16-byte boundary; otherwise, a
general-protection exception (#GP) is generated.
The MOVUPS (move unaligned packed single-precision, floating-point) instruction performs the same operations as
the MOVAPS instruction, except that 16-byte alignment of a memory address is not required.
The MOVSS (move scalar single-precision floating-point) instruction transfers a 32-bit single-precision floating-
point operand from memory to the low doubleword of an XMM register and vice versa, or between XMM registers.
The MOVLPS (move low packed single-precision floating-point) instruction moves two packed single-precision
floating-point values from memory to the low quadword of an XMM register and vice versa. The high quadword of
the register is left unchanged.

The MOVHPS (move high packed single-precision floating-point) instruction moves two packed single-precision
floating-point values from memory to the high quadword of an XMM register and vice versa. The low quadword of
the register is left unchanged.
The MOVLHPS (move packed single-precision floating-point low to high) instruction moves two packed single-preci-
sion floating-point values from the low quadword of the source XMM register into the high quadword of the desti-
nation XMM register. The low quadword of the destination register is left unchanged.
The MOVHLPS (move packed single-precision floating-point high to low) instruction moves two packed single-preci-
sion floating-point values from the high quadword of the source XMM register into the low quadword of the desti-
nation XMM register. The high quadword of the destination register is left unchanged.
The MOVMSKPS (move packed single-precision floating-point mask) instruction transfers the most significant bit of
each of the four packed single-precision floating-point numbers in an XMM register to a general-purpose register.
This 4-bit value can then be used as a condition to perform branching.

10.4.1.2      SSE Arithmetic Instructions
SSE arithmetic instructions perform addition, subtraction, multiply, divide, reciprocal, square root, reciprocal of
square root, and maximum/minimum operations on packed and scalar single-precision floating-point values.
The ADDPS (add packed single-precision floating-point values) and SUBPS (subtract packed single-precision
floating-point values) instructions add and subtract, respectively, two packed single-precision floating-point oper-
ands.
The ADDSS (add scalar single-precision floating-point values) and SUBSS (subtract scalar single-precision floating-
point values) instructions add and subtract, respectively, the low single-precision floating-point values of two oper-
ands and store the result in the low doubleword of the destination operand.
The MULPS (multiply packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction multiplies two packed single-preci-
sion floating-point operands.
The MULSS (multiply scalar single-precision floating-point values) instruction multiplies the low single-precision
floating-point values of two operands and stores the result in the low doubleword of the destination operand.
The DIVPS (divide packed, single-precision floating-point values) instruction divides two packed single-precision
floating-point operands.
The DIVSS (divide scalar single-precision floating-point values) instruction divides the low single-precision floating-
point values of two operands and stores the result in the low doubleword of the destination operand.
The RCPPS (compute reciprocals of packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction computes the approx-
imate reciprocals of values in a packed single-precision floating-point operand.
The RCPSS (compute reciprocal of scalar single-precision floating-point values) instruction computes the approxi-
mate reciprocal of the low single-precision floating-point value in the source operand and stores the result in the
low doubleword of the destination operand.
The SQRTPS (compute square roots of packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction computes the
square roots of the values in a packed single-precision floating-point operand.
The SQRTSS (compute square root of scalar single-precision floating-point values) instruction computes the square
root of the low single-precision floating-point value in the source operand and stores the result in the low double-
word of the destination operand.
The RSQRTPS (compute reciprocals of square roots of packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction
computes the approximate reciprocals of the square roots of the values in a packed single-precision floating-point
operand.
The RSQRTSS (reciprocal of square root of scalar single-precision floating-point value) instruction computes the
approximate reciprocal of the square root of the low single-precision floating-point value in the source operand and
stores the result in the low doubleword of the destination operand.
The MAXPS (return maximum of packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction compares the corre-
sponding values from two packed single-precision floating-point operands and returns the numerically greater
value from each comparison to the destination operand.

The MAXSS (return maximum of scalar single-precision floating-point values) instruction compares the low values
from two packed single-precision floating-point operands and returns the numerically greater value from the
comparison to the low doubleword of the destination operand.
The MINPS (return minimum of packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction compares the corre-
sponding values from two packed single-precision floating-point operands and returns the numerically lesser value
from each comparison to the destination operand.
The MINSS (return minimum of scalar single-precision floating-point values) instruction compares the low values
from two packed single-precision floating-point operands and returns the numerically lesser value from the
comparison to the low doubleword of the destination operand.

10.4.2      SSE Logical Instructions
SSE logical instructions perform AND, AND NOT, OR, and XOR operations on packed single-precision floating-point
values.
The ANDPS (bitwise logical AND of packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction returns the logical
AND of two packed single-precision floating-point operands.
The ANDNPS (bitwise logical AND NOT of packed single-precision, floating-point values) instruction returns the
logical AND NOT of two packed single-precision floating-point operands.
The ORPS (bitwise logical OR of packed single-precision, floating-point values) instruction returns the logical OR of
two packed single-precision floating-point operands.
The XORPS (bitwise logical XOR of packed single-precision, floating-point values) instruction returns the logical
XOR of two packed single-precision floating-point operands.

10.4.2.1    SSE Comparison Instructions
The compare instructions compare packed and scalar single-precision floating-point values and return the results
of the comparison either to the destination operand or to the EFLAGS register.
The CMPPS (compare packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction compares the corresponding values
from two packed single-precision floating-point operands, using an immediate operand as a predicate, and returns
a 32-bit mask result of all 1s or all 0s for each comparison to the destination operand. The value of the immediate
operand allows the selection of any of 8 compare conditions: equal, less than, less than equal, unordered, not
equal, not less than, not less than or equal, or ordered.
The CMPSS (compare scalar single-precision, floating-point values) instruction compares the low values from two
packed single-precision floating-point operands, using an immediate operand as a predicate, and returns a 32-bit
mask result of all 1s or all 0s for the comparison to the low doubleword of the destination operand. The immediate
operand selects the compare conditions as with the CMPPS instruction.
The COMISS (compare scalar single-precision floating-point values and set EFLAGS) and UCOMISS (unordered
compare scalar single-precision floating-point values and set EFLAGS) instructions compare the low values of two
packed single-precision floating-point operands and set the ZF, PF, and CF flags in the EFLAGS register to show the
result (greater than, less than, equal, or unordered). These two instructions differ as follows: the COMISS instruc-
tion signals a floating-point invalid-operation (#I) exception when a source operand is either a QNaN or an SNaN;
the UCOMISS instruction only signals an invalid-operation exception when a source operand is an SNaN.

10.4.2.2    SSE Shuffle and Unpack Instructions
SSE shuffle and unpack instructions shuffle or interleave the contents of two packed single-precision floating-point
values and store the results in the destination operand.
The SHUFPS (shuffle packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction places any two of the four packed
single-precision floating-point values from the destination operand into the two low-order doublewords of the
destination operand, and places any two of the four packed single-precision floating-point values from the source
operand in the two high-order doublewords of the destination operand (see Figure 10-7). By using the same
register for the source and destination operands, the SHUFPS instruction can shuffle four single-precision floating-
point values into any order.

                      DEST           X3            X2               X1            X0

                      SRC            Y3           Y2              Y1             Y0

                      DEST      Y3 ... Y0       Y3 ... Y0        X3 ... X0     X3 ... X0

                             Figure 10-7. SHUFPS Instruction, Packed Shuffle Operation

The UNPCKHPS (unpack and interleave high packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction performs an
interleaved unpack of the high-order single-precision floating-point values from the source and destination oper-
ands and stores the result in the destination operand (see Figure 10-8).

                      DEST            X3          X2               X1            X0

                      SRC            Y3           Y2               Y1            Y0

                      DEST           Y3          X3                Y2              X2

                   Figure 10-8. UNPCKHPS Instruction, High Unpack and Interleave Operation

The UNPCKLPS (unpack and interleave low packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction performs an
interleaved unpack of the low-order single-precision floating-point values from the source and destination oper-
ands and stores the result in the destination operand (see Figure 10-9).

                      DEST            X3          X2                X1             X0

                      SRC             Y3          Y2                Y1           Y0

                      DEST           Y1            X1                  Y0         X0

                    Figure 10-9. UNPCKLPS Instruction, Low Unpack and Interleave Operation

10.4.3      SSE Conversion Instructions
SSE conversion instructions (see Figure 11-8) support packed and scalar conversions between single-precision
floating-point and doubleword integer formats.
The CVTPI2PS (convert packed doubleword integers to packed single-precision floating-point values) instruction
converts two packed signed doubleword integers into two packed single-precision floating-point values. When the
conversion is inexact, the result is rounded according to the rounding mode selected in the MXCSR register.
The CVTSI2SS (convert doubleword integer to scalar single-precision floating-point value) instruction converts a
signed doubleword integer into a single-precision floating-point value. When the conversion is inexact, the result is
rounded according to the rounding mode selected in the MXCSR register.
The CVTPS2PI (convert packed single-precision floating-point values to packed doubleword integers) instruction
converts two packed single-precision floating-point values into two packed signed doubleword integers. When the
conversion is inexact, the result is rounded according to the rounding mode selected in the MXCSR register. The
CVTTPS2PI (convert with truncation packed single-precision floating-point values to packed doubleword integers)
instruction is similar to the CVTPS2PI instruction, except that truncation is used to round a source value to an
integer value (see Section 4.8.4.2, “Truncation with SSE and SSE2 Conversion Instructions”).
The CVTSS2SI (convert scalar single-precision floating-point value to doubleword integer) instruction converts a
single-precision floating-point value into a signed doubleword integer. When the conversion is inexact, the result is
rounded according to the rounding mode selected in the MXCSR register. The CVTTSS2SI (convert with truncation
scalar single-precision floating-point value to doubleword integer) instruction is similar to the CVTSS2SI instruc-
tion, except that truncation is used to round the source value to an integer value (see Section 4.8.4.2, “Truncation
with SSE and SSE2 Conversion Instructions”).

10.4.4      SSE 64-Bit SIMD Integer Instructions
SSE extensions add the following 64-bit packed integer instructions to the IA-32 architecture. These instructions
operate on data in MMX registers and 64-bit memory locations.

                                                       NOTE
        When SSE2 extensions are present in an IA-32 processor, these instructions are extended to
        operate on 128-bit operands in XMM registers and 128-bit memory locations.

The PAVGB (compute average of packed unsigned byte integers) and PAVGW (compute average of packed
unsigned word integers) instructions compute a SIMD average of two packed unsigned byte or word integer oper-
ands, respectively. For each corresponding pair of data elements in the packed source operands, the elements are
added together, a 1 is added to the temporary sum, and that result is shifted right one bit position.
The PEXTRW (extract word) instruction copies a selected word from an MMX register into a general-purpose
register.
The PINSRW (insert word) instruction copies a word from a general-purpose register or from memory into a
selected word location in an MMX register.
The PMAXUB (maximum of packed unsigned byte integers) instruction compares the corresponding unsigned byte
integers in two packed operands and returns the greater of each comparison to the destination operand.
The PMINUB (minimum of packed unsigned byte integers) instruction compares the corresponding unsigned byte
integers in two packed operands and returns the lesser of each comparison to the destination operand.
The PMAXSW (maximum of packed signed word integers) instruction compares the corresponding signed word
integers in two packed operands and returns the greater of each comparison to the destination operand.
The PMINSW (minimum of packed signed word integers) instruction compares the corresponding signed word inte-
gers in two packed operands and returns the lesser of each comparison to the destination operand.
The PMOVMSKB (move byte mask) instruction creates an 8-bit mask from the packed byte integers in an MMX
register and stores the result in the low byte of a general-purpose register. The mask contains the most significant
bit of each byte in the MMX register. (When operating on 128-bit operands, a 16-bit mask is created.)

The PMULHUW (multiply packed unsigned word integers and store high result) instruction performs a SIMD
unsigned multiply of the words in the two source operands and returns the high word of each result to an MMX
register.
The PSADBW (compute sum of absolute differences) instruction computes the SIMD absolute differences of the
corresponding unsigned byte integers in two source operands, sums the differences, and stores the sum in the low
word of the destination operand.
The PSHUFW (shuffle packed word integers) instruction shuffles the words in the source operand according to the
order specified by an 8-bit immediate operand and returns the result to the destination operand.

10.4.5         MXCSR State Management Instructions
The MXCSR state management instructions (LDMXCSR and STMXCSR) load and save the state of the MXCSR
register, respectively. The LDMXCSR instruction loads the MXCSR register from memory, while the STMXCSR
instruction stores the contents of the register to memory.

10.4.6         Cacheability Control, Prefetch, and Memory Ordering Instructions
SSE extensions introduce several new instructions to give programs more control over the caching of data. They
also introduces the PREFETCHh instructions, which provide the ability to prefetch data to a specified cache level,
and the SFENCE instruction, which enforces program ordering on stores. These instructions are described in the
following sections.

10.4.6.1       Cacheability Control Instructions
The following three instructions enable data from the MMX and XMM registers to be stored to memory using a non-
temporal hint. The non-temporal hint directs the processor to store the data to memory without writing the data
into the cache hierarchy. See Section 10.4.6.2, “Caching of Temporal vs. Non-Temporal Data,” for information
about non-temporal stores and hints.
The MOVNTQ (store quadword using non-temporal hint) instruction stores packed integer data from an MMX
register to memory, using a non-temporal hint.
The MOVNTPS (store packed single-precision floating-point values using non-temporal hint) instruction stores
packed floating-point data from an XMM register to memory, using a non-temporal hint.
The MASKMOVQ (store selected bytes of quadword) instruction stores selected byte integers from an MMX register
to memory, using a byte mask to selectively write the individual bytes. This instruction also uses a non-temporal
hint.

10.4.6.2       Caching of Temporal vs. Non-Temporal Data
Data referenced by a program can be temporal (data will be used again) or non-temporal (data will be referenced
once and not reused in the immediate future). For example, program code is generally temporal, whereas, multi-
media data, such as the display list in a 3-D graphics application, is often non-temporal. To make efficient use of
the processor’s caches, it is generally desirable to cache temporal data and not cache non-temporal data. Over-
loading the processor’s caches with non-temporal data is sometimes referred to as “polluting the caches.” The SSE
and SSE2 cacheability control instructions enable a program to write non-temporal data to memory in a manner
that minimizes pollution of caches.
These SSE and SSE2 non-temporal store instructions minimize cache pollutions by treating the memory being
accessed as the write combining (WC) type. If a program specifies a non-temporal store with one of these instruc-
tions and the memory type of the destination region is write back (WB), write through (WT), or write combining
(WC), the processor will do the following:
•   If the memory location being written to is present in the cache hierarchy, the data in the caches is evicted.1

1. Some older CPU implementations (e.g., Pentium M) allowed addresses being written with a non-temporal store instruction to be
   updated in-place if the memory type was not WC and line was already in the cache.

•     The non-temporal data is written to memory with WC semantics.
See also: Chapter 11, “Memory Cache Control,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s
Manual, Volume 3A.
Using the WC semantics, the store transaction will be weakly ordered, meaning that the data may not be written to
memory in program order, and the store will not write allocate (that is, the processor will not fetch the corre-
sponding cache line into the cache hierarchy, prior to performing the store). Also, different processor implementa-
tions may choose to collapse and combine these stores.
The memory type of the region being written to can override the non-temporal hint, if the memory address speci-
fied for the non-temporal store is in uncacheable memory. Uncacheable as referred to here means that the region
being written to has been mapped with either an uncacheable (UC) or write protected (WP) memory type.
In general, WC semantics require software to ensure coherence, with respect to other processors and other system
agents (such as graphics cards). Appropriate use of synchronization and fencing must be performed for producer-
consumer usage models. Fencing ensures that all system agents have global visibility of the stored data; for
instance, failure to fence may result in a written cache line staying within a processor and not being visible to other
agents.
The memory type visible on the bus in the presence of memory type aliasing is implementation specific. As one
possible example, the memory type written to the bus may reflect the memory type for the first store to this line,
as seen in program order; other alternatives are possible. This behavior should be considered reserved, and
dependence on the behavior of any particular implementation risks future incompatibility.

                                                            NOTE
         Some older CPU implementations (e.g., Pentium M) may implement non-temporal stores by
         updating in place data that already reside in the cache hierarchy. For such processors, the
         destination region should also be mapped as WC. If mapped as WB or WT, there is the potential for
         speculative processor reads to bring the data into the caches; in this case, non-temporal stores
         would then update in place, and data would not be flushed from the processor by a subsequent
         fencing operation.

10.4.6.3         PREFETCHh Instructions
The PREFETCHh instructions permit programs to load data into the processor at a suggested cache level, so that
the data is closer to the processor’s load and store unit when it is needed. These instructions fetch 32 aligned bytes
(or more, depending on the implementation) containing the addressed byte to a location in the cache hierarchy
specified by the temporal locality hint (see Table 10-1). In this table, the first-level cache is closest to the processor
and second-level cache is farther away from the processor than the first-level cache. The hints specify a prefetch
of either temporal or non-temporal data (see Section 10.4.6.2, “Caching of Temporal vs. Non-Temporal Data”).
Subsequent accesses to temporal data are treated like normal accesses, while those to non-temporal data will
continue to minimize cache pollution. If the data is already present at a level of the cache hierarchy that is closer
to the processor, the PREFETCHh instruction will not result in any data movement. The PREFETCHh instructions do
not affect functional behavior of the program.
See Section 11.6.13, “Cacheability Hint Instructions,” for additional information about the PREFETCHh instructions.

                                 Table 10-1. PREFETCHh Instructions Caching Hints
      PREFETCHh Instruction
           Mnemonic                                                         Actions
    PREFETCHT0                 Temporal data—fetch data into all levels of cache hierarchy:
                               • Pentium III processor—1st-level cache or 2nd-level cache
                               • Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor—2nd-level cache
    PREFETCHT1                 Temporal data—fetch data into level 2 cache and higher
                               • Pentium III processor—2nd-level cache
                               • Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor—2nd-level cache

                            Table 10-1. PREFETCHh Instructions Caching Hints (Contd.)
    PREFETCHh Instruction
         Mnemonic                                                          Actions
 PREFETCHT2                   Temporal data—fetch data into level 2 cache and higher
                              • Pentium III processor—2nd-level cache
                              • Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor—2nd-level cache
 PREFETCHNTA                  Non-temporal data—fetch data into location close to the processor, minimizing cache pollution
                              • Pentium III processor—1st-level cache
                              • Pentium 4 and Intel Xeon processor—2nd-level cache

10.4.6.4       SFENCE Instruction
The SFENCE (Store Fence) instruction controls write ordering by creating a fence for memory store operations. This
instruction guarantees that the result of every store instruction that precedes the store fence in program order is
globally visible before any store instruction that follows the fence. The SFENCE instruction provides an efficient way
of ensuring ordering between procedures that produce weakly-ordered data and procedures that consume that
data.

10.5           FXSAVE AND FXRSTOR INSTRUCTIONS
The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions were introduced into the IA-32 architecture in the Pentium II processor
family (prior to the introduction of the SSE extensions). The original versions of these instructions performed a fast
save and restore, respectively, of the x87 execution environment (x87 state). (By saving the state of the x87 FPU
data registers, the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions implicitly save and restore the state of the MMX registers.)
The SSE extensions expanded the scope of these instructions to save and restore the states of the XMM registers
and the MXCSR register (SSE state), along with x87 state.
The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions can be used in place of the FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR instructions;
however, the operation of the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions are not identical to the operation of
FSAVE/FNSAVE and FRSTOR.

                                                          NOTE
         The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions are not considered part of the SSE instruction group. They
         have a separate CPUID feature bit to indicate whether they are present (if
         CPUID.01H:EDX.FXSR[bit 24] = 1).

         The CPUID feature bit for SSE extensions does not indicate the presence of FXSAVE and FXRSTOR.
The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions organize x87 state and SSE state in a region of memory called the FXSAVE
area. Section 10.5.1 provides details of the FXSAVE area and its format. Section 10.5.2 describes operation of
FXSAVE, and Section 10.5.3 describes the operation of FXRSTOR.

10.5.1         FXSAVE Area
The FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions organize x87 state and SSE state in a region of memory called the FXSAVE
area. Each of the instructions takes a memory operand that specifies the 16-byte aligned base address of the
FXSAVE area on which it operates.

Every FXSAVE area comprises the 512 bytes starting at the area’s base address. Table 10-2 illustrates the format
of the first 416 bytes of the legacy region of an FXSAVE area.

                                            Table 10-2. Format of an FXSAVE Area
    15   14        13   12       11    10           9    8           7   6     5       4       3     2         1      0
                  CS or FPU
    Reserved                          FPU IP bits 31:0               FOP      Rsvd.   FTW      FSW             FCW            0
                 IP bits 63:32
                                                                                  DS or
         MXCSR_MASK                         MXCSR                 Reserved      FPU DP             FPU DP bits 31:0           16
                                                                               bits 63:32
                  Reserved                                                     ST0/MM0                                        32
                  Reserved                                                     ST1/MM1                                        48
                  Reserved                                                     ST2/MM2                                        64
                  Reserved                                                     ST3/MM3                                        80
                  Reserved                                                     ST4/MM4                                        96
                  Reserved                                                     ST5/MM5                                       112
                  Reserved                                                     ST6/MM6                                       128
                  Reserved                                                     ST7/MM7                                       144
                                                             XMM0                                                            160
                                                             XMM1                                                            176
                                                             XMM2                                                            192
                                                             XMM3                                                            208
                                                             XMM4                                                            224
                                                             XMM5                                                            240
                                                             XMM6                                                            256
                                                             XMM7                                                            272
                                                             XMM8                                                            288
                                                             XMM9                                                            304
                                                             XMM10                                                           320
                                                             XMM11                                                           336
                                                             XMM12                                                           352
                                                             XMM13                                                           368
                                                             XMM14                                                           384
                                                             XMM15                                                           400

The x87 state component comprises bytes 23:0 and bytes 159:32. The SSE state component comprises
bytes 31:24 and bytes 415:160. FXSAVE and FXRSTOR do not use bytes 511:416; bytes 463:416 are reserved.
Section 10.5.2 and Section 10.5.3 provide details of how FXSAVE and FXRSTOR use an FXSAVE area.

10.5.1.1       x87 State
Table 10-2 illustrates how FXSAVE and FXRSTOR organize x87 state and SSE state; the x87 state is listed below,
along with details of its interactions with FXSAVE and FXRSTOR:
•   Bytes 1:0, 3:2, and 7:6 are used for x87 FPU Control Word (FCW), x87 FPU Status Word (FSW), and x87 FPU
    Opcode (FOP), respectively.

•   Byte 4 is used for an abridged version of the x87 FPU Tag Word (FTW). The following items describe its usage:
    — For each j, 0 ≤ j ≤ 7, FXSAVE saves a 0 into bit j of byte 4 if x87 FPU data register STj has a empty tag;
      otherwise, FXSAVE saves a 1 into bit j of byte 4.
    — For each j, 0 ≤ j ≤ 7, FXRSTOR establishes the tag value for x87 FPU data register STj as follows. If bit j of
      byte 4 is 0, the tag for STj in the tag register for that data register is marked empty (11B); otherwise, the
      x87 FPU sets the tag for STj based on the value being loaded into that register (see below).
•   Bytes 15:8 are used as follows:
    — If the instruction has no REX prefix, or if REX.W = 0:
        •      Bytes 11:8 are used for bits 31:0 of the x87 FPU Instruction Pointer Offset (FIP).
        •      If CPUID.(EAX=07H,ECX=0H):EBX[bit 13] = 0, bytes 13:12 are used for x87 FPU Instruction Pointer
               Selector (FPU CS). Otherwise, the processor deprecates the FPU CS value: FXSAVE saves it as 0000H.
        •      Bytes 15:14 are not used.
    — If the instruction has a REX prefix with REX.W = 1, bytes 15:8 are used for the full 64 bits of FIP.
•   Bytes 23:16 are used as follows:
    — If the instruction has no REX prefix, or if REX.W = 0:
        •      Bytes 19:16 are used for bits 31:0 of the x87 FPU Data Pointer Offset (FDP).
        •      If CPUID.(EAX=07H,ECX=0H):EBX[bit 13] = 0, bytes 21:20 are used for x87 FPU Data Pointer Selector
               (FPU DS). Otherwise, the processor deprecates the FPU DS value: FXSAVE saves it as 0000H.
        •      Bytes 23:22 are not used.
    — If the instruction has a REX prefix with REX.W = 1, bytes 23:16 are used for the full 64 bits of FDP.
•   Bytes 31:24 are used for SSE state (see Section 10.5.1.2).
•   Bytes 159:32 are used for the registers ST0–ST7 (MM0–MM7). Each of the 8 registers is allocated a 128-bit
    region, with the low 80 bits used for the register and the upper 48 bits unused.

10.5.1.2        SSE State
Table 10-2 illustrates how FXSAVE and FXRSTOR organize x87 state and SSE state; the SSE state is listed below,
along with details of its interactions with FXSAVE and FXRSTOR:
•   Bytes 23:0 are used for x87 state (see Section 10.5.1.1).
•   Bytes 27:24 are used for the MXCSR register. FXRSTOR generates a general-protection fault (#GP) in response
    to an attempt to set any of the reserved bits in the MXCSR register.
•   Bytes 31:28 are used for the MXCSR_MASK value. FXRSTOR ignores this field.
•   Bytes 159:32 are used for x87 state.
•   Bytes 287:160 are used for the registers XMM0–XMM7.
•   Bytes 415:288 are used for the registers XMM8–XMM15. These fields are used only in 64-bit mode. Executions
    of FXSAVE outside 64-bit mode do not write to these bytes; executions of FXRSTOR outside 64-bit mode do not
    read these bytes and do not update XMM8–XMM15.
If CR4.OSFXSR = 0, FXSAVE and FXRSTOR may or may not operate on SSE state; this behavior is implementation
dependent. Moreover, SSE instructions cannot be used unless CR4.OSFXSR = 1.

10.5.2         Operation of FXSAVE
The FXSAVE instruction takes a single memory operand, which is an FXSAVE area. The instruction stores x87 state
and SSE state to the FXSAVE area. See Section 10.5.1.1 and Section 10.5.1.2 for details regarding mode-specific
operation and operation determined by instruction prefixes.

10.5.3     Operation of FXRSTOR
The FXRSTOR instruction takes a single memory operand, which is an FXSAVE area. If the value at bytes 27:24 of
the FXSAVE area is not a legal value for the MXCSR register (e.g., the value sets reserved bits). Otherwise, the
instruction loads x87 state and SSE state rom the FXSAVE area. See Section 10.5.1.1 and Section 10.5.1.2 for
details regarding mode-specific operation and operation determined by instruction prefixes.

10.6       HANDLING SSE INSTRUCTION EXCEPTIONS
See Section 11.5, “SSE, SSE2, and SSE3 Exceptions,” for a detailed discussion of the general and SIMD floating-
point exceptions that can be generated with the SSE instructions and for guidelines for handling these exceptions
when they occur.

10.7       WRITING APPLICATIONS WITH THE SSE EXTENSIONS
See Section 11.6, “Writing Applications with SSE/SSE2 Extensions,” for additional information about writing appli-
cations and operating-system code using the SSE extensions.

