                                                    CHAPTER 16
         PROGRAMMING WITH INTEL® TRANSACTIONAL SYNCHRONIZATION
                                                    EXTENSIONS

16.1        OVERVIEW
This chapter describes the software programming interface to the Intel® Transactional Synchronization Extensions
of the Intel 64 architecture.
Multithreaded applications take advantage of increasing number of cores to achieve high performance. However,
writing multi-threaded applications requires programmers to reason about data sharing among multiple threads.
Access to shared data typically requires synchronization mechanisms. These mechanisms ensure multiple threads
update shared data by serializing operations on the shared data, often through the use of a critical section
protected by a lock. Since serialization limits concurrency, programmers try to limit synchronization overheads.
They do this either through minimizing the use of synchronization or through the use of fine-grain locks; where
multiple locks each protect different shared data. Unfortunately, this process is difficult and error prone; a missed
or incorrect synchronization can cause an application to fail. Conservatively adding synchronization and using
coarser granularity locks, where a few locks each protect many items of shared data, helps avoid correctness prob-
lems but limits performance due to excessive serialization. While programmers must use static information to
determine when to serialize, the determination as to whether actually to serialize is best done dynamically.
Intel® Transactional Synchronization Extensions aim to improve the performance of lock-protected critical sections
while maintaining the lock-based programming model.

16.2        INTEL® TRANSACTIONAL SYNCHRONIZATION EXTENSIONS
Intel® Transactional Synchronization Extensions (Intel® TSX) allow the processor to determine dynamically
whether threads need to serialize through lock-protected critical sections, and to perform serialization only when
required. This lets the hardware expose and exploit concurrency hidden in an application due to dynamically
unnecessary synchronization through a technique known as lock elision.
With lock elision, the hardware executes the programmer-specified critical sections (also referred to as transac-
tional regions) transactionally. In such an execution, the lock variable is only read within the transactional region;
it is not written to (and therefore not acquired) with the expectation that the lock variable remains unchanged after
the transactional region, thus exposing concurrency.
If the transactional execution completes successfully, then the hardware ensures that all memory operations
performed within the transactional region will appear to have occurred instantaneously when viewed from other
logical processors, a process referred to as an atomic commit. Any updates performed within the transactional
region are made visible to other processors only on an atomic commit.
Since a successful transactional execution ensures an atomic commit, the processor can execute the programmer-
specified code section optimistically without synchronization. If synchronization was unnecessary for that specific
execution, execution can commit without any cross-thread serialization.
If the transactional execution is unsuccessful, the processor cannot commit the updates atomically. When this
happens, the processor will roll back the execution, a process referred to as a transactional abort. On a transac-
tional abort, the processor will discard all updates performed in the region, restore architectural state to appear as
if the optimistic execution never occurred, and resume execution non-transactionally. Depending on the policy in
place, lock elision may be retried or the lock may be explicitly acquired to ensure forward progress.
Intel TSX provides two software interfaces for programmers.
•   Hardware Lock Elision (HLE) is a legacy compatible instruction set extension (comprising the XACQUIRE and
    XRELEASE prefixes).
•   Restricted Transactional Memory (RTM) is a new instruction set interface (comprising the XBEGIN and XEND
    instructions).

Programmers who would like to run Intel TSX-enabled software on legacy hardware would use the HLE interface to
implement lock elision. On the other hand, programmers who do not have legacy hardware requirements and who
deal with more complex locking primitives would use the RTM software interface of Intel TSX to implement lock
elision. In the latter case when using new instructions, the programmer must always provide a non-transactional
path (which would have code to eventually acquire the lock being elided) to execute following a transactional abort
and must not rely on the transactional execution alone.
In addition, Intel TSX also provides the XTEST instruction to test whether a logical processor is executing transac-
tionally, and the XABORT instruction to abort a transactional region.
A processor can perform a transactional abort for numerous reasons. A primary cause is due to conflicting accesses
between the transactionally executing logical processor and another logical processor. Such conflicting accesses
may prevent a successful transactional execution. Memory addresses read from within a transactional region
constitute the read-set of the transactional region and addresses written to within the transactional region consti-
tute the write-set of the transactional region. Intel TSX maintains the read- and write-sets at the granularity of a
cache line.
A conflicting data access occurs if another logical processor either reads a location that is part of the transactional
region’s write-set or writes a location that is a part of either the read- or write-set of the transactional region. We
refer to this as a data conflict. Since Intel TSX detects data conflicts at the granularity of a cache line, unrelated
data locations placed in the same cache line will be detected as conflicts. Transactional aborts may also occur due
to limited transactional resources. For example, the amount of data accessed in the region may exceed an imple-
mentation-specific capacity. Additionally, some instructions and system events may cause transactional aborts.

16.2.1        HLE Software Interface
HLE provides two new instruction prefix hints: XACQUIRE and XRELEASE.
The programmer uses the XACQUIRE prefix in front of the instruction that is used to acquire the lock that is
protecting the critical section. The processor treats the indication as a hint to elide the write associated with the
lock acquire operation. Even though the lock acquire has an associated write operation to the lock, the processor
does not add the address of the lock to the transactional region’s write-set nor does it issue any write requests to
the lock. Instead, the address of the lock is added to the read-set. The logical processor enters transactional execu-
tion. If the lock was available before the XACQUIRE prefixed instruction, all other processors will continue to see it
as available afterwards. Since the transactionally executing logical processor neither added the address of the lock
to its write-set nor performed externally visible write operations to it, other logical processors can read the lock
without causing a data conflict. This allows other logical processors to also enter and concurrently execute the crit-
ical section protected by the lock. The processor automatically detects any data conflicts that occur during the
transactional execution and will perform a transactional abort if necessary.
Even though the eliding processor did not perform any external write operations to the lock, the hardware ensures
program order of operations on the lock. If the eliding processor itself reads the value of the lock in the critical
section, it will appear as if the processor had acquired the lock, i.e. the read will return the non-elided value. This
behavior makes an HLE execution functionally equivalent to an execution without the HLE prefixes.
The programmer uses the XRELEASE prefix in front of the instruction that is used to release the lock protecting the
critical section. This involves a write to the lock. If the instruction is restoring the value of the lock to the value it
had prior to the XACQUIRE prefixed lock acquire operation on the same lock, then the processor elides the external
write request associated with the release of the lock and does not add the address of the lock to the write-set. The
processor then attempts to commit the transactional execution.
With HLE, if multiple threads execute critical sections protected by the same lock but they do not perform any
conflicting operations on each other’s data, then the threads can execute concurrently and without serialization.
Even though the software uses lock acquisition operations on a common lock, the hardware recognizes this, elides
the lock, and executes the critical sections on the two threads without requiring any communication through the
lock — if such communication was dynamically unnecessary.
If the processor is unable to execute the region transactionally, it will execute the region non-transactionally and
without elision. HLE enabled software has the same forward progress guarantees as the underlying non-HLE lock-
based execution. For successful HLE execution, the lock and the critical section code must follow certain guidelines
(discussed in Section 16.3.3 and Section 16.3.8). These guidelines only affect performance; not following these
guidelines will not cause a functional failure.

Hardware without HLE support will ignore the XACQUIRE and XRELEASE prefix hints and will not perform any
elision since these prefixes correspond to the REPNE/REPE IA-32 prefixes which are ignored on the instructions
where XACQUIRE and XRELEASE are valid. Importantly, HLE is compatible with the existing lock-based program-
ming model. Improper use of hints will not cause functional bugs though it may expose latent bugs already in the
code.

16.2.2      RTM Software Interface
RTM provides three new instructions: XBEGIN, XEND, and XABORT.
Software uses the XBEGIN instruction to specify the start of the transactional region and the XEND instruction to
specify the end of the transactional region. The XBEGIN instruction takes an operand that provides a relative offset
to the fallback instruction address if the transactional region could not be successfully executed transactionally.
Software using these instructions to implement lock elision must test the lock within the transactional region, and
only if free should try to commit. Further, the software may also define a policy to retry if the lock is not free.
A processor may abort transactional execution for many reasons. The hardware automatically detects transactional
abort conditions and restarts execution from the fallback instruction address with the architectural state corre-
sponding to that at the start of the XBEGIN instruction and the EAX register updated to describe the abort status.
The XABORT instruction allows programmers to abort the execution of a transactional region explicitly. The
XABORT instruction takes an 8 bit immediate argument that is loaded into the EAX register and will thus be avail-
able to software following a transactional abort.
Hardware provides no guarantees as to whether a transactional execution will ever successfully commit. Program-
mers must always provide an alternative code sequence in the fallback path to guarantee forward progress. When
using the instructions for lock elision, this may be as simple as acquiring a lock and executing the specified code
region non-transactionally. Further, a transactional region that always aborts on a given implementation may
complete transactionally on a future implementation. Therefore, programmers must ensure the code paths for the
transactional region and the alternative code sequence are functionally tested.
If the RTM software interface is used for anything other than lock elision, the programmer must similarly ensure
that the fallback path is inter-operable with the transactionally executing path.

16.3        INTEL® TSX APPLICATION PROGRAMMING MODEL

16.3.1      Detection of Transactional Synchronization Support

16.3.1.1    Detection of HLE Support
A processor supports HLE execution if CPUID.07H.EBX.HLE [bit 4] = 1. However, an application can use the HLE
prefixes (XACQUIRE and XRELEASE) without checking whether the processor supports HLE. Processors without
HLE support ignore these prefixes and will execute the code without entering transactional execution.

16.3.1.2    Detection of RTM Support
A processor supports RTM execution if CPUID.07H.EBX.RTM [bit 11] = 1. An application must check if the processor
supports RTM before it uses the RTM instructions (XBEGIN, XEND, XABORT). These instructions will generate a
#UD exception when used on a processor that does not support RTM.

16.3.1.3    Detection of XTEST Instruction
A processor supports the XTEST instruction if it supports either HLE or RTM. An application must check either of
these feature flags before using the XTEST instruction. This instruction will generate a #UD exception when used
on a processor that does not support either HLE or RTM.

16.3.2        Querying Transactional Execution Status
The XTEST instruction can be used to determine the transactional status of a transactional region specified by HLE
or RTM. Note, while the HLE prefixes are ignored on processors that do not support HLE, the XTEST instruction will
generate a #UD exception when used on processors that do not support either HLE or RTM.

16.3.3        Requirements for HLE Locks
For HLE execution to successfully commit transactionally, the lock must satisfy certain properties and access to the
lock must follow certain guidelines.
•   An XRELEASE prefixed instruction must restore the value of the elided lock to the value it had before the lock
    acquisition. This allows hardware to safely elide locks by not adding them to the write-set. The data size and
    data address of the lock release (XRELEASE prefixed) instruction must match that of the lock acquire
    (XACQUIRE prefixed) and the lock must not cross a cache line boundary.
•   Software should not write to the elided lock inside a transactional HLE region with any instruction other than an
    XRELEASE prefixed instruction, otherwise it may cause a transactional abort. In addition, recursive locks
    (where a thread acquires the same lock multiple times without first releasing the lock) may also cause a trans-
    actional abort. Note that software can observe the result of the elided lock acquire inside the critical section.
    Such a read operation will return the value of the write to the lock.
The processor automatically detects violations to these guidelines, and safely transitions to a non-transactional
execution without elision. Since Intel TSX detects conflicts at the granularity of a cache line, writes to data collo-
cated on the same cache line as the elided lock may be detected as data conflicts by other logical processors eliding
the same lock.

16.3.4        Transactional Nesting
Both HLE- and RTM-based transactional executions support nested transactional regions. However, a transactional
abort restores state to the operation that started transactional execution: either the outermost XACQUIRE prefixed
HLE eligible instruction or the outermost XBEGIN instruction. The processor treats all nested transactional regions
as one monolithic transactional region.

16.3.4.1      HLE Nesting and Elision
Programmers can nest HLE regions up to an implementation specific depth of MAX_HLE_NEST_COUNT. Each logical
processor tracks the nesting count internally but this count is not available to software. An XACQUIRE prefixed HLE-
eligible instruction increments the nesting count, and an XRELEASE prefixed HLE-eligible instruction decrements it.
The logical processor enters transactional execution when the nesting count goes from zero to one. The logical
processor attempts to commit only when the nesting count becomes zero. A transactional abort may occur if the
nesting count exceeds MAX_HLE_NEST_COUNT.
In addition to supporting nested HLE regions, the processor can also elide multiple nested locks. The processor
tracks a lock for elision beginning with the XACQUIRE prefixed HLE eligible instruction for that lock and ending with
the XRELEASE prefixed HLE eligible instruction for that same lock. The processor can, at any one time, track up to
a MAX_HLE_ELIDED_LOCKS number of locks. For example, if the implementation supports a
MAX_HLE_ELIDED_LOCKS value of two and if the programmer nests three HLE identified critical sections (by
performing XACQUIRE prefixed HLE eligible instructions on three distinct locks without performing an intervening
XRELEASE prefixed HLE eligible instruction on any one of the locks), then the first two locks will be elided, but the
third won't be elided (but will be added to the transaction’s write-set). However, the execution will still continue
transactionally. Once an XRELEASE for one of the two elided locks is encountered, a subsequent lock acquired
through the XACQUIRE prefixed HLE eligible instruction will be elided.
The processor attempts to commit the HLE execution when all elided XACQUIRE and XRELEASE pairs have been
matched, the nesting count goes to zero, and the locks have satisfied the requirements described earlier. If execu-
tion cannot commit atomically, then execution transitions to a non-transactional execution without elision as if the
first instruction did not have an XACQUIRE prefix.

16.3.4.2      RTM Nesting
Programmers can nest RTM-based transactional regions up to an implementation specific
MAX_RTM_NEST_COUNT. The logical processor tracks the nesting count internally but this count is not available to
software. An XBEGIN instruction increments the nesting count, and an XEND instruction decrements it. The logical
processor attempts to commit only if the nesting count becomes zero. A transactional abort occurs if the nesting
count exceeds MAX_RTM_NEST_COUNT.

16.3.4.3      Nesting HLE and RTM
HLE and RTM provide two alternative software interfaces to a common transactional execution capability. The
behavior when HLE and RTM are nested together—HLE inside RTM or RTM inside HLE—is implementation specific.
However, in all cases, the implementation will maintain HLE and RTM semantics. An implementation may choose to
ignore HLE hints when used inside RTM regions, and may cause a transactional abort when RTM instructions are
used inside HLE regions. In the latter case, the transition from transactional to non-transactional execution occurs
seamlessly since the processor will re-execute the HLE region without actually doing elision, and then execute the
RTM instructions.

16.3.5        RTM Abort Status Definition
RTM uses the EAX register to communicate abort status to software. Following an RTM abort the EAX register has
the following definition.

                                           Table 16-1. RTM Abort Status Definition
 EAX Register Bit                                                          Meaning
    Position
         0          Set if abort caused by XABORT instruction.
         1          If set, the transactional execution may succeed on a retry. This bit is always clear if bit 0 is set.
         2          Set if another logical processor conflicted with a memory address that was part of the transactional execution
                    that aborted.
         3          Set if an internal buffer to track transactional state overflowed.
         4          Set if a debug exception (#DB) or breakpoint exception (#BP) was hit.
         5          Set if an abort occurred during execution of a nested transactional execution.
       23:6         Reserved.
      31:24         XABORT argument (only valid if bit 0 set, otherwise reserved).

The EAX abort status for RTM only provides causes for aborts. It does not by itself encode whether an abort or
commit occurred for the RTM region. The value of EAX can be 0 following an RTM abort. For example, a CPUID
instruction when used inside an RTM region causes a transactional abort and may not satisfy the requirements for
setting any of the EAX bits. This may result in an EAX value of 0.

16.3.6        RTM Memory Ordering
A successful RTM commit causes all memory operations in the RTM region to appear to execute atomically. A
successfully committed RTM region consisting of an XBEGIN followed by an XEND, even with no memory operations
in the RTM region, has the same ordering semantics as a LOCK prefixed instruction.
The XBEGIN instruction does not have fencing semantics. However, if an RTM execution aborts, all memory
updates from within the RTM region are discarded and never made visible to any other logical processor.

16.3.7        RTM-Enabled Debugger Support
Any debug exception (#DB) or breakpoint exception (#BP) inside an RTM region causes a transactional abort and,
by default, redirects control flow to the fallback instruction address with architectural state recovered and bit 4 in
EAX set. However, to allow software debuggers to intercept execution on debug or breakpoint exceptions, the RTM
architecture provides additional capability called advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions.
Advanced debugging of RTM transactional regions is enabled if bit 11 of DR7 and bit 15 of the IA32_DEBUGCTL MSR
are both 1. In this case, any RTM transactional abort due to a #DB or #BP causes execution to roll back to just
before the XBEGIN instruction (EAX is restored to the value it had before XBEGIN) and then delivers a #DB. (A #DB
is delivered even if the transactional abort was caused by a #BP.) DR6[16] is cleared to indicate that the exception
resulted from a debug or breakpoint exception inside an RTM region. See also Section 17.3.3, “Debug Exceptions,
Breakpoint Exceptions, and Restricted Transactional Memory (RTM),” of Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Soft-
ware Developer’s Manual, Volume 3B.

16.3.8        Programming Considerations
Typical programmer-identified regions are expected to execute transactionally and to commit successfully.
However, Intel TSX does not provide any such guarantee. A transactional execution may abort for many reasons.
To take full advantage of the transactional capabilities, programmers should follow certain guidelines to increase
the probability of their transactional execution committing successfully.
This section discusses various events that may cause transactional aborts. The architecture ensures that updates
performed within a transactional region that subsequently aborts execution will never become visible. Only a
committed transactional execution updates architectural state. Transactional aborts never cause functional failures
and only affect performance.

16.3.8.1      Instruction Based Considerations
Programmers can use any instruction safely inside a transactional region. Further, programmers can use the Intel
TSX instructions and prefixes at any privilege level. However, some instructions will always abort the transactional
execution and cause execution to seamlessly and safely transition to a non-transactional path.
Intel TSX allows for most common instructions to be used inside transactional regions without causing aborts. The
following operations inside a transactional region do not typically cause an abort.
•   Operations on the instruction pointer register, general purpose registers (GPRs) and the status flags (CF, OF, SF,
    PF, AF, and ZF).
•   Operations on XMM and YMM registers and the MXCSR register
However, programmers must be careful when intermixing SSE and AVX operations inside a transactional region.
Intermixing SSE instructions accessing XMM registers and AVX instructions accessing YMM registers may cause
transactional regions to abort.
CLD and STD instructions when used inside transactional regions may cause aborts if they change the value of the
DF flag. However, if DF is 1, the STD instruction will not cause an abort. Similarly, if DF is 0, the CLD instruction will
not cause an abort.
Instructions not enumerated here as causing abort when used inside a transactional region will typically not cause
the execution to abort (examples include but are not limited to MFENCE, LFENCE, SFENCE, RDTSC, RDTSCP, etc.).
The following instructions will abort transactional execution on any implementation:
•   XABORT
•   CPUID
•   PAUSE
•   ENCLS
•   ENCLU
In addition, in some implementations, the following instructions may always cause transactional aborts. These
instructions are not expected to be commonly used inside typical transactional regions. However, programmers
must not rely on these instructions to force a transactional abort, since whether they cause transactional aborts is
implementation dependent.

•   Operations on X87 and MMX architecture state. This includes all MMX and X87 instructions, including the
    FXRSTOR and FXSAVE instructions.
•   Update to non-status portion of EFLAGS: CLI, STI, POPFD, POPFQ.
•   Instructions that update segment registers, debug registers and/or control registers: MOV to
    DS/ES/FS/GS/SS, POP DS/ES/FS/GS/SS, LDS, LES, LFS, LGS, LSS, SWAPGS, WRFSBASE, WRGSBASE, LGDT,
    SGDT, LIDT, SIDT, LLDT, SLDT, LTR, STR, Far CALL, Far JMP, Far RET, IRET, MOV to DRx, MOV to
    CR0/CR2/CR3/CR4/CR8, CLTS and LMSW.
•   Ring transitions: SYSENTER, SYSCALL, SYSEXIT, and SYSRET.
•   TLB and Cacheability control: CLFLUSH, CLFLUSHOPT, INVD, WBINVD, INVLPG, INVPCID, and memory instruc-
    tions with a non-temporal hint (V/MOVNTDQA, V/MOVNTDQ, V/MOVNTI, V/MOVNTPD, V/MOVNTPS,
    V/MOVNTQ, V/MASKMOVQ, and V/MASKMOVDQU).
•   Processor state save: XSAVE, XSAVEOPT, and XRSTOR.
•   Interrupts: INTn, INTO.
•   IO: IN, INS, REP INS, OUT, OUTS, REP OUTS and their variants.
•   VMX: VMPTRLD, VMPTRST, VMCLEAR, VMREAD, VMWRITE, VMCALL, VMLAUNCH, VMRESUME, VMXOFF,
    VMXON, INVEPT, INVVPID, and VMFUNC.
•   SMX: GETSEC.
•   UD2, RSM, RDMSR, WRMSR, HLT, MONITOR, MWAIT, XSETBV, VZEROUPPER, MASKMOVQ, and
    V/MASKMOVDQU.

16.3.8.2    Runtime Considerations
In addition to the instruction-based considerations, runtime events may cause transactional execution to abort.
These may be due to data access patterns or micro-architectural implementation causes. Keep in mind that the
following list is not a comprehensive discussion of all abort causes.
Any fault or trap in a transactional region that must be exposed to software will be suppressed. Transactional
execution will abort and execution will transition to a non-transactional execution, as if the fault or trap had never
occurred. If any exception is not masked, that will result in a transactional abort and it will be as if the exception
had never occurred.
When executed in VMX non-root operation, certain instructions may result in a VM exit. When such instructions are
executed inside a transactional region, then instead of causing a VM exit, they will cause a transactional abort and
the execution will appear as if instruction that would have caused a VM exit never executed.
Synchronous exception events (#DE, #OF, #NP, #SS, #GP, #BR, #UD, #AC, #XM, #PF, #NM, #TS, #MF, #DB,
#BP/INT3) that occur during transactional execution may cause an execution not to commit transactionally, and
require a non-transactional execution. These events are suppressed as if they had never occurred. With HLE, since
the non-transactional code path is identical to the transactional code path, these events will typically re-appear
when the instruction that caused the exception is re-executed non-transactionally, causing the associated synchro-
nous events to be delivered appropriately in the non-transactional execution. The same behavior also applies to
synchronous events (EPT violations, EPT misconfigurations, and accesses to the APIC-access page) that occur in
VMX non-root operation.
Asynchronous events (NMI, SMI, INTR, IPI, PMI, etc.) occurring during transactional execution may cause the
transactional execution to abort and transition to a non-transactional execution. The asynchronous events will be
pended and handled after the transactional abort is processed. The same behavior also applies to asynchronous
events (VMX-preemption timer expiry, virtual-interrupt delivery, and interrupt-window exiting) that occur in VMX
non-root operation.
Transactional execution only supports write-back cacheable memory type operations. A transactional region may
always abort if it includes operations on any other memory type. This includes instruction fetches to UC memory
type.
Memory accesses within a transactional region may require the processor to set the Accessed and Dirty flags of the
referenced page table entry. The behavior of how the processor handles this is implementation specific. Some
implementations may allow the updates to these flags to become externally visible even if the transactional region
subsequently aborts. Some Intel TSX implementations may choose to abort the transactional execution if these
flags need to be updated. Further, a processor's page-table walk may generate accesses to its own transactionally

written but uncommitted state. Some Intel TSX implementations may choose to abort the execution of a transac-
tional region in such situations. Regardless, the architecture ensures that, if the transactional region aborts, then
the transactionally written state will not be made architecturally visible through the behavior of structures such as
TLBs.
Executing self-modifying code transactionally may also cause transactional aborts. Programmers must continue to
follow the Intel recommended guidelines for writing self-modifying and cross-modifying code even when employing
Intel TSX.
While an Intel TSX implementation will typically provide sufficient resources for executing common transactional
regions, implementation constraints and excessive sizes for transactional regions may cause a transactional execu-
tion to abort and transition to a non-transactional execution. The architecture provides no guarantee of the amount
of resources available to do transactional execution and does not guarantee that a transactional execution will ever
succeed.
Conflicting requests to a cache line accessed within a transactional region may prevent the transactional region
from executing successfully. For example, if logical processor P0 reads line A in a transactional region and another
logical processor P1 writes A (either inside or outside a transactional region) then logical processor P0 may abort if
logical processor P1’s write interferes with processor P0's ability to execute transactionally. Similarly, if P0 writes
line A in a transactional region and P1reads or writes A (either inside or outside a transactional region), then P0
may abort if P1's access to A interferes with P0's ability to execute transactionally. In addition, other coherence
traffic may at times appear as conflicting requests and may cause aborts. While these false conflicts may happen,
they are expected to be uncommon. The conflict resolution policy to determine whether P0 or P1 aborts in the
above scenarios is implementation specific.

