                                                                        CHAPTER 17

17.1        INTEL® MEMORY PROTECTION EXTENSIONS (INTEL® MPX)
Intel Memory Protection Extensions (Intel® MPX) is a new capability introduced into Intel Architecture. Intel
    ®

MPX can increase the robustness of software when it is used in conjunction with compiler changes to check mem-
ory references, for those references whose compile-time normal intentions are usurped at runtime due to buffer
overflow or underflow. Two of the most important goals of Intel MPX are to provide this capability at low perfor-
mance overhead for newly compiled code, and to provide compatibility mechanisms with legacy software com-
ponents. A direct benefit Intel MPX provides is hardening software against malicious attacks designed to cause
or exploit buffer overruns. This chapter describes the software visible interfaces of this extension.

17.2        INTRODUCTION
Intel MPX is designed to allow a system (i.e., the logical processor(s) and the OS software) to run both Intel MPX
enabled software and legacy software (written for processors without Intel MPX). When executing software
containing a mixture of Intel MPX-unaware code (legacy code) and Intel MPX-enabled code, the legacy code does
not benefit from Intel MPX, but it also does not experience any change in functionality or reduction in performance.
The performance of Intel MPX-enabled code running on processors that do not support Intel MPX may be similar to
the use of embedding NOPs in the instruction stream.
Intel MPX is designed such that an Intel MPX enabled application can link with, call into, or be called from legacy
software (libraries, etc.) while maintaining existing application binary interfaces (ABIs). And in most cases, the
benefit of Intel MPX requires minimal changes to the source code at the application programming interfaces (APIs)
to legacy library/applications. As described later, Intel MPX associates bounds with pointers in a novel manner,
and the Intel MPX hardware uses bounds to check that the pointer based accesses are suitably constrained. Intel
MPX enabled software is not required to uniformly or universally utilize the new hardware capabilities over all
memory references. Specifically, programmers can selectively use Intel MPX to protect a subset of pointers.
The code enabled for Intel MPX benefits from memory protection against vulnerability such as buffer overrun.
Therefore there is a heightened incentive for software vendors to adopt this technology. At the same time, the
security benefit of Intel MPX-protection can be implemented according to the business priorities of software
vendors. A software vendor can choose to adopt Intel MPX in some modules to realize partial benefit from Intel MPX
quickly, and introduce Intel MPX in other modules in phases (e.g. some programmer intervention might be required
at the interface to legacy calls). This adaptive property of Intel MPX is designed to give software vendors control on
their schedule and modularity of adoption. It also allows a software vendor to secure defense for higher priority or
more attack-prone software first; and allows the use of Intel MPX features in one phase of software engineering
(e.g., testing) and not in another (e.g., general release) as dictated by business realities.
The initial goal of Intel MPX is twofold: (1) provide means to defend a system against attacks that originate
external to some trust perimeter where the trust perimeter subsumes the system memory and integral data repos-
itories, and (2) provide means to pinpoint accidental logic defects in pointer usage, by undergirding memory refer-
ences with hardware based pointer validation.
As with any instruction set extensions, Intel MPX can be used by application developers beyond detecting buffer
overflow, the processor does not limit the use of Intel MPX for buffer overflow detection.

17.3        INTEL MPX PROGRAMMING ENVIRONMENT
Intel MPX introduces new bounds registers and new instructions that operate on bounds registers. Intel MPX
allows an OS to support user mode software (operating at CPL=3) and supervisor mode software (CPL < 3) to add
memory protection capability against buffer overrun. It provides controls to enable Intel MPX extensions for user
mode and supervisor mode independently. Intel MPX extensions are designed to allow software to associate
bounds with pointers, and allow software to check memory references against the bounds associated with the

pointer to prevent out of bound memory access (thus preventing buffer overflow).The bounds registers hold lower
bound and upper bound that can be checked when referencing memory. An out-of-bounds memory reference then
causes a #BR exception. Intel MPX also introduces configuration facilities that the OS must manage to support
enabling of user-mode (and/or supervisor-mode) software operations using bounds registers.

17.3.1        Detection and Enumeration of Intel MPX Interfaces
Detection of hardware support for processor extended state component is provided by the main CPUID leaf func-
tion 0DH with index ECX = 0. Specifically, the return value in EDX:EAX of CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=0) provides a
64-bit wide bit vector of hardware support of processor state components.
If CPUID.(EAX=07H,ECX=0H):EBX.MPX[bit 14] = 1 (the processor supports Intel MPX),
CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[bits 4:3] will enumerate the XSAVE state components associated with Intel MPX.
These two component states of Intel MPX are the following:
•   BNDREGS: CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[3] indicates XCR0.BNDREGS[bit 3] is supported. This bit indicates
    bound register component of Intel MPX state, comprised of four bounds registers, BND0-BND3 (see Section
    17.3.2).
•   BNDCSR: CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[4] indicates XCR0.BNDCSR[bit 4] is supported. This bit indicates
    bounds configuration and status component of Intel MPX comprised of BNDCFGU and BNDSTATUS. OS must
    enable both BNDCSR and BNDREGS bits in XCR0 to ensure full Intel MPX support to applications.
•   The size of the processor state component, enabled by XCR0.BNDREGS, is enumerated by
    CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=03H).EAX[31:0] and the byte offset of this component relative to the beginning of the
    XSAVE/XRSTOR area is reported by CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=03H).EBX[31:0].
•   The size of the processor state component, enabled by XCR0.BNDCSR, is enumerated by
    CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=04H).EAX[31:0] and the byte offset of this component relative to the beginning of the
    XSAVE/XRSTOR area is reported by CPUID.(EAX=0DH, ECX=04H).EBX[31:0].
On processors that support Intel MPX, CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[3] and CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[4]
will both be 1. On processors that do not support Intel MPX, CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[3] and
CPUID.(EAX=0DH,ECX=0):EAX[4] will both be 0.
The layout of XCR0 for extended processor state components defined in Intel Architecture is shown in Figure 2-8 of
Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.
Enabling Intel MPX requires an OS to manage bits [4:3] of XCR0; see Section 13.5.
The BNDLDX and BNDSTX instructions (Section 17.4.3) each take an operand whose bits are used to traverse data
structures in memory. In 64-bit mode, these instructions operate only on the lower bits in the supplied 64-bit
addresses. The number of bits used is 48 plus a value called the MPX address-width adjust (MAWA). The MAWA
value depends on CPL:
•   If CPL < 3, the supervisor MAWA (MAWAS) is used. This value is 0.
•   If CPL = 3, the user MAWA (MAWAU) is used. The value of MAWAU is enumerated in
    CPUID.(EAX=07H,ECX=0H):ECX.MAWAU[bits 21:17].
(Outside of 64-bit mode, BNDLDX and BNDSTX use the entire 32 bits of the supplied linear-address operands.)

17.3.2        Bounds Registers
Intel MPX Architecture defines four new registers, BND0-BND3, which Intel MPX instructions operate on. Each
bounds register stores a pair of 64-bit values which are the lower bound (LB) and upper bound (UB) of a buffer, see
Figure 17-1.

               127                                                       64 63                                            0
                              Upper Bound (UB)                                            Lower Bound (LB)

                            Figure 17-1. Layout of the Bounds Registers BND0-BND3

The bounds are unsigned effective addresses, and are inclusive. The upper bounds are architecturally represented
in 1/’s complement form. Lower bound = 0, and upper bound = 0 (1’s complement of all 1s) will allow access to the
entire address space. The bounds are considered as INIT when both lower and upper bounds are 0 (cover the
entire address space). The two Intel MPX instructions which operate on the upper bound (BNDMK and BNDCU)
account for the 1’s complement representation of the upper bounds.
The instruction set does not impose any conventions on the use of bounds registers. Software has full flexibility
associating pointers to bounds registers including sharing them for multiple pointers.
RESET or INIT# will initialize (write zero to) BND0–BND3.

17.3.3      Configuration and Status Registers
Intel MPX defines two configuration registers and one status register. The two configuration registers are defined
for user mode (CPL = 3) and supervisor mode (CPL < 3). The user-mode configuration register BNDCFGU is acces-
sible only with the XSAVE feature set instructions.
The supervisor mode configuration register is an MSR, referred to as IA32_BNDCFGS (MSR 0D90H). Because both
configuration registers share a common layout (see Figure 17-2), when describing the common behavior, these
configuration registers are often denoted as BNDCFGx, where x can be U or S, for user and supervisor mode
respectively.

               63                                                        12 11                                     2 1    0
                              Base of Bound Directory (Linear Address)           Reserved (must be zero)                 En

                                                  Bprv: BNDPRESERVE
                                                  En: Enable

           Figure 17-2. Common Layout of the Bound Configuration Registers BNDCFGU and BNDCFGS

The Enable bit in BNDCFGU enables Intel MPX in user mode (CPL = 3), and the Enable bit in BNDCFGS enables Intel
MPX in supervisor mode (CPL < 3). The BNDPRESERVE bit controls the initialization behavior of CALL/RET/JMP/Jcc
instructions without the BND (F2H) prefix -- see Section 17.5.3.
WRMSR to BNDCFGS will #GP if any of the reserved bits of BNDCFGS is not zero or if the base address of the bound
directory is not canonical. XRSTOR of BNDCFGU ignores the reserved bits and does not fault if any is non-zero;
similarly, it ignores the upper bits of the base address of the bound directory and sign-extends the highest imple-
mented bit of the linear address to guarantee the canonicality of this address.
Intel MPX also defines a status register (BNDSTATUS) primarily used to communicate status information for #BR
exception. The layout of the status register is shown in Figure 17-3.

                   63                                                                                                2 1 0

                                    ABD: Address Bound Directory Entry - Linear Address

                                                                      EC: Error Code

                               Figure 17-3. Layout of the Bound Status Registers BNDSTATUS

The BNDSTATUS register provides two fields to communicate the status of Intel MPX operations:
•    EC (bits 1:0): The error code field communicates status information of a bound range exception #BR or
     operation involving bound directory.
•    ABD: (bits 63:2):The address field of a bound directory entry can provide information when operation on the
     bound directory caused a #BR.
The valid error codes are defined in Table 17-1.

                                          Table 17-1. Error Code Definition of BNDSTATUS
    EC             Description                                                            Meaning

    00b1      No Intel MPX exception No exception caused by Intel MPX operations.
                                         #BR caused by BNDCL, BNDCU or BNDCN instructions;
    01b          Bounds violation
                                         ABD is 0.
                                         #BR caused by BNDLDX or BNDSTX instructions, ABD will be set to the linear address of the
    10b          Invalid BD entry
                                         invalid bound-directory entry
    11b             Reserved             Reserved
NOTES:
1. When legacy BOUND instruction cause a #BR with Intel MPX enabled (see Section 17.5.4), EC is written with
  Zero.

RESET or INIT# will set BNDCFGx and BNDSTATUS registers to zero.

17.3.4         Read and Write of IA32_BNDCFGS
The RDMSR and WRMSR instructions can be used to read and write the IA32_BNDCFGS MSR. (The XSAVE state
does not include IA32_BNDCFGS, and instructions in the XSAVE feature set do not access that register). Attempts
to write to IA32_BNDCFGS check for canonicality of the addresses being loaded into IA32_BNDCFGS (regardless of
mode at the time of execution) and will #GP if the address is not canonical or if reserved bits would be set.
Software can use RDMSR and WRMSR to read and write IA32_BNDCFGS as long as the processor implements Intel
MPX, i.e. CPUID.(EAX=07H, ECX=0H).EBX.MPX = 1. The states of CR4 and XCR0 have no impact on the ability to
access IA32_BNDCFGS.

17.4           INTEL MPX INSTRUCTION SUMMARY
When Intel MPX is not enabled or not present, all Intel MPX instructions behave as NOP. There are eight Intel MPX
instructions, Table 17-2 provides a summary.
A C/C++ compiler can implement intrinsic support for Intel MPX instructions to facilitate pointer operation with
capability of checking for valid bounds on pointers. Typically, Intel MPX intrinsics are implemented by compiler via
inline code generation where bounds register allocations are handled by the compiler without requiring the

programmer to directly manipulate any bounds registers. Therefore no new data type for a bounds register is
needed in the syntax of Intel MPX intrinsics.

                                          Table 17-2. Intel MPX Instruction Summary
      Intel MPX
                                                                          Description
     Instruction
    BNDMK b, m          Create LowerBound (LB) and UpperBound (UB) in the bounds register b
    BNDCL b, r/m        Checks the address of a memory reference or address in r against the lower bound
    BNDCU b, r/m        Checks the address of a memory reference or address in r against the upper bound in 1's complement form
                        Checks the address of a memory reference or address in r against the upper bound not in 1's complement
    BNDCN b, r/m
                        form
   BNDMOV b, b/m        Copy/load LB and UB bounds from memory or a bounds register
   BNDMOV b/m, b        Store LB and UB bounds in a bounds register to memory or another register
   BNDLDX b, mib        Load bounds using address translation using an sib-addressing expression mib
   BNDSTX mib, b        Store bounds using address translation using an sib-addressing expression mib

17.4.1       Instruction Encoding
All Intel MPX instructions are NOP on processors that report CPUID.(EAX=07H, ECX=0H).EBX.MPX [bit 14] = 0, or
if Intel MPX is not enabled by the operating system (see Section 13.5). Applications can selectively opt-in to use
Intel MPX instructions.
All Intel MPX opcodes encoded to operate on BND0-BND3 are valid Intel MPX instructions. All Intel MPX opcodes
encoded to operate on bound registers beyond BND3 will #UD if Intel MPX is enabled.
BNDLDX/BNDSTX opcodes require 66H as a mandatory prefix with its operand size tied to the address size attri-
bute of the supported operating modes. Attempt to override operand size attribute with 66H or with REX.W in 64-
bit mode is ignored.

17.4.2       Usage and Examples
BNDMK is typically used after memory is allocated for a buffer, e.g., by functions such as malloc, calloc, or when
the memory is allocated on the stack. However, many other usages are possible such as when accessing an array
member of a structure.

Example 17-1. BNDMK Example Usage in Application and Library Code
int A[100]; //assume the array A is allocated on the stack at ‘offset’   // similarly, for a library implementation of dynamic allocated
from RBP.                                                                memory
// the instruction to store starting address of array will be:                      int * k = malloc(100);
          LEA RAX, [RBP+offset]                                          // assuming that malloc returns pointer k in RAX and holds (size
// the instruction to create the bounds for array A will be:             - 1) in RCX
          BNDMK BND0, [RAX+399]                                          // the malloc implementation will execute the following
// Store RAX into BND0.LB, and ~(RAX+399) into BND0.UB.                  instruction before returning:
                                                                                   BNDMK BND0, [RAX+RCX]
                                                                         // BND0.LB stores RAX, and BND0.UB stores ~(RAX+RCX)

BNDMOV is typically used to copy bounds from one bound register to another when a pointer is copied from one
general purpose register to another, or to spill/fill bounds into memory corresponding to a spill/fill of a pointer.

Example 17-2. BNDMOV Example
Spilling or caller save of bound register would use BNDMOV [RBP+ offset], BNDx.

Assuming that the calling convention is that bound of first pointer is passed in BND0, and that bound happens to be in BND3 before
the call, the software will add instruction BNDMOV BND0, BND3 prior to the call.

BNDCL/BNDCU/BNDCN are typically used before writing to a buffer but can be used in other instances as well. If
there are no bounds violations as a result of bound check instruction, the processor will proceed to execute the next
instruction. However, if the bound check fails, it will signal #BR exception (fault).
Typically, the pointer used to write to memory will be compared against lower bound. However, for upper bound
check, the software must add the (operand size - 1) to the pointer before upper bound checking.
For example, the software intend to write 32-bit integer in 64-bit mode into a buffer at address specified in RAX,
and the bounds are in register BND0, the instruction sequence will be:
         BNDCL BND0, [RAX]
         BNDCU BND0, [RAX+3] ; operand size is 4
         MOV Dword ptr [RAX], RBX ; RBX has the data to be written to the buffer.
Software may move one of the two bound checks out of a loop if it can determine that memory is accessed strictly
in ascending or descending order. For string instructions of the form REP MOVS, the software may choose to do
check lower bound against first access and upper bound against last access to memory. However, if software wants
to also check for wrap around conditions as part of address computation, it should check for both upper and lower
bound for first and last instructions (total of four bound checks).
BNDSTX is used to store the bounds associated with a buffer and the “pointer value” of the pointer to that buffer
onto a bound table entry via address translation using a two-level structure, see Section 17.4.3.
For example, the software has a buffer with bounds stored in BND0, the pointer to the buffer is in ESI, the following
sequence will store the “pointer value” (the buffer) and the bounds into a configured bound table entry using
address translation from the linear address associated with the base of a SIB-addressing form consisting of a base
register and a index register:
         MOV ECX, Dword ptr [ESI] ; store the pointer value in the index register ECX
         MOV EAX, ESI ; store the pointer in the base register EAX
       BNDSTX Dword ptr [EAX+ECX], BND0 ; perform address translation from the linear address of the base
EAX and store bounds and pointer value ECX onto a bound table entry.
Similarly to retrieve a buffer and its associated bounds from a bound table entry:
         MOV EAX, dword ptr [EBX] ;
       BNDLDX BND0, dword ptr [EBX+EAX]; perform address translation from the linear address of the base EBX,
and loads bounds and pointer value from a bound table entry

17.4.3        Loading and Storing Bounds in Memory
Intel MPX defines two instructions to load and store of the linear address of a pointer to a buffer, along with the
bounds of the buffer into a data structure of extended bounds. When storing these extended bounds, the processor
parses the address of the pointer (where it is stored) to locate an entry in a bound table in which to store the
extended bounds. Loading of an extended bounds performs the reverse sequence.
The memory representation of an extended bound is a 4-tuple consisting of lower bound, upper bound, pointer
value and a reserved field (for use by future versions of Intel MPX; software must not use this field). Accesses to
these extended bounds use 32-bit or 64-bit operands according to the current paging mode. Thus, a bound table
entry is 4*64 bits (32 bytes) in 64-bit mode and 4*32 bits (16 bytes) outside 64-bit mode The linear address of a
bound table is stored in a bound-directory entry (BDE). The linear address of the bound directory is derived from
either BNDCFGU (CPL = 3) or BNDCFGS (CPL < 3).
The bound directory and bound tables are stored in application memory and are allocated by the application (in
case of kernel use, the structures will be in kernel memory). The bound directory and each bound table are in
contiguous linear memory.
Software should take care to allocate sufficient memory for the bound directory and the bound tables. The amount
of memory required depends on the current operating mode and, in some cases, on CPL:
•   In 64-bit mode:
    — Each bound table comprises of 217 32-byte entries thus, the size of a bound table in 64-bit mode is
      4 MBytes.

    — The size of the bound directory depends on the value of MAWA. Specifically, the bound directory comprises
      of 228+MAWA 64-bit entries; thus, the size of a bound directory in 64-bit mode is 21+MAWA GBytes. The value
      of MAWA depends on CPL:
       •      If CPL < 3, the supervisor MAWA (MAWAS) is used. This value is 0. Thus, when CPL < 3, a bound
              directory comprises of 228 64-bit entries and the size of a bound directory is 2 GBytes.
       •      If CPL = 3, the user MAWA (MAWAU) is used. The value of MAWAU is enumerated in
              CPUID.(EAX=07H,ECX=0H):ECX.MAWAU[bits 21:17]. When CPL = 3, a bound directory comprises of
              228+MAWAU 64-bit entries and the size of a bound directory is 21+MAWAU GBytes.

                                                                              NOTE
           Software operating with CPL = 3 in 64-bit mode should use CPUID to determine the proper amount
           of memory to allocate for the bound directory.
•   Outside 64-bit mode:
    — Each bound table comprises of 210 16-byte entries; thus, the size of a bound table outside 64-bit mode is
      16 KBytes.
    — The bound directory comprises of 220 32-bit entries; thus, the size of a bound directory outside 64-bit
      mode is 4 MBytes. This size is independent of MAWA and CPL.
Bounds in memory are associated with the memory address where the pointer is stored, i.e., Ap. A linear address
LAp is computed by adding the appropriate segment base to Ap. (Note: for these instructions, the segment over-
ride applies only to the computation.) Section 17.4.3.1 and Section 17.4.3.2 describe how BNDLDX and BNDSTX
parse LAp to locate a bound-directory entry (BDE), which contains the address of a bound table, and then a bound-
table entry (BTE), which contains the extended bounds for the pointer.

17.4.3.1        BNDLDX and BNDSTX in 64-Bit Mode
Figure 17-4 shows the two-level structures for address translation of extended bounds in 64-bit mode.

                                                                      BNDCFGU/BNDCFGS
                               63                                              12 11                                                     0
                                   Base of Bound Directory (Linear Address)

      63                                12       0
             BNDCFGx[63:12]                  0
                                                                      Linear Address of “pointer” (LAp)
                              63             47+MAWA                            20 19                             3             0

                          30+MAWA                            3          0           21                            5                 0
                                   LAp[47+MAWA:20]                0                       LAp[19:3]                         0
                                                                                                                                        Reserved        24
                                                                                                                                        Pointer Value   16
                  64                                                                           22                                       Upper Bound     8
                                                                                                                                        Lower Bound
                       31+MAWA                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                      Bound Table Entries

                                        Bound Directory Entries
                                                                              61
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                      Bound Table (4 MBytes)
                                                                  0
                                          Bound Directory (21+MAWA GBytes)

                        Figure 17-4. Bound Paging Structure and Address Translation in 64-Bit Mode

As noted earlier, the linear address of the bound directory is derived from either BNDCFGU (CPL = 3) or BNDCFGS
(CPL < 3). In 64-bit mode, each bound-directory entry (BDE) is 8 bytes. The number of entries in the bound direc-
tory is determined by the MPX address-width adjust (MAWA; see Section 17.3.1). Specifically, the number of
entries is 228+MAWA.
In 64-bit mode, the processor uses the two-level structures to access extended bounds as follows:
•   A bound directory is located at the 4-KByte aligned linear address specified in bits 63:12 of BNDCFGx (see
    Figure 17-2). A bound directory comprises of 228+MAWA 64-bit entries (BDEs); thus, the size of a bound
    directory in 64-bit mode is 21+MAWA GBytes. A BDE is selected using the LAp (linear address of pointer to a
    buffer) to construct a 64-bit offset as follows:
    — bits 63:31+MAWA are 0;
    — bits 30+MAWA:3 are LAp[47+MAWA:20]; and
    — bits 2:0 are 0.
    The address of the BDE is the sum of the bound-directory base address (from BNDCFGx) plus this 64-bit offset.
•   Bit 0 of a BDE is a valid bit. If this bit is 0, use of the BDE by BNDLDX or BNDSTX causes #BR, sets
    BNDSTATUS[1:0] to 10b (the error code), and loads BNDSTATUS[63:2] with bits 63:2 of the linear address of
    the BDE. Otherwise, the processor uses bits 63:3 of the BDE as the 8-byte aligned address of a bound table
    (BT); the processor ignores bits 2:1 of a BDE.
    A bound table comprises of 217 32-byte entries (BTEs); thus, the size of a bound table in 64-bit mode is
    4 MBytes. A BTE is selected using the LAp (linear address of pointer to a buffer) to construct an offset as
    follows:
    — bits 21:5 are LAp[19:3]; and
    — bits 4:0 are 0.
    The address of the BTE is the sum of the bound-table base address (from the BDE) plus this offset.
•   Each BTE comprises the following:
    — a 64-bit lower bound (LB) field;
    — a 64-bit upper bound (UB) field;
    — a 64-bit pointer value; and
    — a 64-bit reserved field. This field is reserved for future Intel MPX; software must not use it.

17.4.3.2      BNDLDX and BNDSTX Outside 64-Bit Mode
Figure 17-5 shows the two-level structures for address translation of extended bounds outside 64-bit mode.
As noted earlier, the linear address of the bound directory is derived from either BNDCFGU (CPL = 3) or BNDCFGS
(CPL < 3). Outside 64-bit mode, each bound-directory entry (BDE) is 4 bytes. The number of entries in the bound
directory is 220.
Outside 64-bit mode, the processor uses the two-level structures to access extended bounds as follows:
•   A bound directory is located at the 4-KByte aligned linear address specified in bits 31:12 of BNDCFGx (see
    Figure 17-2). A bound directory comprises of 220 32-bit entries (BDEs); thus, the size of a bound directory
    outside 64-bit mode is 4 MBytes. A BDE is selected using the LAp (linear address of pointer to a buffer) to
    construct an offset as follows:
    — bits 21:2 are LAp[31:12]; and
    — bits 1:0 are 0.
    The address of the BDE is the sum of the bound-directory base address (from BNDCFGx) plus this offset.
•   Bit 0 of a BDE is a valid bit. If this bit is 0, use of the BDE by BNDLDX or BNDSTX causes #BR, sets
    BNDSTATUS[1:0] to 10b (the error code), and loads BNDSTATUS[31:2] with bits 31:2 of the linear address of
    the BDE. Otherwise, the processor uses bits 31:2 of the BDE as the 4-byte aligned address of a bound table
    (BT); the processor ignores bit 1 of a BDE.

                                                                    BNDCFGU/BNDCFGS
                             31                                              12 11                                                     0
                                 Base of Bound Directory (Linear Address)

      31                              12       0
           BNDCFGx[31:12]                  0
                                                                    Linear Address of “pointer” (LAp)
                            31                                                12 11                             2             0

                       21                                  2          0           13                            4                 0
                                 LAp[31:12]                     0                       LAp[11:2]                         0
                                                                                                                                      Reserved        12
                                                                                                                                      Pointer Value   8
                32                                                                           14                                       Upper Bound     4
                                                                                                                                      Lower Bound
                            22                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                    Bound Table Entries

                                      Bound Directory Entries
                                                                            30
                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                    Bound Table (16 KBytes)
                                                                 0
                                        Bound Directory (4 MBytes)

                 Figure 17-5. Bound Paging Structure and Address Translation Outside 64-Bit Mode

    A bound table comprises of 210 16-byte entries (BTEs); thus, the size of a bound table outside 64-bit mode is
    16 KBytes. A BTE is selected using the LAp (linear address of pointer to a buffer) to construct an offset as
    follows:
    — bits 13:4 are LAp[11:2]; and
    — bits 3:0 are 0.
    The address of the BTE is the sum of the bound-table base address (from the BDE) plus this offset. This address
    is use as an offset into the DS segment to determine the linear address of the BTE.
•   Each BTE comprises the following:
    — a 32-bit lower bound (LB) field;
    — a 32-bit upper bound (UB) field;
    — a 32-bit pointer value; and
    — a 32-bit reserved field. This field is reserved for future Intel MPX; software must not use it.

17.5         INTERACTIONS WITH INTEL MPX

17.5.1       Intel MPX and Operating Modes
In 64-bit Mode, all Intel MPX instructions use 64-bit operands for bounds and 64 bit addressing, i.e. REX.W & 67H
have no effect on data or address size.
XSAVE, XSAVEOPT and XRSTOR load/store 64-bit values in all modes, as these state-management instructions are
not Intel MPX instructions.

In compatibility and legacy modes (including 16-bit code segments, real and virtual 8086 modes) all Intel MPX
instructions use 32-bit operands for bounds and 32 bit addressing. The upper 32-bits of destination bound register
are cleared (consistent with behavior of integer registers)
In 32-bit and compatibility mode, the bounds are 32-bit, and are treated same as 32-bit integer registers. There-
fore, when 32-bit bound is updated in a bound register, the upper 32-bits are undefined. When switching from 64-
bit, the behavior of content of bounds register will be similar to that of general purpose registers.
Table 17-3 describes the impact of 67H prefix on memory forms of Intel MPX instructions (register-only forms
ignore 67H prefix) when Intel MPX is enabled:

                      Table 17-3. Effective Address Size of Intel MPX Instructions with 67H Prefix
    Addressing Mode      67H Prefix      Effective Address Size used for Intel MPX instructions when Intel MPX is enabled
      64-bit Mode            Y        64 bit addressing used
      64-bit Mode            N        64 bit addressing used
      32-bit Mode            Y        #UD
      32-bit Mode            N        32 bit addressing used
      16-bit Mode            Y        32 bit addressing used
      16-bit Mode            N        #UD

17.5.2         Intel MPX Support for Pointer Operations with Branching
Intel MPX provides flexibility in supporting pointer operation across control flow changes. Intel MPX allows
•    compatibility with legacy code that may perform pointer operation across control flow changes and are unaware
     of Intel MPX, along with
•    Intel MPX-aware code that adds bounds checking protection to pointer operation across control flow changes.
The interface to provide such flexibility consists of:
•    Using a prefix, referred to as BND prefix, to relevant branch instructions: CALL, RET, JMP and Jcc
•    BNDCFGU and BNDCFGS provides the bit field, BNDPRESERVE (bit 1).
The value of BNDPRESERVE in conjunction with the presence/absence the BND prefix with those branching instruc-
tion will determine whether the values in BND0-BND3 will be initialized or unchanged.

17.5.3         CALL, RET, JMP and All Jcc
An application compiled to use Intel MPX will use the REPNE (F2H) prefix (denoted by BND) for all forms of near
CALL, near RET, near JMP, short & near Jcc instructions (BND+CALL, BND+RET, BND+JMP, BND+Jcc). See Table
17-4 for specific opcodes. All far CALL, RET and JMP instructions plus short JMP (JMP rel 8, opcode EB) instructions
will never cause bound registers to be initialized.
If BNDPRESERVE bit is one, above instructions will NOT INIT the bounds registers when BND prefix is not present
for above instructions (legacy behavior). However, If BNDPRESERVE is zero, above instructions will INIT ALL bound
registers (BND0-BND3) when BND prefix is not present for above instructions. If BND prefix is present for above
instructions, the BND registers will NOT INIT any bound registers (BND0-BND3).
The legacy code will continue to use non-prefixed forms of these instructions, so if BNDPRESERVE is zero, all the
bound registers will INIT by legacy code. This allows the legacy function to execute and return to callee with all
bound registers initialized (legacy code by definition cannot make or load bounds in bound registers because it does
not have Intel MPX instructions). This will eliminate compatibility concerns when legacy function might have
changed the pointer in registers but did not update the value of the bounds registers associated with these
pointers.
If BNDCFGx.BNDPRESERVE is clear then non-prefixed forms of these instructions will initialize all the bound regis-
ters. If this bit is set then non-prefixed and prefixed forms of these instructions will preserve the contents of bound
registers as shown in Table 17-4.

             Table 17-4. Bounds Register INIT Behavior Due to BND Prefix with Branch Instructions
         Instruction        Branch Instruction Opcodes        BNDPRESERVE = 0             BNDPRESERVE = 1
            CALL                     E8, FF/2             Init BND0-BND3              BND0-BND3 unchanged
         BND + CALL               F2 E8, F2 FF/2          BND0-BND3 unchanged         BND0-BND3 unchanged
            RET                       C2, C3              Init BND0-BND3              BND0-BND3 unchanged
         BND + RET                 F2 C2, F2 C3           BND0-BND3 unchanged         BND0-BND3 unchanged
            JMP                      E9, FF/4             Init BND0-BND3              BND0-BND3 unchanged
         BND + JMP                F2 E9, F2 FF/4          BND0-BND3 unchanged         BND0-BND3 unchanged
                                  70 through 7F,
             Jcc                                          Init BND0-BND3              BND0-BND3 unchanged
                               0F 80 through 0F 8F
                                F2 70 through F2 7F,
          BND + Jcc                                       BND0-BND3 unchanged         BND0-BND3 unchanged
                             F2 0F 80 through F2 0F 8F

17.5.4      BOUND Instruction and Intel MPX
If Intel MPX in enabled (see Section 13.5) and a #BR was caused due to a BOUND instruction, then BOUND instruc-
tion will write zero to the BNDSTATUS register. In all other situations, BOUND instruction will not modify
BNDSTATUS. Specifically, the operation of the BOUND instruction can be described as:
IF ( ( BOUND instruction caused #BR) AND ( CR4.OXXSAVE =1 AND XCR0.BNDREGS=1 AND XCR0.BNDCSR =1) AND
     ( (CPL=3 AND BNDCFGU.ENABLE = 1) OR (CPL < 3 AND BNDCFGS.ENABLE = 1) ) ) THEN
     BNDSTATUS  0;
ELSE
     BNDSTATUS is not modified;
FI;

17.5.5      Programming Considerations
Intel MPX instruction set does not dictate any calling convention, but allows the calling convention extensions to be
interoperable with legacy code by making use of the of the bound registers and the bound tables to convey argu-
ments and return values.

17.5.6      Intel MPX and System Manage Mode
Upon delivery of an SMI to a processor supporting Intel MPX, the contents of IA32_BNDCFGS is saved to SMM state
save map (at offset 7ED0H) and the register is then cleared when entering into SMM. RSM restores IA32_BNDCFGS
from the SMM state save map. The instruction forces the reserved bits (11:2) to 0 and sign-extends the highest
implemented bit of the linear address to guarantee the canonicality of this address (regardless of what is in SMM
state save map).
The content of IA32_BNDCFGS is cleared after entering into SMM. Thus, Intel MPX is disabled inside an SMM
handler until SMM code enables it explicitly. This will prevent the side-effect of INIT-ing bound registers by legacy
CALL/RET/JMP/Jcc in SMM code.

17.5.7      Support of Intel MPX in VMCS
A new guest-state field for IA32_BNDCFGS is added to the VMCS. In addition, two new controls are added:
•   a VM-exit control called “clear BNDCFGS”
•   a VM-entry control called “load BNDCFGS.”

VM exits always save IA32_BNDCFGS into BNDCFGS field of VMCS; if “clear BNDCFGS” is 1, VM exits clear
IA32_BNDCFGS. If “load BNDCFGS” is 1, VM entry loads IA32_BNDCFGS from VMCS. If loading IA32_BNDCFGS,
VM entry should check the value of that register in the guest-state area of the VMCS and cause the VM entry to fail
(late) if the value is one that would causes WRMSR to fault if executed in ring 0.

17.5.8         Support of Intel MPX in Intel TSX
For some processor implementations, the following Intel MPX instructions may always cause transactional aborts:
•   An Intel TSX transaction abort will occur in case of legacy branch (that causes bounds registers INIT) when at
    least one bounds register was in a NON-INIT state.
•   An Intel TSX transaction abort will occur in case of a BNDLDX & BNDSTX instruction on non-flat segment.
Intel MPX Instructions (including BND prefix + branch instructions) not enumerated above as causing transactional
abort when used inside a transaction will typically not cause an Intel TSX transaction to abort.

