                                                         CHAPTER 19

When writing software intended to run on IA-32 processors, it is necessary to identify the type of processor present
in a system and the processor features that are available to an application.

19.1        USING THE CPUID INSTRUCTION
Use the CPUID instruction for processor identification in the Pentium M processor family, Pentium 4 processor
family, Intel Xeon processor family, P6 family, Pentium processor, and later Intel486 processors. This instruction
returns the family, model and (for some processors) a brand string for the processor that executes the instruction.
It also indicates the features that are present in the processor and gives information about the processor’s caches
and TLB.
The ID flag (bit 21) in the EFLAGS register indicates support for the CPUID instruction. If a software procedure can
set and clear this flag, the processor executing the procedure supports the CPUID instruction. The CPUID instruc-
tion will cause the invalid opcode exception (#UD) if executed on a processor that does not support it.
To obtain processor identification information, a source operand value is placed in the EAX register to select the
type of information to be returned. When the CPUID instruction is executed, selected information is returned in the
EAX, EBX, ECX, and EDX registers. For a complete description of the CPUID instruction, tables indicating values
returned, and example code, see CPUID—CPU Identification in Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures
Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A.

19.1.1      Notes on Where to Start
The following guidelines are among the most important, and should always be followed when using the CPUID
instruction to determine available features:
•   Always begin by testing for the “GenuineIntel,” message in the EBX, EDX, and ECX registers when the CPUID
    instruction is executed with EAX equal to 0. If the processor is not genuine Intel, the feature identification flags
    may have different meanings than are described in Intel documentation.
•   Test feature identification flags individually and do not make assumptions about undefined bits.

19.1.2      Identification of Earlier IA-32 Processors
The CPUID instruction is not available in earlier IA-32 processors up through the earlier Intel486 processors. For
these processors, several other architectural features can be exploited to identify the processor.
The settings of bits 12 and 13 (IOPL), 14 (NT), and 15 (reserved) in the EFLAGS register are different for Intel’s 32-
bit processors than for the Intel 8086 and Intel 286 processors. By examining the settings of these bits (with the
PUSHF/PUSHFD and POPF/POPFD instructions), an application program can determine whether the processor is an
8086, Intel 286, or one of the Intel 32-bit processors:
•   8086 processor — Bits 12 through 15 of the EFLAGS register are always set.
•   Intel 286 processor — Bits 12 through 15 are always clear in real-address mode.
•   32-bit processors — In real-address mode, bit 15 is always clear and bits 12 through 14 have the last value
    loaded into them. In protected mode, bit 15 is always clear, bit 14 has the last value loaded into it, and the IOPL
    bits depend on the current privilege level (CPL). The IOPL field can be changed only if the CPL is 0.
Other EFLAGS register bits that can be used to differentiate between the 32-bit processors:
•   Bit 18 (AC) — Implemented only on the Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, Pentium, and Intel486 processors.
    The inability to set or clear this bit distinguishes an Intel386 processor from the later IA-32 processors.
•   Bit 21 (ID) — Determines if the processor is able to execute the CPUID instruction. The ability to set and clear
    this bit indicates that it is a Pentium 4, Intel Xeon, P6 family, Pentium, or later-version Intel486 processor.

To determine whether an x87 FPU or NPX is present in a system, applications can write to the x87 FPU status and
control registers using the FNINIT instruction and then verify that the correct values are read back using the
FNSTENV instruction.
After determining that an x87 FPU or NPX is present, its type can then be determined. In most cases, the processor
type will determine the type of FPU or NPX; however, an Intel386 processor is compatible with either an Intel 287
or Intel 387 math coprocessor.
The method the coprocessor uses to represent ∞ (after the execution of the FINIT, FNINIT, or RESET instruction)
indicates which coprocessor is present. The Intel 287 math coprocessor uses the same bit representation for +∞
and −∞; whereas, the Intel 387 math coprocessor uses different representations for +∞ and −∞.

