                                                                                       APPENDIX D
                                                                   GUIDELINES FOR WRITING X87 FPU
                                                                              EXCEPTION HANDLERS

As described in Chapter 8, “Programming with the x87 FPU,” the IA-32 Architecture supports two mechanisms for
accessing exception handlers to handle unmasked x87 FPU exceptions: native mode and MS-DOS compatibility
mode. The primary purpose of this appendix is to provide detailed information to help software engineers design
and write x87 FPU exception-handling facilities to run on PC systems that use the MS-DOS compatibility mode1 for
handling x87 FPU exceptions. Some of the information in this appendix will also be of interest to engineers who are
writing native-mode x87 FPU exception handlers. The information provided is as follows:
•   Discussion of the origin of the MS-DOS x87 FPU exception handling mechanism and its relationship to the x87
    FPU’s native exception handling mechanism.
•   Description of the IA-32 flags and processor pins that control the MS-DOS x87 FPU exception handling
    mechanism.
•   Description of the external hardware typically required to support MS-DOS exception handling mechanism.
•   Description of the x87 FPU’s exception handling mechanism and the typical protocol for x87 FPU exception
    handlers.
•   Code examples that demonstrate various levels of x87 FPU exception handlers.
•   Discussion of x87 FPU considerations in multitasking environments.
•   Discussion of native mode x87 FPU exception handling.
The information given is oriented toward the most recent generations of IA-32 processors, starting with the
Intel486. It is intended to augment the reference information given in Chapter 8, “Programming with the x87 FPU.”
A more extensive version of this appendix is available in the application note AP-578, Software and Hardware
Considerations for x87 FPU Exception Handlers for Intel Architecture Processors (Order Number 243291), which is
available from Intel.

D.1          MS-DOS COMPATIBILITY SUB-MODE FOR HANDLING X87 FPU EXCEPTIONS
The first generations of IA-32 processors (starting with the Intel 8086 and 8088 processors and going through the
Intel 286 and Intel386 processors) did not have an on-chip floating-point unit. Instead, floating-point capability
was provided on a separate numeric coprocessor chip. The first of these numeric coprocessors was the Intel 8087,
which was followed by the Intel 287 and Intel 387 numeric coprocessors.
To allow the 8087 to signal floating-point exceptions to its companion 8086 or 8088, the 8087 has an output pin,
INT, which it asserts when an unmasked floating-point exception occurs. The designers of the 8087 recommended
that the output from this pin be routed through a programmable interrupt controller (PIC) such as the Intel 8259A
to the INTR pin of the 8086 or 8088. The handler for the resulting interrupt could then be used to access the
floating-point exception handler.
However, the original IBM* PC design and MS-DOS operating system used a different mechanism for handling the
INT output from the 8087. It connected the INT pin directly to the NMI input pin of the 8086 or 8088. The NMI inter-
rupt handler then had to determine if the interrupt was caused by a floating-point exception or another NMI event.
This mechanism is the origin of what is now called the “MS-DOS compatibility mode.” The decision to use this latter
floating-point exception handling mechanism came about because when the IBM PC was first designed, the 8087
was not available. When the 8087 did become available, other functions had already been assigned to the eight
inputs to the PIC. One of these functions was a BIOS video interrupt, which was assigned vector 16 for the 8086
and 8088.

1   Microsoft Windows* 95 and Windows 3.1 (and earlier versions) operating systems use almost the same x87 FPU exception handling
    interface as MS-DOS. The recommendations in this appendix for a MS-DOS compatible exception handler thus apply to all three oper-
    ating systems.

The Intel 286 processor created the “native mode” for handling floating-point exceptions by providing a dedicated
input pin (ERROR#) for receiving floating-point exception signals and a dedicated interrupt vector, 16. Interrupt 16
was used to signal floating-point errors (also called math faults). It was intended that the ERROR# pin on the Intel
286 be connected to a corresponding ERROR# pin on the Intel 287 numeric coprocessor. When the Intel 287
signals a floating-point exception using this mechanism, the Intel 286 generates an interrupt 16, to invoke the
floating-point exception handler.
To maintain compatibility with existing PC software, the native floating-point exception handling mode of the Intel
286 and 287 was not used in the IBM PC AT system design. Instead, the ERROR# pin on the Intel 286 was tied
permanently high, and the ERROR# pin from the Intel 287 was routed to a second (cascaded) PIC. The resulting
output of this PIC was routed through an exception handler and eventually caused an interrupt 2 (NMI interrupt).
Here the NMI interrupt was shared with IBM PC AT’s new parity checking feature. Interrupt 16 remained assigned
to the BIOS video interrupt handler. The external hardware for the MS-DOS compatibility mode must prevent the
Intel 286 processor from executing past the next x87 FPU instruction when an unmasked exception has been gener-
ated. To do this, it asserts the BUSY# signal into the Intel 286 when the ERROR# signal is asserted by the Intel 287.
The Intel386 processor and its companion Intel 387 numeric coprocessor provided the same hardware mechanism
for signaling and handling floating-point exceptions as the Intel 286 and 287 processors. And again, to maintain
compatibility with existing MS-DOS software, basically the same MS-DOS compatibility floating-point exception
handling mechanism that was used in the IBM PC AT was used in PCs based on the Intel386 processor.

D.2          IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MS-DOS* COMPATIBILITY SUB-MODE IN THE
             INTEL486™, PENTIUM®, AND P6 PROCESSOR FAMILY, AND PENTIUM® 4
             PROCESSORS
Beginning with the Intel486™ processor, the IA-32 architecture provided a dedicated mechanism for enabling the
MS-DOS compatibility mode for x87 FPU exceptions and for generating external x87 FPU-exception signals while
operating in this mode. The following sections describe the implementation of the MS-DOS compatibility mode in
the Intel486 and Pentium processors and in the P6 family and Pentium 4 processors. Also described is the recom-
mended external hardware to support this mode of operation.

D.2.1        MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-mode in the Intel486™ and Pentium® Processors
In the Intel486 processor, several things were done to enhance and speed up the numeric coprocessor, now called
the floating-point unit (x87 FPU). The most important enhancement was that the x87 FPU was included in the same
chip as the processor, for increased speed in x87 FPU computations and reduced latency for x87 FPU exception
handling. Also, for the first time, the MS-DOS compatibility mode was built into the chip design, with the addition
of the NE bit in control register CR0 and the addition of the FERR# (Floating-point ERRor) and IGNNE# (IGNore
Numeric Error) pins.
The NE bit selects the native x87 FPU exception handling mode (NE = 1) or the MS-DOS compatibility mode (NE =
0). When native mode is selected, all signaling of floating-point exceptions is handled internally in the Intel486
chip, resulting in the generation of an interrupt 16.
When MS-DOS compatibility mode is selected, the FERRR# and IGNNE# pins are used to signal floating-point
exceptions. The FERR# output pin, which replaces the ERROR# pin from the previous generations of IA-32 numeric
coprocessors, is connected to a PIC. A new input signal, IGNNE#, is provided to allow the x87 FPU exception
handler to execute x87 FPU instructions, if desired, without first clearing the error condition and without triggering
the interrupt a second time. This IGNNE# feature is needed to replicate the capability that was provided on MS-
DOS compatible Intel 286 and Intel 287 and Intel386 and Intel 387 systems by turning off the BUSY# signal, when
inside the x87 FPU exception handler, before clearing the error condition.
Note that Intel, in order to provide Intel486 processors for market segments that had no need for an x87 FPU,
created the “SX” versions. These Intel486 SX processors did not contain the floating-point unit. Intel also produced
Intel 487 SX processors for end users who later decided to upgrade to a system with an x87 FPU. These Intel 487
SX processors are similar to standard Intel486 processors with a working x87 FPU on board.
Thus, the external circuitry necessary to support the MS-DOS compatibility mode for Intel 487 SX processors is the
same as for standard Intel486 DX processors.

The Pentium, P6 family, and Pentium 4 processors offer the same mechanism (the NE bit and the FERR# and
IGNNE# pins) as the Intel486 processors for generating x87 FPU exceptions in MS-DOS compatibility mode. The
actions of these mechanisms are slightly different and more straightforward for the P6 family and Pentium 4
processors, as described in Section D.2.2, “MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-mode in the P6 Family and Pentium® 4
Processors.”
For Pentium, P6 family, and Pentium 4 processors, it is important to note that the special DP (Dual Processing)
mode for Pentium processors and also the more general Intel MultiProcessor Specification for systems with
multiple Pentium, P6 family, or Pentium 4 processors support x87 FPU exception handling only in the native mode.
Intel does not recommend using the MS-DOS compatibility x87 FPU mode for systems using more than one
processor.

D.2.1.1     Basic Rules: When FERR# Is Generated
When MS-DOS compatibility mode is enabled for the Intel486 or Pentium processors (NE bit is set to 0) and the
IGNNE# input pin is de-asserted, the FERR# signal is generated as follows:
1. When an x87 FPU instruction causes an unmasked x87 FPU exception, the processor (in most cases) uses a
   “deferred” method of reporting the error. This means that the processor does not respond immediately, but
   rather freezes just before executing the next WAIT or x87 FPU instruction (except for “no-wait” instructions,
   which the x87 FPU executes regardless of an error condition).
2. When the processor freezes, it also asserts the FERR# output.
3. The frozen processor waits for an external interrupt, which must be supplied by external hardware in response
   to the FERR# assertion.
4. In MS-DOS compatibility systems, FERR# is fed to the IRQ13 input in the cascaded PIC. The PIC generates
   interrupt 75H, which then branches to interrupt 2, as described earlier in this appendix for systems using the
   Intel 286 and Intel 287 or Intel386 and Intel 387 processors.
The deferred method of error reporting is used for all exceptions caused by the basic arithmetic instructions
(including FADD, FSUB, FMUL, FDIV, FSQRT, FCOM and FUCOM), for precision exceptions caused by all types of x87
FPU instructions, and for numeric underflow and overflow exceptions caused by all types of x87 FPU instructions
except stores to memory.
Some x87 FPU instructions with some x87 FPU exceptions use an “immediate” method of reporting errors. Here,
the FERR# is asserted immediately, at the time that the exception occurs. The immediate method of error
reporting is used for x87 FPU stack fault, invalid operation and denormal exceptions caused by all transcendental
instructions, FSCALE, FXTRACT, FPREM and others, and all exceptions (except precision) when caused by x87 FPU
store instructions. Like deferred error reporting, immediate error reporting will cause the processor to freeze just
before executing the next WAIT or x87 FPU instruction if the error condition has not been cleared by that time.
Note that in general, whether deferred or immediate error reporting is used for an x87 FPU exception depends both
on which exception occurred and which instruction caused that exception. A complete specification of these cases,
which applies to both the Pentium and the Intel486 processors, is given in Section 5.1.21 in the Pentium Processor
Family Developer’s Manual: Volume 1.
If NE = 0 but the IGNNE# input is active while an unmasked x87 FPU exception is in effect, the processor disre-
gards the exception, does not assert FERR#, and continues. If IGNNE# is then de-asserted and the x87 FPU excep-
tion has not been cleared, the processor will respond as described above. (That is, an immediate exception case
will assert FERR# immediately. A deferred exception case will assert FERR# and freeze just before the next x87
FPU or WAIT instruction.) The assertion of IGNNE# is intended for use only inside the x87 FPU exception handler,
where it is needed if one wants to execute non-control x87 FPU instructions for diagnosis, before clearing the
exception condition. When IGNNE# is asserted inside the exception handler, a preceding x87 FPU exception has
already caused FERR# to be asserted, and the external interrupt hardware has responded, but IGNNE# assertion
still prevents the freeze at x87 FPU instructions. Note that if IGNNE# is left active outside of the x87 FPU exception
handler, additional x87 FPU instructions may be executed after a given instruction has caused an x87 FPU excep-
tion. In this case, if the x87 FPU exception handler ever did get invoked, it could not determine which instruction
caused the exception.
To properly manage the interface between the processor’s FERR# output, its IGNNE# input, and the IRQ13 input
of the PIC, additional external hardware is needed. A recommended configuration is described in the following
section.

D.2.1.2      Recommended External Hardware to Support the MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-mode
Figure D-1 provides an external circuit that will assure proper handling of FERR# and IGNNE# when an x87 FPU
exception occurs. In particular, it assures that IGNNE# will be active only inside the x87 FPU exception handler
without depending on the order of actions by the exception handler. Some hardware implementations have been
less robust because they have depended on the exception handler to clear the x87 FPU exception interrupt request
to the PIC (FP_IRQ signal) before the handler causes FERR# to be de-asserted by clearing the exception from the
x87 FPU itself. Figure D-2 shows the details of how IGNNE# will behave when the circuit in Figure D-1 is imple-
mented. The temporal regions within the x87 FPU exception handler activity are described as follows:
1. The FERR# signal is activated by an x87 FPU exception and sends an interrupt request through the PIC to the
   processor’s INTR pin.
2. During the x87 FPU interrupt service routine (exception handler) the processor will need to clear the interrupt
   request latch (Flip Flop #1). It may also want to execute non-control x87 FPU instructions before the exception
   is cleared from the x87 FPU. For this purpose the IGNNE# must be driven low. Typically in the PC environment
   an I/O access to Port 0F0H clears the external x87 FPU exception interrupt request (FP_IRQ). In the
   recommended circuit, this access also is used to activate IGNNE#. With IGNNE# active, the x87 FPU exception
   handler may execute any x87 FPU instruction without being blocked by an active x87 FPU exception.
3. Clearing the exception within the x87 FPU will cause the FERR# signal to be deactivated and then there is no
   further need for IGNNE# to be active. In the recommended circuit, the deactivation of FERR# is used to
   deactivate IGNNE#. If another circuit is used, the software and circuit together must assure that IGNNE# is
   deactivated no later than the exit from the x87 FPU exception handler.

                                                                        RESET

                                I/O Port F0H
                                Address Decode

                                                                 +5V

                                                                        FF #1
                                                   FERR#
                                                                            PR
                                    Pentium® Pro Processor

                                                                        +5V
                                    Intel486™ Processor
                                    Pentium® Processor

                                                                +5V     CLR

                                                                        FF #2

                                                                            PR

                                                                      +5V

                                                 IGNNE#

                                                       INTR
                                                               Interrupt
                                                                                 FP_IRQ
                                                               Controller
                                LEGEND:
                                FF #n Flip Flop #n
                                CLR Clear or Reset

                      Figure D-1. Recommended Circuit for MS-DOS Compatibility x87 FPU
                                           Exception Handling

In the circuit in Figure D-1, when the x87 FPU exception handler accesses I/O port 0F0H it clears the IRQ13 inter-
rupt request output from Flip Flop #1 and also clocks out the IGNNE# signal (active) from Flip Flop #2. So the
handler can activate IGNNE#, if needed, by doing this 0F0H access before clearing the x87 FPU exception condition
(which de-asserts FERR#).
However, the circuit does not depend on the order of actions by the x87 FPU exception handler to guarantee the
correct hardware state upon exit from the handler. Flip Flop #2, which drives IGNNE# to the processor, has its
CLEAR input attached to the inverted FERR#. This ensures that IGNNE# can never be active when FERR# is inac-
tive. So if the handler clears the x87 FPU exception condition before the 0F0H access, IGNNE# does not get acti-
vated and left on after exit from the handler.

                         0F0H Address
                           Decode

                       Figure D-2. Behavior of Signals During x87 FPU Exception Handling

D.2.1.3     No-Wait x87 FPU Instructions Can Get x87 FPU Interrupt in Window
The Pentium and Intel486 processors implement the “no-wait” floating-point instructions (FNINIT, FNCLEX,
FNSTENV, FNSAVE, FNSTSW, FNSTCW, FNENI, FNDISI or FNSETPM) in the MS-DOS compatibility mode in the
following manner. (See Section 8.3.11, “x87 FPU Control Instructions,” and Section 8.3.12, “Waiting vs. Non-
waiting Instructions,” for a discussion of the no-wait instructions.)
If an unmasked numeric exception is pending from a preceding x87 FPU instruction, a member of the no-wait class
of instructions will, at the beginning of its execution, assert the FERR# pin in response to that exception just like
other x87 FPU instructions, but then, unlike the other x87 FPU instructions, FERR# will be de-asserted. This de-
assertion was implemented to allow the no-wait class of instructions to proceed without an interrupt due to any
pending numeric exception. However, the brief assertion of FERR# is sufficient to latch the x87 FPU exception
request into most hardware interface implementations (including Intel’s recommended circuit).
All the x87 FPU instructions are implemented such that during their execution, there is a window in which the
processor will sample and accept external interrupts. If there is a pending interrupt, the processor services the
interrupt first before resuming the execution of the instruction. Consequently, it is possible that the no-wait
floating-point instruction may accept the external interrupt caused by it’s own assertion of the FERR# pin in the
event of a pending unmasked numeric exception, which is not an explicitly documented behavior of a no-wait
instruction. This process is illustrated in Figure D-3.

                                                                 Exception Generating
                                                                    Floating-Point
                                                                      Instruction

                                          Assertion of FERR#
                                           by the Processor      Start of the “No-Wait”
                                                                     Floating-Point
                                                                       Instruction
                                                 System
                                                Dependent
                                                  Delay
                                                        Case 1     External Interrupt
                                                                   Sampling Window
                                Assertion of INTR Pin
                                   by the System
                                                        Case 2
                                                                    Window Closed

                                Figure D-3. Timing of Receipt of External Interrupt

Figure D-3 assumes that a floating-point instruction that generates a “deferred” error (as defined in the Section
D.2.1.1, “Basic Rules: When FERR# Is Generated”), which asserts the FERR# pin only on encountering the next
floating-point instruction, causes an unmasked numeric exception. Assume that the next floating-point instruction
following this instruction is one of the no-wait floating-point instructions. The FERR# pin is asserted by the
processor to indicate the pending exception on encountering the no-wait floating-point instruction. After the asser-
tion of the FERR# pin the no-wait floating-point instruction opens a window where the pending external interrupts
are sampled.
Then there are two cases possible depending on the timing of the receipt of the interrupt via the INTR pin (asserted
by the system in response to the FERR# pin) by the processor.
Case 1         If the system responds to the assertion of FERR# pin by the no-wait floating-point instruction via
               the INTR pin during this window then the interrupt is serviced first, before resuming the execu-
               tion of the no-wait floating-point instruction.
Case 2         If the system responds via the INTR pin after the window has closed then the interrupt is recognized
               only at the next instruction boundary.
There are two other ways, in addition to Case 1 above, in which a no-wait floating-point instruction can service a
numeric exception inside its interrupt window. First, the first floating-point error condition could be of the “imme-
diate” category (as defined in Section D.2.1.1, “Basic Rules: When FERR# Is Generated”) that asserts FERR#
immediately. If the system delay before asserting INTR is long enough, relative to the time elapsed before the no-
wait floating-point instruction, INTR can be asserted inside the interrupt window for the latter. Second, consider
two no-wait x87 FPU instructions in close sequence, and assume that a previous x87 FPU instruction has caused an
unmasked numeric exception. Then if the INTR timing is too long for an FERR# signal triggered by the first no-wait
instruction to hit the first instruction’s interrupt window, it could catch the interrupt window of the second.
The possible malfunction of a no-wait x87 FPU instruction explained above cannot happen if the instruction is being
used in the manner for which Intel originally designed it. The no-wait instructions were intended to be used inside
the x87 FPU exception handler, to allow manipulation of the x87 FPU before the error condition is cleared, without
hanging the processor because of the x87 FPU error condition, and without the need to assert IGNNE#. They will
perform this function correctly, since before the error condition is cleared, the assertion of FERR# that caused the
x87 FPU error handler to be invoked is still active. Thus the logic that would assert FERR# briefly at a no-wait
instruction causes no change since FERR# is already asserted. The no-wait instructions may also be used without
problem in the handler after the error condition is cleared, since now they will not cause FERR# to be asserted at
all.

If a no-wait instruction is used outside of the x87 FPU exception handler, it may malfunction as explained above,
depending on the details of the hardware interface implementation and which particular processor is involved. The
actual interrupt inside the window in the no-wait instruction may be blocked by surrounding it with the instructions:
PUSHFD, CLI, no-wait, then POPFD. (CLI blocks interrupts, and the push and pop of flags preserves and restores
the original value of the interrupt flag.) However, if FERR# was triggered by the no-wait, its latched value and the
PIC response will still be in effect. Further code can be used to check for and correct such a condition, if needed.
Section D.3.6, “Considerations When x87 FPU Shared Between Tasks,” discusses an important example of this type
of problem and gives a solution.

D.2.2       MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-mode in the P6 Family
            and Pentium® 4 Processors
When bit NE = 0 in CR0, the MS-DOS compatibility mode of the P6 family and Pentium 4 processors provides
FERR# and IGNNE# functionality that is almost identical to the Intel486 and Pentium processors. The same
external hardware described in Section D.2.1.2, “Recommended External Hardware to Support the MS-DOS*
Compatibility Sub-mode,” is recommended for the P6 family and Pentium 4 processors as well as the two previous
generations. The only change to MS-DOS compatibility x87 FPU exception handling with the P6 family and Pentium
4 processors is that all exceptions for all x87 FPU instructions cause immediate error reporting. That is, FERR# is
asserted as soon as the x87 FPU detects an unmasked exception; there are no cases in which error reporting is
deferred to the next x87 FPU or WAIT instruction.
(As is discussed in Section D.2.1.1, “Basic Rules: When FERR# Is Generated,” most exception cases in the Intel486
and Pentium processors are of the deferred type.)
Although FERR# is asserted immediately upon detection of an unmasked x87 FPU error, this certainly does not
mean that the requested interrupt will always be serviced before the next instruction in the code sequence is
executed. To begin with, the P6 family and Pentium 4 processors execute several instructions simultaneously.
There also will be a delay, which depends on the external hardware implementation, between the FERR# assertion
from the processor and the responding INTR assertion to the processor. Further, the interrupt request to the PICs
(IRQ13) may be temporarily blocked by the operating system, or delayed by higher priority interrupts, and
processor response to INTR itself is blocked if the operating system has cleared the IF bit in EFLAGS. Note that
Streaming SIMD Extensions numeric exceptions will not cause assertion of FERR# (independent of the value of
CR0.NE). In addition, they ignore the assertion/deassertion of IGNNE#).
However, just as with the Intel486 and Pentium processors, if the IGNNE# input is inactive, a floating-point excep-
tion which occurred in the previous x87 FPU instruction and is unmasked causes the processor to freeze immedi-
ately when encountering the next WAIT or x87 FPU instruction (except for no-wait instructions). This means that if
the x87 FPU exception handler has not already been invoked due to the earlier exception (and therefore, the
handler not has cleared that exception state from the x87 FPU), the processor is forced to wait for the handler to
be invoked and handle the exception, before the processor can execute another WAIT or x87 FPU instruction.
As explained in Section D.2.1.3, “No-Wait x87 FPU Instructions Can Get x87 FPU Interrupt in Window,” if a no-wait
instruction is used outside of the x87 FPU exception handler, in the Intel486 and Pentium processors, it may accept
an unmasked exception from a previous x87 FPU instruction which happens to fall within the external interrupt
sampling window that is opened near the beginning of execution of all x87 FPU instructions. This will not happen in
the P6 family and Pentium 4 processors, because this sampling window has been removed from the no-wait group
of x87 FPU instructions.

D.3         RECOMMENDED PROTOCOL FOR MS-DOS* COMPATIBILITY HANDLERS
The activities of numeric programs can be split into two major areas: program control and arithmetic. The program
control part performs activities such as deciding what functions to perform, calculating addresses of numeric oper-
ands, and loop control. The arithmetic part simply adds, subtracts, multiplies, and performs other operations on
the numeric operands. The processor is designed to handle these two parts separately and efficiently. An x87 FPU
exception handler, if a system chooses to implement one, is often one of the most complicated parts of the program
control code.

D.3.1        Floating-Point Exceptions and Their Defaults
The x87 FPU can recognize six classes of floating-point exception conditions while executing floating-point instruc-
tions:
1. #I — Invalid operation
     #IS — Stack fault
     #IA — IEEE standard invalid operation
2. #Z — Divide-by-zero
3. #D — Denormalized operand
4. #O — Numeric overflow
5. #U — Numeric underflow
6. #P — Inexact result (precision)
For complete details on these exceptions and their defaults, see Section 8.4, “x87 FPU Floating-Point Exception
Handling,” and Section 8.5, “x87 FPU Floating-Point Exception Conditions.”

D.3.2        Two Options for Handling Numeric Exceptions
Depending on options determined by the software system designer, the processor takes one of two possible
courses of action when a numeric exception occurs:
1. The x87 FPU can handle selected exceptions itself, producing a default fix-up that is reasonable in most
   situations. This allows the numeric program execution to continue undisturbed. Programs can mask individual
   exception types to indicate that the x87 FPU should generate this safe, reasonable result whenever the
   exception occurs. The default exception fix-up activity is treated by the x87 FPU as part of the instruction
   causing the exception; no external indication of the exception is given (except that the instruction takes longer
   to execute when it handles a masked exception.) When masked exceptions are detected, a flag is set in the
   numeric status register, but no information is preserved regarding where or when it was set.
2. A software exception handler can be invoked to handle the exception. When a numeric exception is unmasked
   and the exception occurs, the x87 FPU stops further execution of the numeric instruction and causes a branch
   to a software exception handler. The exception handler can then implement any sort of recovery procedures
   desired for any numeric exception detectable by the x87 FPU.

D.3.2.1      Automatic Exception Handling: Using Masked Exceptions
Each of the six exception conditions described above has a corresponding flag bit in the x87 FPU status word and a
mask bit in the x87 FPU control word. If an exception is masked (the corresponding mask bit in the control word =
1), the processor takes an appropriate default action and continues with the computation.
The processor has a default fix-up activity for every possible exception condition it may encounter. These masked-
exception responses are designed to be safe and are generally acceptable for most numeric applications.
For example, if the Inexact result (Precision) exception is masked, the system can specify whether the x87 FPU
should handle a result that cannot be represented exactly by one of four modes of rounding: rounding it normally,
chopping it toward zero, always rounding it up, or always down. If the Underflow exception is masked, the x87 FPU
will store a number that is too small to be represented in normalized form as a denormal (or zero if it’s smaller than
the smallest denormal). Note that when exceptions are masked, the x87 FPU may detect multiple exceptions in a
single instruction, because it continues executing the instruction after performing its masked response. For
example, the x87 FPU could detect a denormalized operand, perform its masked response to this exception, and
then detect an underflow.
As an example of how even severe exceptions can be handled safely and automatically using the default exception
responses, consider a calculation of the parallel resistance of several values using only the standard formula (see
Figure D-4). If R1 becomes zero, the circuit resistance becomes zero. With the divide-by-zero and precision excep-
tions masked, the processor will produce the correct result. FDIV of R1 into 1 gives infinity, and then FDIV of
(infinity +R2 +R3) into 1 gives zero.

                                                    R1        R2       R3

                                                                        1
                                         Equivalent Resistance =
                                                                   1    1    1
                                                                      +    +
                                                                   R1   R2   R3

                                  Figure D-4. Arithmetic Example Using Infinity

By masking or unmasking specific numeric exceptions in the x87 FPU control word, programmers can delegate
responsibility for most exceptions to the processor, reserving the most severe exceptions for programmed excep-
tion handlers. Exception-handling software is often difficult to write, and the masked responses have been tailored
to deliver the most reasonable result for each condition. For the majority of applications, masking all exceptions
yields satisfactory results with the least programming effort. Certain exceptions can usefully be left unmasked
during the debugging phase of software development, and then masked when the clean software is actually run.
An invalid-operation exception for example, typically indicates a program error that must be corrected.
The exception flags in the x87 FPU status word provide a cumulative record of exceptions that have occurred since
these flags were last cleared. Once set, these flags can be cleared only by executing the FCLEX/FNCLEX (clear
exceptions) instruction, by reinitializing the x87 FPU with FINIT/FNINIT or FSAVE/FNSAVE, or by overwriting the
flags with an FRSTOR or FLDENV instruction. This allows a programmer to mask all exceptions, run a calculation,
and then inspect the status word to see if any exceptions were detected at any point in the calculation.

D.3.2.2     Software Exception Handling
If the x87 FPU in or with an IA-32 processor (Intel 286 and onwards) encounters an unmasked exception condition,
with the system operated in the MS-DOS compatibility mode and with IGNNE# not asserted, a software exception
handler is invoked through a PIC and the processor’s INTR pin. The FERR# (or ERROR#) output from the x87 FPU
that begins the process of invoking the exception handler may occur when the error condition is first detected, or
when the processor encounters the next WAIT or x87 FPU instruction. Which of these two cases occurs depends on
the processor generation and also on which exception and which x87 FPU instruction triggered it, as discussed
earlier in Section D.1, “MS-DOS Compatibility Sub-mode for Handling x87 FPU Exceptions,” and Section D.2,
“Implementation of the MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-mode in the Intel486™, Pentium®, and P6 Processor Family,
and Pentium® 4 Processors.” The elapsed time between the initial error signal and the invocation of the x87 FPU
exception handler depends of course on the external hardware interface, and also on whether the external inter-
rupt for x87 FPU errors is enabled. But the architecture ensures that the handler will be invoked before execution
of the next WAIT or floating-point instruction since an unmasked floating-point exception causes the processor to
freeze just before executing such an instruction (unless the IGNNE# input is active, or it is a no-wait x87 FPU
instruction).
The frozen processor waits for an external interrupt, which must be supplied by external hardware in response to
the FERR# (or ERROR#) output of the processor (or coprocessor), usually through IRQ13 on the “slave” PIC, and
then through INTR. Then the external interrupt invokes the exception handling routine. Note that if the external
interrupt for x87 FPU errors is disabled when the processor executes an x87 FPU instruction, the processor will
freeze until some other (enabled) interrupt occurs if an unmasked x87 FPU exception condition is in effect. If NE =
0 but the IGNNE# input is active, the processor disregards the exception and continues. Error reporting via an
external interrupt is supported for MS-DOS compatibility. Chapter 22, “IA-32 Architecture Compatibility,” of the
Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3B, contains further discussion of compat-
ibility issues.

The references above to the ERROR# output from the x87 FPU apply to the Intel 387 and Intel 287 math coproces-
sors (NPX chips). If one of these coprocessors encounters an unmasked exception condition, it signals the excep-
tion to the Intel 286 or Intel386 processor using the ERROR# status line between the processor and the
coprocessor. See Section D.1, “MS-DOS Compatibility Sub-mode for Handling x87 FPU Exceptions,” in this
appendix, and Chapter 22, “IA-32 Architecture Compatibility,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 3B, for differences in x87 FPU exception handling.
The exception-handling routine is normally a part of the systems software. The routine must clear (or disable) the
active exception flags in the x87 FPU status word before executing any floating-point instructions that cannot
complete execution when there is a pending floating-point exception. Otherwise, the floating-point instruction will
trigger the x87 FPU interrupt again, and the system will be caught in an endless loop of nested floating-point
exceptions, and hang. In any event, the routine must clear (or disable) the active exception flags in the x87 FPU
status word after handling them, and before IRET(D). Typical exception responses may include:
•   Incrementing an exception counter for later display or printing.
•   Printing or displaying diagnostic information (e.g., the x87 FPU environment and registers).
•   Aborting further execution, or using the exception pointers to build an instruction that will run without
    exception and executing it.
Applications programmers should consult their operating system's reference manuals for the appropriate system
response to numerical exceptions. For systems programmers, some details on writing software exception handlers
are provided in Chapter 6, “Interrupt and Exception Handling,” in the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software
Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A, as well as in Section D.3.4, “x87 FPU Exception Handling Examples,” in this
appendix.
As discussed in Section D.2.1.2, “Recommended External Hardware to Support the MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-
mode,” some early FERR# to INTR hardware interface implementations are less robust than the recommended
circuit. This is because they depended on the exception handler to clear the x87 FPU exception interrupt request to
the PIC (by accessing port 0F0H) before the handler causes FERR# to be de-asserted by clearing the exception
from the x87 FPU itself. To eliminate the chance of a problem with this early hardware, Intel recommends that x87
FPU exception handlers always access port 0F0H before clearing the error condition from the x87 FPU.

D.3.3         Synchronization Required for Use of x87 FPU Exception Handlers
Concurrency or synchronization management requires a check for exceptions before letting the processor change
a value just used by the x87 FPU. It is important to remember that almost any numeric instruction can, under the
wrong circumstances, produce a numeric exception.

D.3.3.1       Exception Synchronization: What, Why, and When
Exception synchronization means that the exception handler inspects and deals with the exception in the context
in which it occurred. If concurrent execution is allowed, the state of the processor when it recognizes the exception
is often not in the context in which it occurred. The processor may have changed many of its internal registers and
be executing a totally different program by the time the exception occurs. If the exception handler cannot recap-
ture the original context, it cannot reliably determine the cause of the exception or recover successfully from the
exception. To handle this situation, the x87 FPU has special registers updated at the start of each numeric instruc-
tion to describe the state of the numeric program when the failed instruction was attempted.
This provides tools to help the exception handler recapture the original context, but the application code must also
be written with synchronization in mind. Overall, exception synchronization must ensure that the x87 FPU and
other relevant parts of the context are in a well defined state when the handler is invoked after an unmasked
numeric exception occurs.
When the x87 FPU signals an unmasked exception condition, it is requesting help. The fact that the exception was
unmasked indicates that further numeric program execution under the arithmetic and programming rules of the
x87 FPU will probably yield invalid results. Thus the exception must be handled, and with proper synchronization,
or the program will not operate reliably.
For programmers using higher-level languages, all required synchronization is automatically provided by the
appropriate compiler. However, for assembly language programmers exception synchronization remains the
responsibility of the programmer. It is not uncommon for a programmer to expect that their numeric program will

not cause numeric exceptions after it has been tested and debugged, but in a different system or numeric environ-
ment, exceptions may occur regularly nonetheless. An obvious example would be use of the program with some
numbers beyond the range for which it was designed and tested. Example D-1 and Example D-2 in Section D.3.3.2,
“Exception Synchronization Examples,” show a subtle way in which unexpected exceptions can occur.
As described in Section D.3.1, “Floating-Point Exceptions and Their Defaults,” depending on options determined by
the software system designer, the processor can perform one of two possible courses of action when a numeric
exception occurs.
•     The x87 FPU can provide a default fix-up for selected numeric exceptions. If the x87 FPU performs its default
      action for all exceptions, then the need for exception synchronization is not manifest. However, code is often
      ported to contexts and operating systems for which it was not originally designed. Example D-1 and Example
      D-2, below, illustrate that it is safest to always consider exception synchronization when designing code that
      uses the x87 FPU.
•     Alternatively, a software exception handler can be invoked to handle the exception. When a numeric exception
      is unmasked and the exception occurs, the x87 FPU stops further execution of the numeric instruction and
      causes a branch to a software exception handler. When an x87 FPU exception handler will be invoked, synchro-
      nization must always be considered to assure reliable performance.
Example D-1 and Example D-2, below, illustrate the need to always consider exception synchronization when
writing numeric code, even when the code is initially intended for execution with exceptions masked.

D.3.3.2       Exception Synchronization Examples
In the following examples, three instructions are shown to load an integer, calculate its square root, then increment
the integer. The synchronous execution of the x87 FPU will allow both of these programs to execute correctly, with
INC COUNT being executed in parallel in the processor, as long as no exceptions occur on the FILD instruction.
However, if the code is later moved to an environment where exceptions are unmasked, the code in Example D-1
will not work correctly:

Example D-1. Incorrect Error Synchronization

FILD  COUNT          ;x87 FPU instruction
INC   COUNT          ;integer instruction alters operand
FSQRT                ;subsequent x87 FPU instruction -- error
                     ;from previous x87 FPU instruction detected here

Example D-2. Proper Error Synchronization
FILD  COUNT          ;x87 FPU instruction
FSQRT                ;subsequent x87 FPU instruction -- error from
                     ;previous x87 FPU instruction detected here
INC      COUNT       ;integer instruction alters operand

In some operating systems supporting the x87 FPU, the numeric register stack is extended to memory. To extend
the x87 FPU stack to memory, the invalid exception is unmasked. A push to a full register or pop from an empty
register sets SF (Stack Fault flag) and causes an invalid operation exception. The recovery routine for the exception
must recognize this situation, fix up the stack, then perform the original operation. The recovery routine will not
work correctly in Example D-1. The problem is that the value of COUNT increments before the exception handler is
invoked, so that the recovery routine will load an incorrect value of COUNT, causing the program to fail or behave
unreliably.

D.3.3.3       Proper Exception Synchronization
As explained in Section D.2.1.2, “Recommended External Hardware to Support the MS-DOS* Compatibility Sub-
mode,” if the x87 FPU encounters an unmasked exception condition a software exception handler is invoked before
execution of the next WAIT or floating-point instruction. This is because an unmasked floating-point exception
causes the processor to freeze immediately before executing such an instruction (unless the IGNNE# input is

active, or it is a no-wait x87 FPU instruction). Exactly when the exception handler will be invoked (in the interval
between when the exception is detected and the next WAIT or x87 FPU instruction) is dependent on the processor
generation, the system, and which x87 FPU instruction and exception is involved.
To be safe in exception synchronization, one should assume the handler will be invoked at the end of the interval.
Thus the program should not change any value that might be needed by the handler (such as COUNT in Example
D-1 and Example D-2) until after the next x87 FPU instruction following an x87 FPU instruction that could cause
an error. If the program needs to modify such a value before the next x87 FPU instruction (or if the next x87 FPU
instruction could also cause an error), then a WAIT instruction should be inserted before the value is modified. This
will force the handling of any exception before the value is modified. A WAIT instruction should also be placed after
the last floating-point instruction in an application so that any unmasked exceptions will be serviced before the task
completes.

D.3.4         x87 FPU Exception Handling Examples
There are many approaches to writing exception handlers. One useful technique is to consider the exception
handler procedure as consisting of “prologue,” “body,” and “epilogue” sections of code.
In the transfer of control to the exception handler due to an INTR, NMI, or SMI, external interrupts have been
disabled by hardware. The prologue performs all functions that must be protected from possible interruption by
higher-priority sources. Typically, this involves saving registers and transferring diagnostic information from the
x87 FPU to memory. When the critical processing has been completed, the prologue may re-enable interrupts to
allow higher-priority interrupt handlers to preempt the exception handler. The standard “prologue” not only saves
the registers and transfers diagnostic information from the x87 FPU to memory but also clears the floating-point
exception flags in the status word. Alternatively, when it is not necessary for the handler to be re-entrant, another
technique may also be used. In this technique, the exception flags are not cleared in the “prologue” and the body
of the handler must not contain any floating-point instructions that cannot complete execution when there is a
pending floating-point exception. (The no-wait instructions are discussed in Section 8.3.12, “Waiting vs. Non-
waiting Instructions.”) Note that the handler must still clear the exception flag(s) before executing the IRET. If the
exception handler uses neither of these techniques, the system will be caught in an endless loop of nested floating-
point exceptions, and hang.
The body of the exception handler examines the diagnostic information and makes a response that is necessarily
application-dependent. This response may range from halting execution, to displaying a message, to attempting to
repair the problem and proceed with normal execution. The epilogue essentially reverses the actions of the
prologue, restoring the processor so that normal execution can be resumed. The epilogue must not load an
unmasked exception flag into the x87 FPU or another exception will be requested immediately.
The following code examples show the ASM386/486 coding of three skeleton exception handlers, with the save
spaces given as correct for 32-bit protected mode. They show how prologues and epilogues can be written for
various situations, but the application-dependent exception handling body is just indicated by comments showing
where it should be placed.
The first two are very similar; their only substantial difference is their choice of instructions to save and restore the
x87 FPU. The trade-off here is between the increased diagnostic information provided by FNSAVE and the faster
execution of FNSTENV. (Also, after saving the original contents, FNSAVE re-initializes the x87 FPU, while FNSTENV
only masks all x87 FPU exceptions.) For applications that are sensitive to interrupt latency or that do not need to
examine register contents, FNSTENV reduces the duration of the “critical region,” during which the processor does
not recognize another interrupt request. (See the Section 8.1.10, “Saving the x87 FPU’s State with
FSTENV/FNSTENV and FSAVE/FNSAVE,” for a complete description of the x87 FPU save image.) If the processor
supports Streaming SIMD Extensions and the operating system supports it, the FXSAVE instruction should be used
instead of FNSAVE. If the FXSAVE instruction is used, the save area should be increased to 512 bytes and aligned
to 16 bytes to save the entire state. These steps will ensure that the complete context is saved.
After the exception handler body, the epilogues prepare the processor to resume execution from the point of inter-
ruption (for example, the instruction following the one that generated the unmasked exception). Notice that the
exception flags in the memory image that is loaded into the x87 FPU are cleared to zero prior to reloading (in fact,
in these examples, the entire status word image is cleared).
Example D-3 and Example D-4 assume that the exception handler itself will not cause an unmasked exception.
Where this is a possibility, the general approach shown in Example D-5 can be employed. The basic technique is to

save the full x87 FPU state and then to load a new control word in the prologue. Note that considerable care should
be taken when designing an exception handler of this type to prevent the handler from being reentered endlessly.

Example D-3. Full-State Exception Handler

SAVE_ALL PROC
;
;SAVE REGISTERS, ALLOCATE STACK SPACE FOR x87 FPU STATE IMAGE
    PUSH    EBP
    .
    .
    MOV     EBP, ESP
    SUB     ESP, 108 ; ALLOCATES 108 BYTES (32-bit PROTECTED MODE SIZE)
;SAVE FULL x87 FPU STATE, RESTORE INTERRUPT ENABLE FLAG (IF)
    FNSAVE [EBP-108]
    PUSH    [EBP + OFFSET_TO_EFLAGS] ; COPY OLD EFLAGS TO STACK TOP
    POPFD ;RESTORE IF TO VALUE BEFORE x87 FPU EXCEPTION
;
;APPLICATION-DEPENDENT EXCEPTION HANDLING CODE GOES HERE
;
;CLEAR EXCEPTION FLAGS IN STATUS WORD (WHICH IS IN MEMORY)
;RESTORE MODIFIED STATE IMAGE
    MOV     BYTE PTR [EBP-104], 0H
    FRSTOR [EBP-108]
;DE-ALLOCATE STACK SPACE, RESTORE REGISTERS
    MOV     ESP, EBP
    .
    .
    POP     EBP
;
;RETURN TO INTERRUPTED CALCULATION
    IRETD
    SAVE_ALL     ENDP

Example D-4. Reduced-Latency Exception Handler

SAVE_ENVIRONMENTPROC
;
;SAVE REGISTERS, ALLOCATE STACK SPACE FOR x87 FPU ENVIRONMENT
    PUSH   EBP
    .
    .
    MOV    EBP, ESP
    SUB    ESP, 28 ;ALLOCATES 28 BYTES (32-bit PROTECTED MODE SIZE)
;SAVE ENVIRONMENT, RESTORE INTERRUPT ENABLE FLAG (IF)
    FNSTENV     [EBP - 28]
    PUSH        [EBP + OFFSET_TO_EFLAGS] ; COPY OLD EFLAGS TO STACK TOP
    POPFD ;RESTORE IF TO VALUE BEFORE x87 FPU EXCEPTION
;
;APPLICATION-DEPENDENT EXCEPTION HANDLING CODE GOES HERE
;
;CLEAR EXCEPTION FLAGS IN STATUS WORD (WHICH IS IN MEMORY)
;RESTORE MODIFIED ENVIRONMENT IMAGE
    MOV    BYTE PTR [EBP-24], 0H

   FLDENV [EBP-28]
;DE-ALLOCATE STACK SPACE, RESTORE REGISTERS
   MOV     ESP, EBP
   .
   .
   POP     EBP
;
;RETURN TO INTERRUPTED CALCULATION
   IRETD
   SAVE_ENVIRONMENT ENDP

Example D-5. Reentrant Exception Handler

   .
   .
LOCAL_CONTROL DW ?; ASSUME INITIALIZED
   .
   .
REENTRANTPROC
;
;SAVE REGISTERS, ALLOCATE STACK SPACE FOR x87 FPU STATE IMAGE
   PUSH    EBP
   .
   .
   MOV     EBP, ESP
   SUB     ESP, 108 ;ALLOCATES 108 BYTES (32-bit PROTECTED MODE SIZE)

;SAVE STATE, LOAD NEW CONTROL WORD, RESTORE INTERRUPT ENABLE FLAG (IF)
   FNSAVE [EBP-108]
   FLDCW LOCAL_CONTROL
   PUSH    [EBP + OFFSET_TO_EFLAGS] ;COPY OLD EFLAGS TO STACK TOP
   POPFD ;RESTORE IF TO VALUE BEFORE x87 FPU EXCEPTION

   .
   .
;
;APPLICATION-DEPENDENT EXCEPTION HANDLING CODE
;GOES HERE - AN UNMASKED EXCEPTION
;GENERATED HERE WILL CAUSE THE EXCEPTION HANDLER TO BE REENTERED
;IF LOCAL STORAGE IS NEEDED, IT MUST BE ALLOCATED ON THE STACK
     .
;CLEAR EXCEPTION FLAGS IN STATUS WORD (WHICH IS IN MEMORY)
;RESTORE MODIFIED STATE IMAGE
     MOV     BYTE PTR [EBP-104], 0H
     FRSTOR [EBP-108]
;DE-ALLOCATE STACK SPACE, RESTORE REGISTERS
     MOV    ESP, EBP
     .
     .
     POP    EBP
;
;RETURN TO POINT OF INTERRUPTION
     IRETD
     REENTRANT ENDP

D.3.5       Need for Storing State of IGNNE# Circuit If Using x87 FPU and SMM
The recommended circuit (see Figure D-1) for MS-DOS compatibility x87 FPU exception handling for Intel486
processors and beyond contains two flip flops. When the x87 FPU exception handler accesses I/O port 0F0H it
clears the IRQ13 interrupt request output from Flip Flop #1 and also clocks out the IGNNE# signal (active) from
Flip Flop #2.
The assertion of IGNNE# may be used by the handler if needed to execute any x87 FPU instruction while ignoring
the pending x87 FPU errors. The problem here is that the state of Flip Flop #2 is effectively an additional (but
hidden) status bit that can affect processor behavior, and so ideally should be saved upon entering SMM, and
restored before resuming to normal operation. If this is not done, and also the SMM code saves the x87 FPU state,
AND an x87 FPU error handler is being used which relies on IGNNE# assertion, then (very rarely) the x87 FPU
handler will nest inside itself and malfunction. The following example shows how this can happen.
Suppose that the x87 FPU exception handler includes the following sequence:

FNSTSW save_sw     ; save the x87 FPU status word
                   ; using a no-wait x87 FPU instruction
OUT   0F0H, AL     ; clears IRQ13 & activates IGNNE#
....
FLDCW new_cw       ; loads new CW ignoring x87 FPU errors,
                   ; since IGNNE# is assumed active; or any
                   ; other x87 FPU instruction that is not a no-wait
                   ; type will cause the same problem
....
FCLEX              ; clear the x87 FPU error conditions & thus
                   ; turn off FERR# & reset the IGNNE# FF

The problem will only occur if the processor enters SMM between the OUT and the FLDCW instructions. But if that
happens, AND the SMM code saves the x87 FPU state using FNSAVE, then the IGNNE# Flip Flop will be cleared
(because FNSAVE clears the x87 FPU errors and thus de-asserts FERR#). When the processor returns from SMM it
will restore the x87 FPU state with FRSTOR, which will re-assert FERR#, but the IGNNE# Flip Flop will not get set.
Then when the x87 FPU error handler executes the FLDCW instruction, the active error condition will cause the
processor to re-enter the x87 FPU error handler from the beginning. This may cause the handler to malfunction.
To avoid this problem, Intel recommends two measures:
1. Do not use the x87 FPU for calculations inside SMM code. (The normal power management, and sometimes
   security, functions provided by SMM have no need for x87 FPU calculations; if they are needed for some special
   case, use scaling or emulation instead.) This eliminates the need to do FNSAVE/FRSTOR inside SMM code,
   except when going into a 0 V suspend state (in which, in order to save power, the CPU is turned off completely,
   requiring its complete state to be saved).
2. The system should not call upon SMM code to put the processor into 0 V suspend while the processor is running
   x87 FPU calculations, or just after an interrupt has occurred. Normal power management protocol avoids this
   by going into power down states only after timed intervals in which no system activity occurs.

D.3.6       Considerations When x87 FPU Shared Between Tasks
The IA-32 architecture allows speculative deferral of floating-point state swaps on task switches. This feature
allows postponing an x87 FPU state swap until an x87 FPU instruction is actually encountered in another task. Since
kernel tasks rarely use floating-point, and some applications do not use floating-point or use it infrequently, the
amount of time saved by avoiding unnecessary stores of the floating-point state is significant. Speculative deferral
of x87 FPU saves does, however, place an extra burden on the kernel in three key ways:
1. The kernel must keep track of which thread owns the x87 FPU, which may be different from the currently
   executing thread.
2. The kernel must associate any floating-point exceptions with the generating task. This requires special
   handling since floating-point exceptions are delivered asynchronous with other system activity.

3. There are conditions under which spurious floating-point exception interrupts are generated, which the kernel
   must recognize and discard.

D.3.6.1       Speculatively Deferring x87 FPU Saves, General Overview
In order to support multitasking, each thread in the system needs a save area for the general-purpose registers,
and each task that is allowed to use floating-point needs an x87 FPU save area large enough to hold the entire x87
FPU stack and associated x87 FPU state such as the control word and status word. (See Section 8.1.10, “Saving the
x87 FPU’s State with FSTENV/FNSTENV and FSAVE/FNSAVE,” for a complete description of the x87 FPU save
image.) If the processor and the operating system support Streaming SIMD Extensions, the save area should be
large enough and aligned correctly to hold x87 FPU and Streaming SIMD Extensions state.
On a task switch, the general-purpose registers are swapped out to their save area for the suspending thread, and
the registers of the resuming thread are loaded. The x87 FPU state does not need to be saved at this point. If the
resuming thread does not use the x87 FPU before it is itself suspended, then both a save and a load of the x87 FPU
state has been avoided. It is often the case that several threads may be executed without any usage of the x87
FPU.
The processor supports speculative deferral of x87 FPU saves via interrupt 7 “Device Not Available” (DNA), used in
conjunction with CR0 bit 3, the “Task Switched” bit (TS). (See “Control Registers” in Chapter 2 of the Intel® 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3A.) Every task switch via the hardware supported task
switching mechanism (see “Task Switching” in Chapter 7 of the Intel® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Devel-
oper’s Manual, Volume 3A) sets TS. Multi-threaded kernels that use software task switching1 can set the TS bit by
reading CR0, ORing a “1” into2 bit 3, and writing back CR0. Any subsequent floating-point instructions (now being
executed in a new thread context) will fault via interrupt 7 before execution.
This allows a DNA handler to save the old floating-point context and reload the x87 FPU state for the current
thread. The handler should clear the TS bit before exit using the CLTS instruction. On return from the handler the
faulting thread will proceed with its floating-point computation.
Some operating systems save the x87 FPU context on every task switch, typically because they also change the
linear address space between tasks. The problem and solution discussed in the following sections apply to these
operating systems also.

D.3.6.2       Tracking x87 FPU Ownership
Since the contents of the x87 FPU may not belong to the currently executing thread, the thread identifier for the
last x87 FPU user needs to be tracked separately. This is not complicated; the kernel should simply provide a vari-
able to store the thread identifier of the x87 FPU owner, separate from the variable that stores the identifier for the
currently executing thread. This variable is updated in the DNA exception handler, and is used by the DNA excep-
tion handler to find the x87 FPU save areas of the old and new threads. A simplified flow for a DNA exception
handler is then:
1. Use the “x87 FPU Owner” variable to find the x87 FPU save area of the last thread to use the x87 FPU.
2. Save the x87 FPU contents to the old thread’s save area, typically using an FNSAVE or FXSAVE instruction.
3. Set the x87 FPU Owner variable to the identify the currently executing thread.
4. Reload the x87 FPU contents from the new thread’s save area, typically using an FRSTOR or FXSTOR
   instruction.
5. Clear TS using the CLTS instruction and exit the DNA exception handler.
While this flow covers the basic requirements for speculatively deferred x87 FPU state swaps, there are some addi-
tional subtleties that need to be handled in a robust implementation.

1 In a software task switch, the operating system uses a sequence of instructions to save the suspending thread’s state and restore
  the resuming thread’s state, instead of the single long non-interruptible task switch operation provided by the IA-32 architecture.
2 Although CR0, bit 2, the emulation flag (EM), also causes a DNA exception, do not use the EM bit as a surrogate for TS. EM means that
  no x87 FPU is available and that floating-point instructions must be emulated. Using EM to trap on task switches is not compatible
  with the MMX technology. If the EM flag is set, MMX instructions raise the invalid opcode exception.

D.3.6.3     Interaction of x87 FPU State Saves and Floating-Point Exception Association
Recall these key points from earlier in this document: When considering floating-point exceptions across all imple-
mentations of the IA-32 architecture, and across all floating-point instructions, a floating-point exception can be
initiated from any time during the excepting floating-point instruction, up to just before the next floating-point
instruction. The “next” floating-point instruction may be the FNSAVE used to save the x87 FPU state for a task
switch. In the case of “no-wait:” instructions such as FNSAVE, the interrupt from a previously excepting instruc-
tion (NE = 0 case) may arrive just before the no-wait instruction, during, or shortly thereafter with a system
dependent delay.
Note that this implies that an floating-point exception might be registered during the state swap process itself, and
the kernel and floating-point exception interrupt handler must be prepared for this case.
A simple way to handle the case of exceptions arriving during x87 FPU state swaps is to allow the kernel to be one
of the x87 FPU owning threads. A reserved thread identifier is used to indicate kernel ownership of the x87 FPU.
During an floating-point state swap, the “x87 FPU owner” variable should be set to indicate the kernel as the
current owner. At the completion of the state swap, the variable should be set to indicate the new owning thread.
The numeric exception handler needs to check the x87 FPU owner and discard any numeric exceptions that occur
while the kernel is the x87 FPU owner. A more general flow for a DNA exception handler that handles this case is
shown in Figure D-5.
Numeric exceptions received while the kernel owns the x87 FPU for a state swap must be discarded in the kernel
without being dispatched to a handler. A flow for a numeric exception dispatch routine is shown in Figure D-6.
It may at first glance seem that there is a possibility of floating-point exceptions being lost because of exceptions
that are discarded during state swaps. This is not the case, as the exception will be re-issued when the floating-
point state is reloaded. Walking through state swaps both with and without pending numeric exceptions will clarify
the operation of these two handlers.

                                DNA Handler Entry

                            <other handler set up code>

                                  Current Thread
                                     same as
                                   FPU Owner?              Yes

                                           No
                               FPU Owner := Kernel

                             FNSAVE to Old Thread’s
                                   FP Save Area
                           (may cause numeric exception)          <handler final clean-up>

                          FRSTOR from Current Thread’s            CLTS (clears CR0.TS)
                                FP Save Area

                               <other handler code>                  Exit DNA Handler

                           FPU Owner := Current Thread

                           Figure D-5. General Program Flow for DNA Exception Handler

                              Numeric Exception Entry

                                     Is Kernel
                                    FPU Owner?           Yes

                                            No
                                Normal Dispatch to
                             Numeric Exception Handler                    Exit

                       Figure D-6. Program Flow for a Numeric Exception Dispatch Routine

Case #1: x87 FPU State Swap Without Numeric Exception
Assume two threads A and B, both using the floating-point unit. Let A be the thread to have most recently executed
a floating-point instruction, with no pending numeric exceptions. Let B be the currently executing thread. CR0.TS
was set when thread A was suspended.
When B starts to execute a floating-point instruction the instruction will fault with the DNA exception because TS is
set.
At this point the handler is entered, and eventually it finds that the current x87 FPU Owner is not the currently
executing thread. To guard the x87 FPU state swap from extraneous numeric exceptions, the x87 FPU Owner is set
to be the kernel. The old owner’s x87 FPU state is saved with FNSAVE, and the current thread’s x87 FPU state is
restored with FRSTOR. Before exiting, the x87 FPU owner is set to thread B, and the TS bit is cleared.
On exit, thread B resumes execution of the faulting floating-point instruction and continues.

Case #2: x87 FPU State Swap with Discarded Numeric Exception
Again, assume two threads A and B, both using the floating-point unit. Let A be the thread to have most recently
executed a floating-point instruction, but this time let there be a pending numeric exception. Let B be the currently
executing thread. When B starts to execute a floating-point instruction the instruction will fault with the DNA
exception and enter the DNA handler. (If both numeric and DNA exceptions are pending, the DNA exception takes
precedence, in order to support handling the numeric exception in its own context.)
When the FNSAVE starts, it will trigger an interrupt via FERR# because of the pending numeric exception. After
some system dependent delay, the numeric exception handler is entered. It may be entered before the FNSAVE
starts to execute, or it may be entered shortly after execution of the FNSAVE. Since the x87 FPU Owner is the
kernel, the numeric exception handler simply exits, discarding the exception. The DNA handler resumes execution,
completing the FNSAVE of the old floating-point context of thread A and the FRSTOR of the floating-point context
for thread B.
Thread A eventually gets an opportunity to handle the exception that was discarded during the task switch. After
some time, thread B is suspended, and thread A resumes execution. When thread A starts to execute an floating-
point instruction, once again the DNA exception handler is entered. B’s x87 FPU state is saved with FNSAVE, and A’s
x87 FPU state is restored with FRSTOR. Note that in restoring the x87 FPU state from A’s save area, the pending
numeric exception flags are reloaded into the floating-point status word. Now when the DNA exception handler
returns, thread A resumes execution of the faulting floating-point instruction just long enough to immediately
generate a numeric exception, which now gets handled in the normal way. The net result is that the task switch and
resulting x87 FPU state swap via the DNA exception handler causes an extra numeric exception which can be safely
discarded.

D.3.6.4       Interrupt Routing From the Kernel
In MS-DOS, an application that wishes to handle numeric exceptions hooks interrupt 16 by placing its handler
address in the interrupt vector table, and exiting via a jump to the previous interrupt 16 handler. Protected mode
systems that run MS-DOS programs under a subsystem can emulate this exception delivery mechanism. For
example, assume a protected mode OS. that runs with CR0.NE[bit 5] = 1, and that runs MS-DOS programs in a

virtual machine subsystem. The MS-DOS program is set up in a virtual machine that provides a virtualized inter-
rupt table. The MS-DOS application hooks interrupt 16 in the virtual machine in the normal way. A numeric excep-
tion will trap to the kernel via the real INT 16 residing in the kernel at ring 0.
The INT 16 handler in the kernel then locates the correct MS-DOS virtual machine, and reflects the interrupt to the
virtual machine monitor. The virtual machine monitor then emulates an interrupt by jumping through the address
in the virtualized interrupt table, eventually reaching the application’s numeric exception handler.

D.3.6.5     Special Considerations for Operating Systems that Support Streaming SIMD Extensions
Operating systems that support Streaming SIMD Extensions instructions introduced with the Pentium III processor
should use the FXSAVE and FXRSTOR instructions to save and restore the new SIMD floating-point instruction
register state as well as the floating-point state. Such operating systems must consider the following issues:
1. Enlarged state save area — FNSAVE/FRSTOR instructions operate on a 94-byte or 108-byte memory region,
   depending on whether they are executed in 16-bit or 32-bit mode. The FXSAVE/FXRSTOR instructions operate
   on a 512-byte memory region.
2. Alignment requirements — FXSAVE/FXRSTOR instructions require the memory region on which they operate
   to be 16-byte aligned (refer to the individual instruction instructions descriptions in Chapter 3 of the Intel® 64
   and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 2A, for information about exceptions generated
   if the memory region is not aligned).
3. Maintaining compatibility with legacy applications/libraries — The operating system changes to
   support Streaming SIMD Extensions must be invisible to legacy applications or libraries that deal only with
   floating-point instructions. The layout of the memory region operated on by the FXSAVE/FXRSTOR instructions
   is different from the layout for the FNSAVE/FRSTOR instructions. Specifically, the format of the x87 FPU tag
   word and the length of the various fields in the memory region is different. Care must be taken to return the
   x87 FPU state to a legacy application (e.g., when reporting FP exceptions) in the format it expects.
4. Instruction semantic differences — There are some semantic differences between the way the FXSAVE and
   FSAVE/FNSAVE instructions operate. The FSAVE/FNSAVE instructions clear the x87 FPU after they save the
   state while the FXSAVE instruction saves the x87 FPU/Streaming SIMD Extensions state but does not clear it.
   Operating systems that use FXSAVE to save the x87 FPU state before making it available for another thread
   (e.g., during thread switch time) should take precautions not to pass a “dirty” x87 FPU to another application.

D.4         DIFFERENCES FOR HANDLERS USING NATIVE MODE
The 8087 has an INT pin which it asserts when an unmasked exception occurs. But there is no interrupt input pin
in the 8086 or 8088 dedicated to its attachment, nor an interrupt vector in the 8086 or 8088 specific for an x87 FPU
error assertion. Beginning with the Intel 286 and Intel 287 hardware, a connection was dedicated to support the
x87 FPU exception and interrupt vector 16 was assigned to it.

D.4.1       Origin with the Intel 286 and Intel 287, and Intel386 and Intel 387 Processors
The Intel 286 and Intel 287, and Intel386 and Intel 387 processor/coprocessor pairs are each provided with
ERROR# pins that are recommended to be connected between the processor and x87 FPU. If this is done, when an
unmasked x87 FPU exception occurs, the x87 FPU records the exception, and asserts its ERROR# pin. The
processor recognizes this active condition of the ERROR# status line immediately before execution of the next
WAIT or x87 FPU instruction (except for the no-wait type) in its instruction stream, and branches to the handler of
interrupt 16. Thus an x87 FPU exception will be handled before any other x87 FPU instruction (after the one
causing the error) is executed (except for no-wait instructions, which will be executed without triggering the x87
FPU exception interrupt, but it will remain pending).
Using the dedicated INT 16 for x87 FPU exception handling is referred to as the native mode. It is the simplest
approach, and the one recommended most highly by Intel.

D.4.2         Changes with Intel486, Pentium and Pentium Pro Processors with CR0.NE[bit 5] = 1
With these three generations of the IA-32 architecture, more enhancements and speedup features have been
added to the corresponding x87 FPUs. Also, the x87 FPU is now built into the same chip as the processor, which
allows further increases in the speed at which the x87 FPU can operate as part of the integrated system. This also
means that the native mode of x87 FPU exception handling, selected by setting bit NE of register CR0 to 1, is now
entirely internal.
If an unmasked exception occurs during an x87 FPU instruction, the x87 FPU records the exception internally, and
triggers the exception handler through interrupt 16 immediately before execution of the next WAIT or x87 FPU
instruction (except for no-wait instructions, which will be executed as described in Section D.4.1, “Origin with the
Intel 286 and Intel 287, and Intel386 and Intel 387 Processors”).
An unmasked numerical exception causes the FERR# output to be activated even with NE = 1, and at exactly the
same point in the program flow as it would have been asserted if NE were zero. However, the system would not
connect FERR# to a PIC to generate INTR when operating in the native, internal mode. (If the hardware of a system
has FERR# connected to trigger IRQ13 in order to support MS-DOS, but an operating system using the native mode
is actually running the system, it is the operating system’s responsibility to make sure that IRQ13 is not enabled in
the slave PIC.) With this configuration a system is immune to the problem discussed in Section D.2.1.3, “No-Wait
x87 FPU Instructions Can Get x87 FPU Interrupt in Window,” where for Intel486 and Pentium processors a no-wait
x87 FPU instruction can get an x87 FPU exception.

D.4.3         Considerations When x87 FPU Shared Between Tasks Using Native Mode
The protocols recommended in Section D.3.6, “Considerations When x87 FPU Shared Between Tasks,” for MS-DOS
compatibility x87 FPU exception handlers that are shared between tasks may be used without change with the
native mode. However, the protocols for a handler written specifically for native mode can be simplified, because
the problem of a spurious floating-point exception interrupt occurring while the kernel is executing cannot happen
in native mode.
The problem as actually found in practical code in a MS-DOS compatibility system happens when the DNA handler
uses FNSAVE to switch x87 FPU contexts. If an x87 FPU exception is active, then FNSAVE triggers FERR# briefly,
which usually will cause the x87 FPU exception handler to be invoked inside the DNA handler. In native mode,
neither FNSAVE nor any other no-wait instructions can trigger interrupt 16. (As discussed above, FERR# gets
asserted independent of the value of the NE bit, but when NE = 1, the operating system should not enable its path
through the PIC.) Another possible (very rare) way a floating-point exception interrupt could occur while the kernel
is executing is by an x87 FPU immediate exception case having its interrupt delayed by the external hardware until
execution has switched to the kernel. This also cannot happen in native mode because there is no delay through
external hardware.
Thus the native mode x87 FPU exception handler can omit the test to see if the kernel is the x87 FPU owner, and
the DNA handler for a native mode system can omit the step of setting the kernel as the x87 FPU owner at the
handler’s beginning. Since however these simplifications are minor and save little code, it would be a reasonable
and conservative habit (as long as the MS-DOS compatibility mode is widely used) to include these steps in all
systems.
Note that the special DP (Dual Processing) mode for Pentium processors, and also the more general Intel MultiPro-
cessor Specification for systems with multiple Pentium, P6 family, or Pentium 4 processors, support x87 FPU
exception handling only in the native mode. Intel does not recommend using the MS-DOS compatibility mode for
systems using more than one processor.

