                    Praise for Gray Hat Hacking:
            The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook, Sixth Edition

“Offensive security covers such a broad array of topics that it can be extremely difficult to
find reference material that provides even surface-level coverage of it. Gray Hat Hacking:
The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook, Sixth Edition manages to cover a surprisingly large subset
of specialist areas within the field, all while diving deep enough to shine a light on some
of the more interesting and challenging nuances of those areas. It’s a worthy addition to
the hacker’s bookshelf.”
                                                                                —OJ Reeves
                                                                   Director, Beyond Binary

“This book has been a staple of the development and careers of many, and its sixth edition
delivers on expectations with fresh material and content to help push people to the next
level. It’s a phenomenal contribution to anyone’s skill set and written by true experts;
Stephen Sims and the other authors are people that I respect and routinely read whatever
they put out. Readers will find this to be a practical resource worthy of any bookshelf of
any practitioner in our field.”
                                                                          —Robert M. Lee
                          Senior SANS Instructor and CEO/Co-Founder of Dragos, Inc.

“The chapters on Hyper-V in Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook,
Sixth Edition are the most complete public resources I have seen to date. Not only do
they provide a general overview of the architecture, they also provide in-depth scripts
that can be used to understand the internals very well. I’m very impressed with all of the
resources attached to these chapters. If you are interested in hypervisors and/or Hyper-V
in any form, give this book a shot.”
                                                                             —Matt Suiche
                                                                          Founder, Comae
This page intentionally left blank
