                                  In Memory of Shon Harris
Each time we write a new edition, all of my memories of Shon come to the surface. As you
know from previous editions, we lost Shon on October 8, 2014. She was a great friend,
pioneer in the field, and beloved subject matter expert of cybersecurity. She brought
me into the first Gray Hat Hacking project. We were actually working toward creating
another book at the time, but it did not pan out, so the Gray Hat Hacking book was born.
I owe much of what I have accomplished in the field to the great start she so generously
gave me, back in 2002 when I first met her at a CISSP bootcamp. I had no clue who Shon
was when I signed up for the bootcamp, but that chance encounter changed my life. Her
passion for the field and her work ethic were contagious and inspired me to be the best
I could be, as I tried to live up to her high standard. I will always remember her and how
much I learned from her. Please join me and the other authors as we continue to honor
her memory and her desire to improve the world through cybersecurity. We dedicate this
book to her memory.
                                        —Allen Harper
                            Lead author and friend of Shon Harris

To my brothers and sisters in Christ, keep running the race. Let your light shine for Him,
that others may be drawn to Him through you.
                                                                          —Allen Harper
To my wife, thank you for your constant encouragement and faith, and for pushing me
to push myself.
                                                                        —Ryan Linn
To my lovely wife Leanne and my daughter Audrey, thank you for your ongoing support!
                                                                      —Stephen Sims
To my daughter Tiernan, thank you for your support and continuous reminders to enjoy
life and learning each and every day. I look forward to seeing the wonderful woman you
will become.
                                                                      —Michael Baucom
To my beautiful wife Zoe and our children Alexander and Axel, thank you for your
continuous love and support, and for always trusting in me and encouraging all my crazy
new ideas.
                                                                     —Huáscar Tejeda
To my beautiful wife Vanesa and my family for their support and their patience every
time I come up with a new project.
                                                                —Daniel Fernandez
To my wife Gina and my daughter Juliet, who I am so proud of. Thank you for putting
up with most of my harebrained ideas.
                                                                      —Moses Frost
This page intentionally left blank
