                                 ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Dr. Allen Harper, CISSP, retired in 2007 from the military as a Marine Corps Officer
after a tour in Iraq. He has more than 30 years of IT/security experience. He holds a
PhD in IT with a focus on information assurance and security from Capella, an MS in
computer science from the Naval Postgraduate School, and a BS in computer engineer-
ing from North Carolina State University. In 2004, Allen led the development of the
GEN III Honeywall CD-ROM, called roo, for the Honeynet Project. Since then, he
has worked as a security consultant for many Fortune 500 and government entities. His
interests include the Internet of Things, reverse engineering, vulnerability discovery, and
all forms of ethical hacking. Allen was the founder of N2NetSecurity, Inc., served as the
EVP and chief hacker at Tangible Security, program director at Liberty University, and
now serves as EVP of cybersecurity at T-Rex Solutions, LLC, in Greenbelt, Maryland.
    Ryan Linn, CISSP, CSSLP, OSCP, OSCE, GREM, has over 20 years in the security
industry, ranging from systems programmer to corporate security to leading a global
cybersecurity consultancy. Ryan has contributed to a number of open source projects,
including Metasploit, the Browser Exploitation Framework (BeEF), and Ettercap. Ryan
participates in Twitter as @sussurro, and he has presented his research at numerous
security conferences, including Black Hat, DEF CON, Thotcon, and Derbycon, and has
provided training in attack techniques and forensics worldwide.
    Stephen Sims is an industry expert with over 15 years of experience in information
technology and security. Stephen currently works out of the San Francisco Bay Area as a
consultant. He has spent many years performing security architecture, exploit develop-
ment, reverse engineering, and penetration testing for various Fortune 500 companies, and
he has discovered and responsibly disclosed a wide range of vulnerabilities in commercial
products. Stephen has an MS in information assurance from Norwich University and cur-
rently leads the Offensive Operations curriculum at the SANS Institute. He is the author
of the SANS Institute’s only 700-level course, SEC760: Advanced Exploit Development
for Penetration Testers, which concentrates on complex heap overflows, patch diffing, and
client-side exploits. He holds the GIAC Security Expert (GSE) certification as well as the
CISA, Immunity NOP, and many others. In his spare time, Stephen enjoys snowboarding
and writing music.
    Michael Baucom has over 25 years of industry experience, ranging from embedded
systems development to leading the product security and research division at Tangible
Security. With more than 15 years of security experience, he has performed security
assessments of countless systems across a multitude of areas, including medical, indus-
trial, networking, and consumer electronics. Michael has been a trainer at Black Hat,
speaker at several conferences, and both an author and technical editor for Gray Hat
Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook. His current interests are in embedded system
security and development.
    Huáscar Tejeda is the co-founder and CEO of F2TC Cyber Security. He is a seasoned,
thoroughly experienced cybersecurity professional, with more than 20 years and notable
achievements in IT and telecommunications, developing carrier-grade security solutions
and business-critical components for multiple broadband providers. He is highly skilled
in security research, penetration testing, Linux kernel hacking, software development,
and embedded hardware design. Huáscar is also a member of the SANS Latin America
Advisory Group, SANS Purple Team Summit Advisory Board, and contributing author
of the SANS Institute’s most advanced course, SEC760: Advanced Exploit Development
for Penetration Testers.
    Daniel Fernandez is a security researcher with over 15 years of industry experience.
Over his career, he has discovered and exploited vulnerabilities in a vast number of
targets. During the last years, his focus had shifted to hypervisors, where he has found
and reported bugs in products such as Microsoft Hyper-V. He has worked at several
information security companies, including Blue Frost Security GmbH and Immunity,
Inc. Recently, he co-founded TACITO Security. When not breaking software, Daniel
enjoys training his working dogs.
    Moses Frost started his career in designing and implementing large-scale networks
around the year 2000. He has worked with computers in some form or another since the
early 1990s. His past employers include TLO, Cisco Systems, and McAfee. At Cisco Sys-
tems, he was a lead architect for its Cyber Defense Clinics. This free information security
dojo was used in educating individuals from the high school and university levels as well
as in many enterprises. At Cisco, he was asked to work on crucial security projects such
as industry certifications. Moses is an author and senior instructor at the SANS Institute.
His technology interests include web app penetration testing, cloud penetration testing,
and red team operations. He currently works as a red team operator at GRIMM.

Disclaimer: The views expressed in this book are those of the authors and not of the
U.S. government or any company mentioned herein.

About the Contributor
Jaime Geiger currently works for GRIMM Cyber as a senior software vulnerability
research engineer and for SANS as a certified instructor. He is also an avid snowboarder,
climber, sailor, and skateboarder.

About the Technical Editor
Heather Linn is a red teamer, penetration tester, threat hunter, and cybersecurity strate-
gist with more than 20 years of experience in the security industry. During her career, she
has consulted as a penetration tester and digital forensics investigator and has operated
as a senior red team engineer inside Fortune 50 environments. In addition to being an
accomplished technical editor, Heather has written and delivered training for multiple
security conferences and organizations, including Black Hat USA and Girls Who Code,
and she has published exam guides for the CompTIA Pentest+ certification. She holds
or has held various certifications, including OSCP, CISSP, GREM, GCFA, GNFA, and
CompTIA Pentest+.
