                                 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Each of the authors would like to thank the staff at McGraw Hill. In particular, we
would like to thank Wendy Rinaldi and Emily Walters. We could not have done this
book without you. Your expertise, tireless dedication, and attention to detail helped
make this book a success. Thanks for keeping us on track and for your patience with us
as we progressed.
   We would also like to thank Heather Linn, our technical editor. She went above and
beyond as a technical editor and improved the book in many ways. She tirelessly ran all
the code in the book and often had to work with the authors to fix that code. Through-
out the process, she kept a sense of humor and encouraged us to do our best. As an
accomplished author in her own right, she completed our team.
   Allen Harper would like to thank his wonderful wife Corann and beautiful daughters
Haley and Madison for their support and understanding as he chased yet another dream.
With each edition, it is neat to see our family grow and now spread apart, as we live in
different states. Haley and Madison, you are the joy of my life. I am so proud of you both
and am so excited for your future. Corann, I love you more than ever, and look forward
to spending the rest of our lives together! To my colleagues at T-Rex, thanks for bringing
the best out of me and challenging me to achieve even more.
   Ryan Linn would like to thank Heather for her support, encouragement, and advice
as well as his family and friends for their support and for putting up with the long hours
and infrequent communication while the book was coming together.
   Thanks to Jeff, Brian, Luke, Derek, Adrian, Shawn, Rob, Jon, Andrew, Tom, Todd,
Kelly, Debbie, and all the others who continue to push him to grow technically,
professionally, and in all aspects of life.
   Stephen Sims would like to thank his wife Leanne and daughter Audrey for their
ongoing support with the time needed to research, write, work, teach, and travel.
   He would also like to thank his parents George and Mary and his sister Lisa for their
support from afar. Finally, a special thanks to all of the brilliant security researchers who
contribute so much to the community with publications, lectures, and tools.
   Finally, a special thank you to Jaime Geiger for writing the chapter on Windows
Kernel exploitation!
   Michael Baucom would like to thank his wife Bridget and his daughter Tiernan for
their sacrifices and support in allowing him to pursue his professional goals.
   He’d also like to thank his parents for their love and support and for instilling in
him the work ethic that has carried him to this point. Additionally, he’d like to thank
the Marine Corps for giving him the courage and confidence to understand that all
things are possible. Finally, he’d like to thank his brother in Christ, long-time friend,
and colleague Allen Harper. Nothing can be accomplished without a great team.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Huáscar Tejeda would like to thank his wife Zoe and their children Alexander and
              Axel for their continuous support and encouragement.
                 He would also like to thank his mother Raysa for having taught him by example the
              importance of being passionate about inexhaustible study and hard work, as well as for
              exposing him to music, painting, and mathematics at an early age. Additionally, he’d like
              to thank his grandmother Milagros for her great love and for always believing in him
              since he was a child. Also, a special thanks to his older brother Geovanny for inviting him
              to the university to take computer science classes after learning of Huáscar’s strong com-
              puter programming skills at the age of 13. And, finally, thanks go to his brother Aneudy
              for always caring and being there for him.
                 Daniel Fernandez would like to thank his wife Vanesa for her love and support.
                 He’d also like to thank former colleagues and longtime friends Sebastian Fernandez,
              Gottfrid Svartholm, and Bruno Deferrari. He considers himself lucky to have met them
              and learn from them all these years. Finally, a special thanks to Rocky, a good friend
              who many years ago gave him the opportunity that resulted in his best professional
              experience.
                 Moses Frost would like to thank his wife Gina and daughter Juliet for their continued
              love, support, and sacrifices throughout the years.
                 He’d also like to thank his parents who allowed him to pursue his passions. It was
              not easy to break free and take chances. Finally, but not least, he’d like to thank some
              former colleagues, mentors, and friends—Fernando Martinez, Joey Muniz, Ed Skoudis,
              Jonathan Cran, and so many others who have helped him be a better person.
                 We, the authors, would also like to collectively thank Hex-Rays for the generous use
              of their tool IDA Pro.
                 Finally, a special thank you to Jaime Geiger for writing the chapter on Windows
              Kernel exploitation!
