By Jonathan Levin ;
            DisARMing Code
An exploration of system-level programming, debugging and
        reverse engineering on AArch64 platforms

                        By Jonathan Levin
                            North Castle, NY

  In memoriam: To my Father - Oh, m y Papa, to me he was so wonderful.
Title
© 2025 by Jonathan Levin.
All rights reserved . No part of this work may be reproduced, transmitted in any form or
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
Artifici al Intelligence, information storage or retrieval system, without the prior written
permission of the Author.

Printed in New Jersey, USA

First Printing:       05/13/2025
This Edition:         06/15/2025

ISBN-l0: 0991055-0-0
ISBN-13: 978-0-9910555 - 0-0

 Publisher:          Technologeeks .com
 Production Editor: Jonathan Levin
Interior Design :    Jonathan Levi n
Cover Illustration : Jon "Hoo ps " Hooper
 Everything Else :   Jonathan Levin

For information on distribution, translation s, or bulk sales, please contact
Technologeeks, LLC, at:

Email: info@Technologeeks.com
Web:    www.Techno logeeks.com

    Company and product names mentioned in this wo rk may be trademarked by their
respective owners. Any and every such nam e is used solely in an editorial fashion, to
the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention whatsoever of infringement. The
Android robot is reproduced and/or modified from work created and shared by Google,
according to the terms of the Creative Commons 3.0 Attribution License , per
httQ..S...;.L~per.android.comLl.e.g.a.l . ARM is a trademark of ARM Ltd. (and the world's
best processor architecture!).

Limit of Liabilit'llDisclaimer of Warrant'l: The Author neither makes or implies any
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this work. Further, this paragraph explicitly and specifically serves to
disclaim all warranties, including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular
purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales or promotional materials .
Th e advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. This
work is sold with the understanding that the Author is not engaged in rendering legal,
accounting, or other professional services. If professional assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional person should be sought. The Author shall not be
liabl e for damages arising herefrom . The fact that an organization or Web site is
referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information
does not mean that the Author endorses the information the organization or Web site
may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that
Internet Web sites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
thi s work was written and when it is read.

Deta ils of Apple and Google's operating systems shown in these pages derive from open
sources, and simple reverse engineeri ng alone . No internal , proprietary or confidential
information of either company was used in any way whatsoever in writing this book, nor
was any contact or co nsulting made with either company.

Information in this book is distributed on an "As Is" basis, with no warranty. Android is
a shifting landscape, with versions being released faster than any work can keep up
wi th. Every effort and precaution has been taken to update this work to reflect the tools
applicable to the operating environments in use at the time of publishing . Bear in mind,
however, that different versions of operating syste ms may add, modify, or remove APls
and features with no notice. The Author hereby disclaims any liability to any and every
person or entity with respect to any loss or damage, whether caused or alleged to be
caused directly or indirectly, by this work.

To report errors or omissions, please contact the Author.
          0.1. About the [AuthorjEditorjFormatterjPublisher]

     I started in my teens by hacking (mostly in the good sense of the word) and trying
to figure out how things worked back in 1993, from an XT with a 2400 baud modem
onto a shell I'm not even sure was mine. With no help per se, I had to man man and
then man   *..
     A lot has happened in the almost three decades since, and from UNIX to Linux, I
got to Windows and as X (sorry, "MacOS"). Over the years, I took up consulting and
training - initially, in security. I then realized security is largely a projection of internals .
Finally, I gathered a few good people and started Technologeeks.com - which is where I
function as CTO.

    Authoring is now a borderline obsession: Over a decade ago, I first took on Apple's
OSes with "Mac as X and iOS Internals" (Wiley, 2012), which was well received. It was
a painful process, but the dopamine rush was awesome . Now an addict, I took on
Android , and published what is now the "first edition" of this work - even more well
received, and unfortunately made free thanks to the CIA. I then turned to the 2nd
Edition of MOXiI - which inflated to a trilogy, after which I swore off Darwin. I'm still
into "Android Internals" - now in its 2nd edition as well - which is now a tetralogy,
presently about 70% complete.

     Althoug h I'm stuck halfway through Android - I needed a break and partial context
switch. I had the idea of this book for a long time - and figured now is a good time for
it. The methods described and discussed herein are the very same ones I used to
research my other books, so I hope they prove as useful to you!
  About This Book
1,., Qv;erview
  " There is always one more bug"
           -- (Lubarsky's Law of Cybernetic Entomology)

       Coding bugs are as old as coding itself. Many coders find themselves trapped,
  sooner or later, in the Sisyphean lifecycle of code-> debug- >code, as bugs are
  inevitable . Most are implementation faults, resulting from incorrect interpretation of the
  al gorithm into code. Others are simple typos, which may have far reaching
  consequences. Others, still, can be design faults, or hide within the algorithms
  the mselves.

       Debugging is just as vital to the coder's skillset, yet there is a surprisingly limited
  am ount of literature on the subject. I've entertained the idea of writing a book about
  debugging for well over a decade. Back then, I had delivered so many trainings for
  @Technologeeks on Linux Debugging, that China became my second home. The three -
  da y course was hugely popular, but was (at the time) Intel oriented.

       A few years later, I made my foray into authoring, with MacOS X/iOS Internals
  ( MOXiI), in its first edition, I tapped a bit into debugging and reversing, but that wa s in
  Da rwin. But it wasn't until I started "Android Internals" (2014), that I found myself
  re ally drawing from the Linux Debugging curriculum ("Android through a Linux Lens"),
  an d then realized that a lot of t he techniques are fairly portable.

      As I sank deeper into Darwin (and was relieved from my former publisher's
  restriction s), the second edition of MOXiI really got into reversing, as I demonstrated
  not just the various aspects of system internals, but how one might glean them through
  a hands -on approach . As I relied more on these techniques, I hoped the re aders would
  catch on by example, but (as the books were already massive) could not devote further
  pages to covering them .

         Meanwhile, I fell in love with ARM. Admittedly, I didn 't like ARMv6/ARMv7 much at
  f irst, largely because of THUMB (16-bit) instructions. But when Apple pulled the world
  in to ARMv8 (64-bit), I was sucked in. My first brush with it was coding a crude
  di sassembler into what was then j too l( j ), so I could figure out linker stubs. But then I
  aCCidentally dumped the _TEXT . _text, and the few supported instructions started
  appearing in the output. I started adding more instructions, and, like puzzle pieces
  falling into place, a complete disassembly emerged.

       With the widespread adoption of AArch64 - first, in mobile, and nowadays (slowly
  but surely) into desktops and servers - I decided it's about time for this book. People
  who know me are well aware of how much of an ARMvangelist I am, and that I perceive
  INTC as an ailing dinosaur. Apple (as always) is at the vanguard of AArch64 adoption
  (first with * OS and now, entirely, with Appl e Silicon ma cOS).

       The last holdout - Windows - has also made its first steps into ARM (with Windows
  11) , and (as far as I see it), it's only a question of time before it adopts it, or dies .
  ARM's amazing power efficiency, beautiful instruction set, and overall superior design
  m akes resistance futile.

       There is an expression in Hebrew: "nv:Jn N? il:lllrJ nV:Jn " - which loosely translates
  to "if you try to catch too much, you'll end up catching nothing". I really hope that, in
  thi s case, this does not apply. For a while, I was thinking of trying to cover all "Big
  Th ree" OS es. Fin ally, I decided two out of three - Linux and Darwin - should be more
  tha n enough, with Android completing the Trinity.

        I decided so, both due to the large common denominator of POSIX-style system
  ca lls, which, along with the C standard, make coding for either portable to both. Also -
  in my humble opinion - the hegemony of Windows is at an end.

       Despite the plethora of facili t ies, tools and techniques I cover in these pag es, th ere
  are no shortcuts. Only hands -on experimentation and, over time, experience, brings
  ma stery. This is why (a s with my other works), the book has plenty of " Experiments".
  Th e idea in the experiments is not to follow the instructions verbatim, but to fo ster
  exploration of the same bin ary with different techniques, or other binaries with the
  sam e technique. Eventu ally, the patterns described in the book will make themselves
  ap parent, and easy to recognize as they recur elsewhere.
    This time, I also added "Case Studies", which look at how some system applications
behave on the platforms, or walk throughs of reverse engineering. These, too , might
vary a bit, as different versions of the binaries examined exi st, but the flow and details
gleaned shou ld largely be the same .

    Another thing I added this t ime are "Review Questions". I do not bel ieve in spoon-
feeding the reader, and therefore left some corollaries embedded in those questions, in
the hope that the interested reader will be able to figure them out after perusing each
chapter. Review questions also make this book suitable as a textbook, for use in
academic environments . An answer key is available, of course, upon request.

    ARMv ? (A32 and Thumb 16-bit) instructions are deemed by your Author as nearly
obsolete. Although still in use in legacy embedded systems and some Ardu ino boards,
all major operating systems now run on 64-bit ARM, and even the entry level Raspberry
Pi supports 64-bit . Further, as of 2022 and onward newer ARMv8 cores no longer
support A32.

    Thus, covering A32 (and especially Thumb ) woul d ( IMHO) only over-complicate and
consume paper (even when recycled) needlessly. Like Intel, A32/T16 will probably stay
around in legacy devices, particularly older firmwares, for a long t ime. Anybody seeking
to be up-to-date (and relatively future proof) should (a gain , IMHO ) invest their time
into A64 .

     With the above point in mind , most - if not all - the methods in this book would
app ly to 32-bit processeses and systems as well. The specific assembly would,
obv iously, change, but wouldn't be that far off. CLI tools would mostly work the same,
and adapting the code samples is usually as simple as replacing the [u] int64_ts with
[u] int32_ts.

     I view Debugging , Tracing, Profiling and Reversing as all aspects of a greater whole,
like the tale of the Elephant in the dark room. All the chapters, in one way or another,
try to describe th is "gestalt", in a progress ively linear flo w. This book spans 14 chapters
and two appendices:

  •    ChaRter 1: covers everything I think is vital for understanding ARM64 assembly,
       and then some . Refactored for standard book pages, this could easi ly have fit a
       mini-book by itself. It starts with a gentle introduction to the very basics of bits,
       bytes and registers - what I'm guessing most readers will skim quickly because
       they know it already, but is sti ll cardinal for the rest of the book, if they do not.
       The chapter then tries to estab lish the "Working Vocabulary" - the set of
       commonly used instructions that should help the Reader obtain "casual
       conversational" abilities. It then looks at ARMv8/ARMv9's ever increasing feature
       set, and attempts to introduce key features and versions.
  •    ChaRter 2: discusses compilation and linking. It follows the stages of the build
       process - Preprocessing, Compiling, (skipping over assembly) and Linking, with
       particular focus on the latter. The objective here is to gain familiarity with
       commonly used patterns in those stages , and how they help both building and
       reversing code .
   •   ~Rter 3 : deals with      Binary Formats . Darwin's Mach-O and (everybody else's)
       ELF. People who have read MOXiI 6 and? will notice the core is pretty much the
       same (it is, after all, a 30 year old format .. ), but I attempted to provide a slig htly
       different view that MOXiI, and also "corrected" MOXiI for features Apple put in
       after that trilogy was sealed .
   •   ChaRter 4: deals with the process lifecycle. It takes those very same binary
       formats of chapter 3, and discusses how they become processes - from birth to
       (timely) death , overall resource usage, and a bit about process security. It is
       meant as an introduction to chapters 5 through 12. As with the rest of the book ,
       the focus is on the core POSIX APls which work on both systems, but with the
       occasional segues into the Darwin or Linux/Android specific extensions.
   •   ChaRter 5: takes a first pass at .virtual memory - from the OS perspective. It
       introduces the idea of paging, and the POSIX memory APIs (and then some), and
       finally looks at system-level metrics, used by system administrators to gauge
       system health.
   •   ChaRter 6: takes a second and final pass at virtual memory - from the process
       perspective. Starting with the stack, and moving to the heap. Whereas the former
       is largely the same across platforms, the latter is more idiosyncratic. I got into
       both GlibC's ptmalloc and Scudo, and believe at an unprecedented level.
   •   ChaRter 7: deals wi th Multithreading. Once considered avant garde,
       multithreading is now the norm . The chapter focuses exclusively on pth read
       APIs, but also goes under the hood showing the opaque pthread_t in the three
       platforms . It then focuses on the various synchroni zation primitives, and OS
       scheduling APIs.
   •   ChaRter 8: deals with Input/Output (I/O), whether to files or between processes
       (IPC). It provides a cursory overview of all the file APls I cou ld think of, as wel l as
       POSIX/UN *X IPC mechanisms. It then diverges to the proprietary IPCs of 2/3
       platforms - Darwin's Mach/XPC, and Android's Binder
   •   ChaRter 9: handles system-wide profiling, tracing and auditing. It is naturally
       very OS-specific, since most of the powerful functionality is achieved through
       proprietary APls. A special focus is given at the end to Darwin 's (deliberately
       crippled) DTrace, and Linux 's staggering eBPF.
   •   ChaRter 10: continues with tracing, focusing on the individual process . Both
       passive (unobtrusive) and active tracing is conSidered , and - since the latter has
       to inject code anyway - the discussion also covers code injection . This, from the
       platform specific APIs, through putting them to practice.
   •   ChaRter 11: details runtimes - Darwin 's Objective-C, Swift, and Android ART. The
       perspective here is chiefly reversing the metadata structures, and reflection -
       runtime type identification and object construction.
   •   ChaRter 12: complements Chapter 4's process lifecycie, in dea ling with the
       untimely demise of processes . First, it examines the UN *X signal model, and then
       talks about the cores and ( Darwin) corpses left after process crashes.
   •   ChaRter 13: goes where no user has gone before - to the kernel, and beyond. It
       first introduces the concept of the multiverse - ARM Exception Levels - and then
       explores them in detail. The most focus is given to Ell - wherein (most) kernels
       operate, with some detail given to EL2 (th e realm of hypervisors) and EL3 (secure
       monitors ). The latter are left wi th less detail, since A-III covers them in more
       detail.
  •    ChaRter 14: describes methodolog ies for Reverse Engineering. In no way
       complete, (and showing those heuristics which work for me), I tried to also show
       practical examp les through several case stud ies.

    The aim of this book is to review a solid, but minimal introduction to operating
system concepts - by no means replace the exce llent Tannenbaum et al./Stallings, etc.
Th e aim is to quickly (re) iterate concepts, and then examine their application in
practice, through the UN * X based operating systems. In a sense, this can be thought as
a pra ctical, hands -on complement to the mostly theoretical canon.

     In another sense, this can also be thought of as "OS Internals Volume 0", as the
topi cs here are used by me in both Android and * OS Internals, and (by the amazing
Ru ssinovich et al.) in Windows Internals. In my other books, I assume a lot of this
information is well known, and at best indi cate a reference the Reader can peruse to
catch up . I hope that now, this book can be used as a reference , and show more of the
method ology of research, debugging and tracing I've used in the respective "Interna ls"
series .

    Note, that there is the unavoidable overlap in a few cases (notably, Android
Interna ls 1/11, which probes Android "Through A Linu x Lens ", and the discussion of
Mach-O and linking, which I bludgeoned to a pulp in MOXiI 1/6-7). I did try to keep such
overlap bare minimum, balancing between the need to not repeat material from those
works, but at the same time not force readers to refer to them .

     That said, I froze MOXiI with Darwin 19, but Apple didn't - we're not just shy of
Darwin 25 ( next month at WWDC), and some things have changed. Two notable realms
wh ich immediately come to mind is DYLD's linking (moving from the legacy opcodes to
chai ned fixups) and the kernel's zone allocator. These two, in parcticular, have changed
so much that they make the relevant discussion in MOXiI (M -I/7 and M-II/12) outdated,
if not "wrong". So, while working on this book, I did correct such "errata" in the trilogy,
by bringing coverage up to date, where necessary - i. e. those changes in Darwin which
occurred over the past five or so years, which woul d outdate the MOXiI discussion.
    The following figure (though somewhat crude) attempts to give a high level view
both of the chapter coverage, and the overlap with MOXiI and AI.

     Further, all the above can be carried out at several "levels". The lowest, disassembly
and using a debugger, is not necessarily the first course of action, nor is it always the
best . This is why, though assembly merits its own chapter and is used all throughout,
this book is designed to be read with little to no debugger use. In fact, the whole
premise of the command line tools I demonstrate (especially those I have authored
over the years) is to avoid having to use a debugger.

    For those readers interested in a debugger based approach, then, I am afraid to
disappoint. There is no mention in the book (outside this paragraph) of gdb, lldb, IDA
and their ilk. If you're looking for a debugger-oriented book, Derek Selander's
"Advanced Apple Debugging & Reverse Engineering" provides far deeper coverage than
I could ever aim to do in these pages.

    By the end of this book, I hope you find that using a debugger is somewhat of a last
resort. Many common issues can be resolved with a well placed printf(3) or similar.

     This book aims to cover all UN *X platforms, since a large portion of it deals with the
POSIX subset, which is supported across Darwin , Linux, and the BSD variants. The
general flow of most chapters thus focuses on the common core system calls, and then
splits into Darwin and Linux specific sections. BSD-enthusiasts will forgive me, I hope,
for not putting BSD-specific sections.

                           -------                ----
      As always :

  •    filenames are specified like this. Apple's mile long path names have been
       abbreviated, where possible, so that /System/Library/Frameworks becomes /S/L/F,
       PrivateFrameworks becomes PF, Caches becomes c, etc. Likewise com. app le. is
       usually abbreviated as c. a. Where #include brackets are shown, the file they
       pertain to can be found in the appropriate SDK directory. GUIDs (which are
       useless to quote anyway and take up tons of space) are abbreviated to only a few
       characters, so their uniqueness can be followed. Files from projects (commonly,
       XNU) are usually mentioned in their context, and shown with a relative, not
       absolute path .
•    commands(l), systemCalls(2) or framework classes are specified thus. The
     numbers in parentheses refer to the manual section describing them (if one
     exists), using the MacOS man(1). This time I also added an exclamation (!) to
     denote missing manual pages (especially in the case of undocumented Darwin
     system calls or daemons) . If you read through the tools section you may have
     noticed that I have also decided to adopt an informal convention of specifying all
     of my tools as appearing in section (j). I do this because that way they can't be
     mistaken for built-in tools . You can also instal l their manual pages (suffixed. j)
     as root under / usr/share/man/manj and edit /etc/manconf appropriately - that is,
     appending ":j" to the MANSECT setting.

    Additionally, this book is full of Figures, Listings and Outputs:

•    Figures: are illustrations of components or message flows, with graphic elements
     in them.
•    Listing~ : are generally static files, usually of code but occasionally of
     configuration or other data files . This time I rendered them using vim(1) with
     : syntax on, and further colorized to emphasize code constants, routines, strings
     and other components. Sometimes I add my own annotations, making them
     stand out clearly from the original code.
•    Outguts : are sequences of commands, often included as part of an experiment.
     Here, too, are annotations:

         #
         # Comment, explaining what's being done
         #
         user@hostname (directory)$/# User in~RRears like this
         Output ...
         Output .. # Annotation, explaining output

         Note, that the prompt user (and terminator, $ or #) will tell you if the
     command requires root privileges. The hostname shows you the device the
     command was tried on. Those on "eMinent" indicate that they can be tried on any
     macOS, unless otherw ise stated. All the other prompts are either Linux or Android,
     and will be clear from the context they are used in. A simp le "$" usually means all
     platforms work the same, or I had to omit the prompt for brevity.

         To abbreviate multiple names beginning with same prefix or ending with same
     suffix I use "[ )", with the standard meaning of "optional" so for example
     [p] read [v] could be understood as read, pread, readv, preadv.

         References in this book follow a simple convention of:

                                     [Book/]Chapter/section

                                                or

                                     [Book/]Cha pte r/figure

          with sections using dots, and figures/listings/outputs dashes. So, for example,
     12/2.3 is Section 2.3 in Chapter 12, and 12/2-4 is Figure 2-4. The [Book/] is
     omitted when it refers to this work, and I sometimes omit that for references
     inside the same chapter (so, for example, "2-4" is this chapter's section 2-4).
     Where I do use [Book/] is for external references: For the MOXiI trilogy, it is as "M-
     I", "M-Il", or "M-Ill" (for volume I, II or III, respectively). A similar convention is
     used for Android Internals references (e.g . A- I/Il, or the upcoming A- III/ A- IV).

         My years of research started with using various built-in or widely available
     tools, but soon enough I started coding my own tools, for several reasons. First
     and foremost, IMHO, the best way to learn about a system is through coding for it.

         This holds especially true in Darwin, wherein the "cool" system interfaces are
     the undocumented ones. The *05 variants, for which Apple provides no CLI, is
     where my too ls became vital, and without which I could not have completed the
     * 05 Internals trilogy.

        Android is immeasurably better from the tool -availability perspective, since
     nearly all Linux tools can easily be cross compiled. Even there, some tools fell
     short of (what I perceived to be) their promise.
     The result are several tools, three of which are featured repeatedly throughout
this book . The following provides a quick description, and the reader is advised to
download them prior to reading the book. The tools are closed source, but are and
will remain free to download.

6.1. disarm(j)
    If this book has a protagnoist, it's disa rm (j ) . The tool (which also lends its
name to the book's title) started its life as a quick and dirty command-line
disassembler to fill my need to disassemble shellcode and standalone instructions,
using the small code base I had in j too l2 for disassembly. Luckily, as with the
other tools, it quickly found more use cases, and was expanded.

    The current incarnation of disarm - v2.x - is parsecs ahead of its predecessor.
I refactored j too l2's code base into disa rm, and added more code to break away
from mach-O and bring the binary analysis capabilities to other file formats - PE
and ELF - with the one requirement that they are for AArch64.

     Additionally, the introduction of an API to disarm(j) can enable any developer
to plug-in to its functions, and extend them. No, this isn't IDAPython (though
someone could write a plugin for that ;-), and my disassembler certainly isn't as
full featured as IDA's, but - on the other hand - it's blazing fast, CLI/scriptable,
easy to maintain, and (in some cases) may outperform its competition in functions.

     There is little sense in further explaining disarm here, since its use is
demonstrated in most of the outputs in this book. Further, Appendix A provides the
unofficial manual page for disarm, and it is my genuine hope that more people
discover the nifty capabilities I put into it, and find their own use cases to integrate
it into their debugging and reversing workflows. Being cross platform, this tool is
linked from all of the books' websites.

6.2. jtrace(j)
     The second tool used extensively in this book is j t race. The tool also started
its life as a simple clone of the well known Linux st race (1), but quickly matched
and then exceeded its inspiration, offering many features I found useful for my
own debugging.

     The "killer" feature in jtrace(j) is its extensibility with plugins. I have
provided a simple, yet efficient API by means of which developers can create their
own shared objects, and load them into jtrace(j) (or have them loaded
automatically) in order to either override or extend j trace (j ) 's handling of
system calls. This means, for example, replacing the default output with better
logiC to, say, parse specific ioctl(2) codes, but can also be used to turn the
regularly innocuous tracing function into obtrusive argument malformation or
fuzzing .

   The tool, like disarm(j), has long been in need of its own manual page, which
Appendix B of this work provides .

6.3. memento(j)
    The third (and if I may confess, unexpected) tool featured in this book is
memento . This tool was also initially very simple - used to hexdump memory on
Linux and Android, by reading from / proc/pid/ m em. At first, I expanded it to search
memory (already highly useful), and then to dump cores .

     Thanks to this book, however, this tool took a life of its own. During the
process of writing Chapter 6, dealing with process memory heaps, I found myself
sifting through the heap structures of Scudo, to the point of putting this heap
analysis logic into memento (j ). From there, it was only natural to extend it to
Linux 's glibc heaps, and finally those of Darwin.

    The result is a no-Ionger-as-simple but actually quite powerful tool - a cross
platform (Darwin/Linux/Android) process memory analysis tool, with a variety of
functions . The latest feature in the pipeline is memory leak detection, which will
either be ready or in advanced beta by the time you read this.

    Unlike the other two, (and despite a planned plugin API), memento (j) remains
really simple to use - so no manual or appendix are needed. At least not now.
    This book has proven to be much more of an endeavor than I had originally
thought. I foolishly thought it would take si x or so months and 200 pages, only to
get to this point now, where I 'm finall y done over a year and 500+ pages later. To
paraphrase AAPL - This is our Best Book Yet. It factors in the experience of having
completed MOXiI and (partially) Android, and addressing what I believed to be
significant shortcoming of both - black and white print .

    Color makes a tremendous difference in this book, and since nearly every
three pages have at least one colorful illustration, I decided to just get this en tire
book printed in color. Print costs have more than tripled for me, but I managed to
get by with as minimal price increase for this book as I could have .

    As with my other books, creating an index was just too much. I opted instead
for an online index, available at the book's website. This is not only far easier to
make with a relatively simple script, but also has the benefit of the reader being
able to look up any word, and get relevant snippets to determine the context.

    Al l the information here is meticulously researched, and backed by
experimentation. Still, errare est humanum, et cetera, so I'm still gladly offering a
BTC-bounty. With BTC edging beyond $100K, it's now at O.OOlBTC - Still a pretty
decent 0($100) , thoughl This applies to technical mistakes only, and not those
that have to do with software versions!

    Typo corrections are still welcome (but unbountied!). Thanks to my
professional Editor I think there won't be any this time. I would like to greatly
thank this highly talented editor (who wi shes to remain anonymous), for catching
my numerous typos and helping me get all the inner references in the book. I also
had two giants in their field - ARM pundit @never_released (for Chapter 1) macOS
Objective-Seer @patrickwardle (for Chapter 11) - and I thank them both!

     My deepest thanks goes to the amazingly talented Jon " Hoops " Hooper -
creator of Hexley and artist extraordinaire. He did the covers for all my MOXiI
trilogy, and when I approached him again for what I thought would be just the
" Darwin Half" of the cover, he ended up doing both: The MOXiI half, illustrated with
his unique style - and the "Android Half", in line with the photorealistic one I used
for AI. He gave me not one but five different designs, leaving me with the hardest
task - picking which one to choose!

      The last, but not least of my thanks, as always, goes to my dear Amy.
Especially towards the end of this work, I found myself spending more and more
time re-reading and re-writing chapters, which meant more time away from real
life . Always patient, always supportive, always understanding, always Amayzing.
                                     DisARMing Code
     System-level programming, debugging and reverse engineering on AArch64 platforms

         Find all references and a searchable index online at btt~/LNewDebug9lngBook.comL

~~ A\1fl1ARM as~emblly prrimer

    1.1. Introduction to Assembly

    1.2. A Working Vocabulary

    1.3. ARM chipset features

    1.4. Review Questions

_2.0_'_
      C~.I Ilila_l
                tJ0_:ull   & lLilfl_ki_'n9='~ _____ __
    2.1. Preprocessing

    2.2. Code Generation/Optimization

    2.3. Linking

    2.4. Review Questions

    3.1. Windows/EFI: Portable Executable (PE32+)

    3.2. Linux: Executable & Library Format (ELF)

    3.3. Darwin: Mach-O

    3.4. Review Questions

4ro, Illt~: '1i'0.£eS~ LifeCVL'=le
    4.1. Prerequisite: System Calls

    4.2. Process Lifecycle stages

    4.3. Resource utilization

    4.4. Process-level Security

    4.5. Review Questions

    5.1. Paging

    5.2. Memory APIs

    5.3. System-level Memory Metrics

    5.4. Review Questions
6;'j MlelJUQrW - 11 - 11t1e P~~J:!~A V;ie·w
   6.1. The Stack

   6.2. The Heap

   6.3. Memory Bugs

   6.4. Exploit Mitigation Strategies

   6.5. Process-level Memory Analysis

   6.6. Review Questions

7J", MJ~IJtiJTtUf~a~j Ill9L
   7.1. Multithreading

   7.2. The POSIX Thread APls

   7.3. Concurrency

   7.4. Scheduling

   7.5. Review Questions

8.,., JilO 8ft IP€:
   8.1. File I/O

   8.2. UN*X IPC

   8.3. Advanced I/O Modes

   8.4. Darwin IPC

   8.5. Android: Binder

   8.6. Review Questions

9.j SY;Sj~rWAde TrracjngA Pfrofiling &. Auditjng
   9.1. Profiling in Linux

   9.2. Profiling in Darwin

   9.3. Auditing

   9.4. Extending the system

   9.5. Review Questions

10", I*>~Jrilll9 • .!mJj,ectjmg
   10.1. Load time hooking

   10.2. Debugger Interfaces

   10.3. Runtime Hooking

   10.4. Putting it all together: Code Injection

   10.5. Review Questions
   11.1. Darwin: Objective-C

   11.2. Darwin: Swift

   11.3. Android: ART

   11.4. Review Questions

   12.1. Exception Handling

   12.2. Core Dumps

   12.3. Crash Reporting

   12.4. Review Questions

                                                    -----------------------
   13.1. Exception Levels

   13.2. Kernel Mode

   13.3. Hypervisors

   13.4. Secure Monitors

   13.5. Review Questions

-   - Rev~rs,e E1119 ineeri n9
1l,4i.,                        ~-

   14.1. WorkFlow

   14.2. Case Studies

   14.3. Review Questions

                                                             ---- -----
   15.1. Basic Information

   15.2. Dumping

   15.3. Searching

   15.4. Disassembly

   15.5. Program Analysis

   16.1. Basic Usage (strace(l) compatibility)

   16.2. Enhancements {and j trace (j ) -specific options)

   16.3. Plugins
