                                                                     Preface
To Everyone
    Welcome to this book! We hope you’ll enjoy reading it as much as we
enjoyed writing it. The book is called Operating Systems: Three Easy
Pieces (available at http://ostep.org), and the title is obviously an
homage to one of the greatest sets of lecture notes ever created, by one
Richard Feynman on the topic of Physics [F96]. While this book will un-
doubtedly fall short of the high standard set by that famous physicist,
perhaps it will be good enough for you in your quest to understand what
operating systems (and more generally, systems) are all about.
    The three easy pieces refer to the three major thematic elements the
book is organized around: virtualization, concurrency, and persistence.
In discussing these concepts, we’ll end up discussing most of the impor-
tant things an operating system does; hopefully, you’ll also have some
fun along the way. Learning new things is fun, right? At least, it (usually)
should be.
    Each major concept is divided into a set of chapters, most of which
present a particular problem and then show how to solve it. The chapters
are short, and try (as best as possible) to reference the source material
where the ideas really came from. One of our goals in writing this book
is to make the paths of history as clear as possible, as we think that helps
a student understand what is, what was, and what will be more clearly.
In this case, seeing how the sausage was made is nearly as important as
understanding what the sausage is good for1 .
    There are a couple devices we use throughout the book which are
probably worth introducing here. The first is the crux of the problem.
Anytime we are trying to solve a problem, we first try to state what the
most important issue is; such a crux of the problem is explicitly called
out in the text, and hopefully solved via the techniques, algorithms, and
ideas presented in the rest of the text.
    In many places, we’ll explain how a system works by showing its be-
havior over time. These timelines are at the essence of understanding; if
you know what happens, for example, when a process page faults, you
are on your way to truly understanding how virtual memory operates. If
   1
       Hint: eating! Or if you’re a vegetarian, running away from.

                                               iii
                  iv

                  you comprehend what takes place when a journaling file system writes a
                  block to disk, you have taken the first steps towards mastery of storage
                  systems.
                      There are also numerous asides and tips throughout the text, adding
                  a little color to the mainline presentation. Asides tend to discuss some-
                  thing relevant (but perhaps not essential) to the main text; tips tend to be
                  general lessons that can be applied to systems you build. An index at the
                  end of the book lists all of these tips and asides (as well as cruces, the odd
                  plural of crux) for your convenience.
                      We use one of the oldest didactic methods, the dialogue, throughout
                  the book, as a way of presenting some of the material in a different light.
                  These are used to introduce the major thematic concepts (in a peachy way,
                  as we will see), as well as to review material every now and then. They
                  are also a chance to write in a more humorous style. Whether you find
                  them useful, or humorous, well, that’s another matter entirely.
                      At the beginning of each major section, we’ll first present an abstrac-
                  tion that an operating system provides, and then work in subsequent
                  chapters on the mechanisms, policies, and other support needed to pro-
                  vide the abstraction. Abstractions are fundamental to all aspects of Com-
                  puter Science, so it is perhaps no surprise that they are also essential in
                  operating systems.
                      Throughout the chapters, we try to use real code (not pseudocode)
                  where possible, so for virtually all examples, you should be able to type
                  them up yourself and run them. Running real code on real systems is the
                  best way to learn about operating systems, so we encourage you to do
                  so when you can. We are also making code available for your viewing
                  pleasure2 .
                      In various parts of the text, we have sprinkled in a few homeworks
                  to ensure that you are understanding what is going on. Many of these
                  homeworks are little simulations of pieces of the operating system; you
                  should download the homeworks, and run them to quiz yourself. The
                  homework simulators have the following feature: by giving them a dif-
                  ferent random seed, you can generate a virtually infinite set of problems;
                  the simulators can also be told to solve the problems for you. Thus, you
                  can test and re-test yourself until you have achieved a good level of un-
                  derstanding.
                      The most important addendum to this book is a set of projects in
                  which you learn about how real systems work by designing, implement-
                  ing, and testing your own code. All projects (as well as the code exam-
                  ples, mentioned above) are in the C programming language [KR88]; C is
                  a simple and powerful language that underlies most operating systems,
                  and thus worth adding to your tool-chest of languages. Two types of
                  projects are available (see the online appendix for ideas). The first are
                  systems programming projects; these projects are great for those who are

                           https://github.com/remzi-arpacidusseau/ostep-code

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                         WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
                                                                          v

new to C and U NIX and want to learn how to do low-level C program-
ming. The second type are based on a real operating system kernel de-
veloped at MIT called xv6 [CK+08]; these projects are great for students
that already have some C and want to get their hands dirty inside the
OS. At Wisconsin, we’ve run the course in three different ways: either all
systems programming, all xv6 programming, or a mix of both.
   We are slowly making project descriptions, and a testing framework,
available. See our repository3 for more information. If not part of a class,
this will give you a chance to do these projects on your own, to better
learn the material. Unfortunately, you don’t have a TA to bug when you
get stuck, but not everything in life can be free (but books can be!).

       https://github.com/remzi-arpacidusseau/ostep-projects

                                                                               T HREE
                       c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                 E ASY
                                                                               P IECES
                  vi

                  To Educators
                     If you are an instructor or professor who wishes to use this book,
                  please feel free to do so. As you may have noticed, they are free and
                  available on-line from the following web page:

                        http://www.ostep.org

                    You can also purchase a printed copy from http://lulu.com or
                  http://amazon.com. Look for it on the web page above.
                    The (current) proper citation for the book is as follows:

                        Operating Systems: Three Easy Pieces
                        Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau and Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau
                        Arpaci-Dusseau Books
                        August, 2018 (Version 1.00) or July, 2019 (Version 1.01)
                        http://www.ostep.org

                     The course divides fairly well across a 15-week semester, in which you
                  can cover most of the topics within at a reasonable level of depth. Cram-
                  ming the course into a 10-week quarter probably requires dropping some
                  detail from each of the pieces. There are also a few chapters on virtual
                  machine monitors, which we usually squeeze in sometime during the
                  semester, either right at end of the large section on virtualization, or near
                  the end as an aside.
                     One slightly unusual aspect of the book is that concurrency, a topic at
                  the front of many OS books, is pushed off herein until the student has
                  built an understanding of virtualization of the CPU and of memory. In
                  our experience in teaching this course for nearly 20 years, students have
                  a hard time understanding how the concurrency problem arises, or why
                  they are trying to solve it, if they don’t yet understand what an address
                  space is, what a process is, or why context switches can occur at arbitrary
                  points in time. Once they do understand these concepts, however, in-
                  troducing the notion of threads and the problems that arise due to them
                  becomes rather easy, or at least, easier.
                     As much as is possible, we use a chalkboard (or whiteboard) to deliver
                  a lecture. On these more conceptual days, we come to class with a few
                  major ideas and examples in mind and use the board to present them.
                  Handouts are useful to give the students concrete problems to solve based
                  on the material. On more practical days, we simply plug a laptop into
                  the projector and show real code; this style works particularly well for
                  concurrency lectures as well as for any discussion sections where you
                  show students code that is relevant for their projects. We don’t generally
                  use slides to present material, but have now made a set available for those
                  who prefer that style of presentation.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                       WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
                                                                         vii

    If you’d like a copy of any of these materials, please drop us an email.
We have already shared them with many others around the world, and
others have contributed their materials as well.
    One last request: if you use the free online chapters, please just link
to them, instead of making a local copy. This helps us track usage (over
1 million chapters downloaded in the past few years!) and also ensures
students get the latest (and greatest?) version.

                                                                               T HREE
                      c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                 E ASY
                                                                               P IECES
                  viii

                  To Students
                      If you are a student reading this book, thank you! It is an honor for us
                  to provide some material to help you in your pursuit of knowledge about
                  operating systems. We both think back fondly towards some textbooks of
                  our undergraduate days (e.g., Hennessy and Patterson [HP90], the classic
                  book on computer architecture) and hope this book will become one of
                  those positive memories for you.
                      You may have noticed this book is free and available online4 . There
                  is one major reason for this: textbooks are generally too expensive. This
                  book, we hope, is the first of a new wave of free materials to help those
                  in pursuit of their education, regardless of which part of the world they
                  come from or how much they are willing to spend for a book. Failing
                  that, it is one free book, which is better than none.
                      We also hope, where possible, to point you to the original sources of
                  much of the material in the book: the great papers and persons who have
                  shaped the field of operating systems over the years. Ideas are not pulled
                  out of the air; they come from smart and hard-working people (including
                  numerous Turing-award winners5 ), and thus we should strive to cele-
                  brate those ideas and people where possible. In doing so, we hopefully
                  can better understand the revolutions that have taken place, instead of
                  writing texts as if those thoughts have always been present [K62]. Fur-
                  ther, perhaps such references will encourage you to dig deeper on your
                  own; reading the famous papers of our field is certainly one of the best
                  ways to learn.

                         A digression here: “free” in the way we use it here does not mean open source, and it
                  does not mean the book is not copyrighted with the usual protections – it is! What it means is
                  that you can download the chapters and use them to learn about operating systems. Why not
                  an open-source book, just like Linux is an open-source kernel? Well, we believe it is important
                  for a book to have a single voice throughout, and have worked hard to provide such a voice.
                  When you’re reading it, the book should kind of feel like a dialogue with the person explaining
                  something to you. Hence, our approach.
                       5
                         The Turing Award is the highest award in Computer Science; it is like the Nobel Prize,
                  except that you have never heard of it.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                              WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
                                                                                        ix

Acknowledgments
   This section will contain thanks to those who helped us put the book
together. The important thing for now: your name could go here! But,
you have to help. So send us some feedback and help debug this book.
And you could be famous! Or, at least, have your name in some book.
   The people who have helped so far include: Aaron Gember (Colgate), Aashrith
H Govindraj (USF), Abhinav Mehra, Abhirami Senthilkumaran*, Adam Drescher* (WUSTL),
Adam Eggum, Aditya Venkataraman, Adriana Iamnitchi and class (USF), Ahmad Jarara, Ahmed
Fikri*, Ajaykrishna Raghavan, Akiel Khan, Alex Curtis, Alex Wyler, Alex Zhao (U. Colorado at
Colorado Springs), Ali Razeen (Duke), Alistair Martin, AmirBehzad Eslami, Anand Mundada,
Andrei Bozântan, Andrew Mahler, Andrew Moss, Andrew Valencik (Saint Mary’s), Angela
Demke Brown (Toronto), Antonella Bernobich (UoPeople)*, Arek Bulski, B. Brahmananda
Reddy (Minnesota), Bala Subrahmanyam Kambala, Bart Miller, Ben Kushigian (U. Mass),
Benita Bose, Bill Yang, Biswajit Mazumder (Clemson), Bobby Jack, Björn Lindberg, Bran-
don Harshe (U. Minn), Brennan Payne, Brian Gorman, Brian Kroth, Caleb Sumner (Southern
Adventist), Cara Lauritzen, Charlotte Kissinger, Cheng Su, Chien-Chung Shen (Delaware)*,
Christian Stober, Christoph Jaeger, C.J. Stanbridge (Memorial U. of Newfoundland), Cody
Hanson, Constantinos Georgiades, Dakota Crane (U. Washington-Tacoma), Dan Soendergaard
(U. Aarhus), Dan Tsafrir (Technion), Danilo Bruschi (Universita Degli Studi Di Milano), Darby
Asher Noam Haller, David Hanle (Grinnell), David Hartman, Dawn Flood, Deepika Muthuku-
mar, Demir Delic, Dennis Zhou, Dheeraj Shetty (North Carolina State), Diego Oleiarz (FaMAF
UNC), Dorian Arnold (New Mexico), Dominic White, Dustin Metzler, Dustin Passofaro, Dy-
lan Kaplan, Eduardo Stelmaszczyk, Emad Sadeghi, Emil Hessman, Emily Jacobson, Emmett
Witchel (Texas), Eric Freudenthal (UTEP), Eric Kleinberg, Eric Johansson, Erik Turk, Ernst
Biersack (France), Ethan Wood, Fangjun Kuang (U. Stuttgart), Feng Zhang (IBM), Finn Ku-
usisto*, Gavin Inglis (Notre Dame), Giovanni Lagorio (DIBRIS), Glenn Bruns (CSU Monterey
Bay), Glen Granzow (College of Idaho), Greggory Van Dycke, Guilherme Baptista, Hamid
Reza Ghasemi, Hao Chen, Hao Liu, Henry Abbey, Hilmar Gústafsson (Aalborg University),
Hrishikesh Amur, Huanchen Zhang*, Huseyin Sular, Hugo Diaz, Hyrum Carroll (Columbus
State), Ilya Oblomkov, Itai Hass (Toronto), Jackson “Jake” Haenchen (Texas), Jaeyoung Cho
(SKKU), Jagannathan Eachambadi, Jake Gillberg, Jakob Olandt, James Earley, James Perry (U.
Michigan-Dearborn)*, Jan Reineke (Universität des Saarlandes), Jason MacLafferty (Southern
Adventist), Jason Waterman (Vassar), Jay Lim, Jerod Weinman (Grinnell), Jhih-Cheng Luo,
Jiao Dong (Rutgers), Jia-Shen Boon, Jiawen Bao, Jidong Xiao (Boise State), Jingxin Li, Joe
Jean (NYU), Joel Kuntz (Saint Mary’s), Joel Sommers (Colgate), John Brady (Grinnell), John
Komenda, John McEachen (NPS), Jonathan Perry (MIT), Joshua Carpenter (NCSU), Jun He,
Justinas Petuchovas, Karl Wallinger, Kartik Singhal, Katherine Dudenas, Katie Coyle (Geor-
gia Tech), Kaushik Kannan, Kemal Bıçakcı, Kevin Liu*, KyoungSoo Park (KAIST), Lanyue Lu,
Laura Xu, Lei Tian (U. Nebraska-Lincoln), Leonardo Medici (U. Milan), Leslie Schultz, Liang
Yin, Lihao Wang, Looserof, Louie Lu, Manav Batra (IIIT-Delhi), Manu Awasthi (Samsung),
Marcel van der Holst, Marco Guazzone (U. Piemonte Orientale), Marco Pedrinazzi (Universita
Degli Studi Di Milano), Marius Rodi, Mart Oskamp, Martha Ferris, Masashi Kishikawa (Sony),
Matt Reichoff, Matthias St. Pierre, Mattia Monga (U. Milan), Matty Williams, Meng Huang,
Michael Machtel (Hochschule Konstanz), Michael Walfish (NYU), Michael Wu (UCLA), Mike
Griepentrog, Ming Chen (Stonybrook), Mohammed Alali (Delaware), Mohamed Omran (GUST),
Muhammad Yasoob Ullah Khalid, Murugan Kandaswamy, Nadeem Shaikh, Nan Xiao, Natasha

                                                                                                T HREE
                          c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                                  E ASY
                                                                                                P IECES
                  x

                  Eilbert, Natasha Stopa, Nathan Dipiazza, Nathan Sullivan, Neeraj Badlani (N.C. State), Neil
                  Perry, Nelson Gomez, Nghia Huynh (Texas), Nicholas Mandal, Nick Weinandt, Nishin Shouzab,
                  Patel Pratyush Ashesh (BITS-Pilani), Patricio Jara, Patrizio Palmisano, Pavle Kostovic, Perry
                  Kivolowitz, Peter Peterson (Minnesota), Pieter Kockx, Radford Smith, Riccardo Mutschlech-
                  ner, Ripudaman Singh, Rita Pia Folisi, Robert Ordóñez and class (Southern Adventist), Roger
                  Wattenhofer (ETH), Rohan Das (Toronto)*, Rohan Pasalkar (Minnesota), Rohan Puri, Ross
                  Aiken, Ruslan Kiselev, Ryland Herrick, Sam Kelly, Sam Noh (UNIST), Sameer Punjal, Samer
                  Al-Kiswany, Sandeep Ummadi (Minnesota), Sankaralingam Panneerselvam, Satish Chebrolu
                  (NetApp), Satyanarayana Shanmugam*, Scott Catlin, Scott Lee (UCLA), Seth Pollen, Sha-
                  rad Punuganti, Shawn Ge, Shivaram Venkataraman, Shreevatsa R., Simon Pratt (Waterloo),
                  Sivaraman Sivaraman*, Song Jiang (Wayne State), Spencer Harston (Weber State), Srinivasan
                  Thirunarayanan*, Stefan Dekanski, Stephen Bye, Stephen Schaub, Suriyhaprakhas Balaram
                  Sankari, Sy Jin Cheah, Teri Zhao (EMC), Thanumalayan S. Pillai, Thomas Griebel, Thomas
                  Scrace, Tianxia Bai, Tobi Popoola (Boise State), Tong He, Tongxin Zheng, Tony Adkins, Torin
                  Rudeen (Princeton), Tuo Wang, Tyler Couto, Varun Vats, Vikas Goel, Waciuma Wanjohi, William
                  Royle (Grinnell), Xiang Peng, Xu Di, Yifan Hao, Yuanyuan Chen, Yubin Ruan, Yudong Sun,
                  Yue Zhuo (Texas A&M), Yufeng Zhang (UCLA), Yufui Ren, Zef RosnBrick, Zeyuan Hu (Texas),
                  ZiHan Zheng (USTC), Zuyu Zhang. Special thanks to those marked with an as-
                  terisk above, who have gone above and beyond in their suggestions for
                  improvement.
                      In addition, a hearty thanks to Professor Joe Meehean (Lynchburg) for
                  his detailed notes on each chapter, to Professor Jerod Weinman (Grin-
                  nell) and his entire class for their incredible booklets, to Professor Chien-
                  Chung Shen (Delaware) for his invaluable and detailed reading and com-
                  ments, to Adam Drescher (WUSTL) for his careful reading and sugges-
                  tions, to Glen Granzow (College of Idaho) for his incredibly detailed com-
                  ments and tips, Michael Walfish (NYU) for his enthusiasm and detailed
                  suggestions for improvement, Peter Peterson (UMD) for his many bits
                  of useful feedback and commentary, Mark Kampe (Pomona) for detailed
                  criticism (we only wish we could fix all suggestions!), and Youjip Won
                  (Hanyang) for his translation work into Korean(!) and numerous insight-
                  ful suggestions. All have helped these authors immeasurably in the re-
                  finement of the materials herein.
                      Also, many thanks to the hundreds of students who have taken 537
                  over the years. In particular, the Fall ’08 class who encouraged the first
                  written form of these notes (they were sick of not having any kind of
                  textbook to read — pushy students!), and then praised them enough for
                  us to keep going (including one hilarious “ZOMG! You should totally
                  write a textbook!” comment in our course evaluations that year).
                      A great debt of thanks is also owed to the brave few who took the xv6
                  project lab course, much of which is now incorporated into the main 537
                  course. From Spring ’09: Justin Cherniak, Patrick Deline, Matt Czech,
                  Tony Gregerson, Michael Griepentrog, Tyler Harter, Ryan Kroiss, Eric
                  Radzikowski, Wesley Reardan, Rajiv Vaidyanathan, and Christopher Wa-
                  clawik. From Fall ’09: Nick Bearson, Aaron Brown, Alex Bird, David
                  Capel, Keith Gould, Tom Grim, Jeffrey Hugo, Brandon Johnson, John
                  Kjell, Boyan Li, James Loethen, Will McCardell, Ryan Szaroletta, Simon

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                             WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
                                                                      xi

Tso, and Ben Yule. From Spring ’10: Patrick Blesi, Aidan Dennis-Oehling,
Paras Doshi, Jake Friedman, Benjamin Frisch, Evan Hanson, Pikkili He-
manth, Michael Jeung, Alex Langenfeld, Scott Rick, Mike Treffert, Garret
Staus, Brennan Wall, Hans Werner, Soo-Young Yang, and Carlos Griffin
(almost).
   Although they do not directly help with the book, our graduate stu-
dents have taught us much of what we know about systems. We talk
with them regularly while they are at Wisconsin, but they do all the real
work — and by telling us about what they are doing, we learn new things
every week. This list includes the following collection of current and
former students and post-docs with whom we have published papers;
an asterisk marks those who received a Ph.D. under our guidance, and
two asterisks are for those who did a post-doctorate with us: Abhishek
Rajimwale, Aishwarya Ganesan, Andrew Krioukov, Ao Ma, Brian For-
ney, Chris Dragga, Deepak Ramamurthi, Dennis Zhou, Edward Oakes,
Florentina Popovici*, Hariharan Gopalakrishnan, Haryadi S. Gunawi*,
James Nugent, Jing Liu, Joe Meehean*, John Bent*, Jun He*, Kan Wu,
Kevin Houck, Lanyue Lu*, Lakshmi Bairavasundaram*, Laxman Visam-
palli, Leo Arulraj*, Leon Yang, Meenali Rungta, Muthian Sivathanu*, Nathan
Burnett*, Nitin Agrawal*, Ram Alagappan, Samer Al-Kiswany**, Scott
Hendrickson, Sriram Subramanian*, Stephen Todd Jones*, Stephen Stur-
devant, Sudarsun Kannan**, Suli Yang*, Swaminathan Sundararaman*,
Swetha Krishnan, Thanh Do*, Thanumalayan S. Pillai*, Timothy Denehy*,
Tyler Harter*, Venkat Venkataramani, Vijay Chidambaram*, Vijayan Prab-
hakaran*, Yiying Zhang*, Yupu Zhang*, Yuvraj Patel, Zev Weiss*.
   Our graduate students have largely been funded by the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF), the Department of Energy Office of Science (DOE),
and by industry grants. We are especially grateful to the NSF for their
support over many years, as our research has shaped the content of many
chapters herein.
   We thank Thomas Griebel, who demanded a better cover for the book.
Although we didn’t take his specific suggestion (a dinosaur, can you be-
lieve it?), the beautiful picture of Halley’s comet would not be found on
the cover without him.
   A final debt of gratitude is also owed to Aaron Brown, who first took
this course many years ago (Spring ’09), then took the xv6 lab course (Fall
’09), and finally was a graduate teaching assistant for the course for two
years or so (Fall ’10 through Spring ’12). His tireless work has vastly im-
proved the state of the projects (particularly those in xv6 land) and thus
has helped better the learning experience for countless undergraduates
and graduates here at Wisconsin. As Aaron would say (in his usual suc-
cinct manner): “Thx.”

                                                                              T HREE
                     c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                E ASY
                                                                              P IECES
                  xii

                  Final Words
                     Yeats famously said “Education is not the filling of a pail but the light-
                  ing of a fire.” He was right but wrong at the same time6 . You do have
                  to “fill the pail” a bit, and these notes are certainly here to help with that
                  part of your education; after all, when you go to interview at Google, and
                  they ask you a trick question about how to use semaphores, it might be
                  good to actually know what a semaphore is, right?
                     But Yeats’s larger point is obviously on the mark: the real point of
                  education is to get you interested in something, to learn something more
                  about the subject matter on your own and not just what you have to digest
                  to get a good grade in some class. As one of our fathers (Remzi’s dad,
                  Vedat Arpaci) used to say, “Learn beyond the classroom”.
                     We created these notes to spark your interest in operating systems, to
                  read more about the topic on your own, to talk to your professor about all
                  the exciting research that is going on in the field, and even to get involved
                  with that research. It is a great field(!), full of exciting and wonderful
                  ideas that have shaped computing history in profound and important
                  ways. And while we understand this fire won’t light for all of you, we
                  hope it does for many, or even a few. Because once that fire is lit, well,
                  that is when you truly become capable of doing something great. And
                  thus the real point of the educational process: to go forth, to study many
                  new and fascinating topics, to learn, to mature, and most importantly, to
                  find something that lights a fire for you.

                  Andrea and Remzi
                  Married couple
                  Professors of Computer Science at the University of Wisconsin
                  Chief Lighters of Fires, hopefully7

                        If he actually said this; as with many famous quotes, the history of this gem is murky.
                        7
                        If this sounds like we are admitting some past history as arsonists, you are probably
                  missing the point. Probably. If this sounds cheesy, well, that’s because it is, but you’ll just have
                  to forgive us for that.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                                WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
                                                                                                   xiii

References
[CK+08] “The xv6 Operating System” by Russ Cox, Frans Kaashoek, Robert Morris, Nickolai
Zeldovich. From: http://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.828/2008/index.html. xv6 was
developed as a port of the original U NIX version 6 and represents a beautiful, clean, and simple way to
understand a modern operating system.
[F96] “Six Easy Pieces: Essentials Of Physics Explained By Its Most Brilliant Teacher” by
Richard P. Feynman. Basic Books, 1996. This book reprints the six easiest chapters of Feynman’s
Lectures on Physics, from 1963. If you like Physics, it is a fantastic read.
[HP90] “Computer Architecture a Quantitative Approach” (1st ed.) by David A. Patterson and
John L. Hennessy . Morgan-Kaufman, 1990. A book that encouraged each of us at our undergraduate
institutions to pursue graduate studies; we later both had the pleasure of working with Patterson, who
greatly shaped the foundations of our research careers.
[KR88] “The C Programming Language” by Brian Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie. Prentice-
Hall, April 1988. The C programming reference that everyone should have, by the people who invented
the language.
[K62] “The Structure of Scientific Revolutions” by Thomas S. Kuhn. University of Chicago
Press, 1962. A great and famous read about the fundamentals of the scientific process. Mop-up work,
anomaly, crisis, and revolution. We are mostly destined to do mop-up work, alas.

                                                                                                           T HREE
                              c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                                             E ASY
                                                                                                           P IECES
