    I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS                                                     11

                         T HE C RUX OF THE P ROBLEM :
             H OW T O B UILD C ORRECT C ONCURRENT P ROGRAMS
    When there are many concurrently executing threads within the same
    memory space, how can we build a correctly working program? What
    primitives are needed from the OS? What mechanisms should be pro-
    vided by the hardware? How can we use them to solve the problems of
    concurrency?

    takes three instructions: one to load the value of the counter from mem-
    ory into a register, one to increment it, and one to store it back into mem-
    ory. Because these three instructions do not execute atomically (all at
    once), strange things can happen. It is this problem of concurrency that
    we will address in great detail in the second part of this book.

2.4 Persistence
        The third major theme of the course is persistence. In system memory,
    data can be easily lost, as devices such as DRAM store values in a volatile
    manner; when power goes away or the system crashes, any data in mem-
    ory is lost. Thus, we need hardware and software to be able to store data
    persistently; such storage is thus critical to any system as users care a
    great deal about their data.
        The hardware comes in the form of some kind of input/output or I/O
    device; in modern systems, a hard drive is a common repository for long-
    lived information, although solid-state drives (SSDs) are making head-
    way in this arena as well.
        The software in the operating system that usually manages the disk is
    called the file system; it is thus responsible for storing any files the user
    creates in a reliable and efficient manner on the disks of the system.
        Unlike the abstractions provided by the OS for the CPU and memory,
    the OS does not create a private, virtualized disk for each application.
    Rather, it is assumed that often times, users will want to share informa-
    tion that is in files. For example, when writing a C program, you might
    first use an editor (e.g., Emacs7 ) to create and edit the C file (emacs -nw
    main.c). Once done, you might use the compiler to turn the source code
    into an executable (e.g., gcc -o main main.c). When you’re finished,
    you might run the new executable (e.g., ./main). Thus, you can see how
    files are shared across different processes. First, Emacs creates a file that
    serves as input to the compiler; the compiler uses that input file to create
    a new executable file (in many steps — take a compiler course for details);
    finally, the new executable is then run. And thus a new program is born!
          You should be using Emacs. If you are using vi, there is probably something wrong with
    you. If you are using something that is not a real code editor, that is even worse.

                                                                                                   T HREE
                              c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                                     E ASY
                                                                                                   P IECES
                  12                                   I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS

           1      #include <stdio.h>
           2      #include <unistd.h>
           3      #include <assert.h>
           4      #include <fcntl.h>
           5      #include <sys/types.h>

           7      int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
           8          int fd = open("/tmp/file", O_WRONLY|O_CREAT|O_TRUNC,
           9                           S_IRWXU);
          10          assert(fd > -1);
          11          int rc = write(fd, "hello world\n", 13);
          12          assert(rc == 13);
          13          close(fd);
          14          return 0;
          15      }
                            Figure 2.6: A Program That Does I/O (io.c)

                      To understand this better, let’s look at some code. Figure 2.6 presents
                  code to create a file (/tmp/file) that contains the string “hello world”.
                      To accomplish this task, the program makes three calls into the oper-
                  ating system. The first, a call to open(), opens the file and creates it; the
                  second, write(), writes some data to the file; the third, close(), sim-
                  ply closes the file thus indicating the program won’t be writing any more
                  data to it. These system calls are routed to the part of the operating sys-
                  tem called the file system, which then handles the requests and returns
                  some kind of error code to the user.
                      You might be wondering what the OS does in order to actually write
                  to disk. We would show you but you’d have to promise to close your
                  eyes first; it is that unpleasant. The file system has to do a fair bit of work:
                  first figuring out where on disk this new data will reside, and then keep-
                  ing track of it in various structures the file system maintains. Doing so
                  requires issuing I/O requests to the underlying storage device, to either
                  read existing structures or update (write) them. As anyone who has writ-
                  ten a device driver8 knows, getting a device to do something on your
                  behalf is an intricate and detailed process. It requires a deep knowledge
                  of the low-level device interface and its exact semantics. Fortunately, the
                  OS provides a standard and simple way to access devices through its sys-
                  tem calls. Thus, the OS is sometimes seen as a standard library.
                      Of course, there are many more details in how devices are accessed,
                  and how file systems manage data persistently atop said devices. For
                  performance reasons, most file systems first delay such writes for a while,
                  hoping to batch them into larger groups. To handle the problems of sys-
                  tem crashes during writes, most file systems incorporate some kind of
                  intricate write protocol, such as journaling or copy-on-write, carefully
                        A device driver is some code in the operating system that knows how to deal with a
                  specific device. We will talk more about devices and device drivers later.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                           WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
