    I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS                                                  13

                           T HE C RUX OF THE P ROBLEM :
                       H OW T O S TORE D ATA P ERSISTENTLY
    The file system is the part of the OS in charge of managing persistent data.
    What techniques are needed to do so correctly? What mechanisms and
    policies are required to do so with high performance? How is reliability
    achieved, in the face of failures in hardware and software?

    ordering writes to disk to ensure that if a failure occurs during the write
    sequence, the system can recover to reasonable state afterwards. To make
    different common operations efficient, file systems employ many differ-
    ent data structures and access methods, from simple lists to complex b-
    trees. If all of this doesn’t make sense yet, good! We’ll be talking about
    all of this quite a bit more in the third part of this book on persistence,
    where we’ll discuss devices and I/O in general, and then disks, RAIDs,
    and file systems in great detail.

2.5 Design Goals
        So now you have some idea of what an OS actually does: it takes phys-
    ical resources, such as a CPU, memory, or disk, and virtualizes them. It
    handles tough and tricky issues related to concurrency. And it stores files
    persistently, thus making them safe over the long-term. Given that we
    want to build such a system, we want to have some goals in mind to help
    focus our design and implementation and make trade-offs as necessary;
    finding the right set of trade-offs is a key to building systems.
        One of the most basic goals is to build up some abstractions in order
    to make the system convenient and easy to use. Abstractions are fun-
    damental to everything we do in computer science. Abstraction makes
    it possible to write a large program by dividing it into small and under-
    standable pieces, to write such a program in a high-level language like
    C9 without thinking about assembly, to write code in assembly without
    thinking about logic gates, and to build a processor out of gates without
    thinking too much about transistors. Abstraction is so fundamental that
    sometimes we forget its importance, but we won’t here; thus, in each sec-
    tion, we’ll discuss some of the major abstractions that have developed
    over time, giving you a way to think about pieces of the OS.
        One goal in designing and implementing an operating system is to
    provide high performance; another way to say this is our goal is to mini-
    mize the overheads of the OS. Virtualization and making the system easy
    to use are well worth it, but not at any cost; thus, we must strive to pro-
    vide virtualization and other OS features without excessive overheads.
          Some of you might object to calling C a high-level language. Remember this is an OS
    course, though, where we’re simply happy not to have to code in assembly all the time!

                                                                                                T HREE
                              c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                                  E ASY
                                                                                                P IECES
