
                       Introduction to Operating Systems

If you are taking an undergraduate operating systems course, you should
already have some idea of what a computer program does when it runs.
If not, this book (and the corresponding course) is going to be difficult
— so you should probably stop reading this book, or run to the near-
est bookstore and quickly consume the necessary background material
before continuing (both Patt & Patel [PP03] and Bryant & O’Hallaron
[BOH10] are pretty great books).
    So what happens when a program runs?
    Well, a running program does one very simple thing: it executes in-
structions. Many millions (and these days, even billions) of times ev-
ery second, the processor fetches an instruction from memory, decodes
it (i.e., figures out which instruction this is), and executes it (i.e., it does
the thing that it is supposed to do, like add two numbers together, access
memory, check a condition, jump to a function, and so forth). After it is
done with this instruction, the processor moves on to the next instruction,
and so on, and so on, until the program finally completes1 .
    Thus, we have just described the basics of the Von Neumann model of
computing2 . Sounds simple, right? But in this class, we will be learning
that while a program runs, a lot of other wild things are going on with
the primary goal of making the system easy to use.
    There is a body of software, in fact, that is responsible for making it
easy to run programs (even allowing you to seemingly run many at the
same time), allowing programs to share memory, enabling programs to
interact with devices, and other fun stuff like that. That body of software

       Of course, modern processors do many bizarre and frightening things underneath the
hood to make programs run faster, e.g., executing multiple instructions at once, and even issu-
ing and completing them out of order! But that is not our concern here; we are just concerned
with the simple model most programs assume: that instructions seemingly execute one at a
time, in an orderly and sequential fashion.
       Von Neumann was one of the early pioneers of computing systems. He also did pioneer-
ing work on game theory and atomic bombs, and played in the NBA for six years. OK, one of
those things isn’t true.

                  4                                       I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS

                                          T HE C RUX OF THE P ROBLEM :
                                       H OW T O V IRTUALIZE R ESOURCES
                  One central question we will answer in this book is quite simple: how
                  does the operating system virtualize resources? This is the crux of our
                  problem. Why the OS does this is not the main question, as the answer
                  should be obvious: it makes the system easier to use. Thus, we focus on
                  the how: what mechanisms and policies are implemented by the OS to
                  attain virtualization? How does the OS do so efficiently? What hardware
                  support is needed?
                  We will use the “crux of the problem”, in shaded boxes such as this one,
                  as a way to call out specific problems we are trying to solve in building
                  an operating system. Thus, within a note on a particular topic, you may
                  find one or more cruces (yes, this is the proper plural) which highlight the
                  problem. The details within the chapter, of course, present the solution,
                  or at least the basic parameters of a solution.

                  is called the operating system (OS)3 , as it is in charge of making sure the
                  system operates correctly and efficiently in an easy-to-use manner.
                      The primary way the OS does this is through a general technique that
                  we call virtualization. That is, the OS takes a physical resource (such as
                  the processor, or memory, or a disk) and transforms it into a more gen-
                  eral, powerful, and easy-to-use virtual form of itself. Thus, we sometimes
                  refer to the operating system as a virtual machine.
                      Of course, in order to allow users to tell the OS what to do and thus
                  make use of the features of the virtual machine (such as running a pro-
                  gram, or allocating memory, or accessing a file), the OS also provides
                  some interfaces (APIs) that you can call. A typical OS, in fact, exports
                  a few hundred system calls that are available to applications. Because
                  the OS provides these calls to run programs, access memory and devices,
                  and other related actions, we also sometimes say that the OS provides a
                  standard library to applications.
                      Finally, because virtualization allows many programs to run (thus shar-
                  ing the CPU), and many programs to concurrently access their own in-
                  structions and data (thus sharing memory), and many programs to access
                  devices (thus sharing disks and so forth), the OS is sometimes known as
                  a resource manager. Each of the CPU, memory, and disk is a resource
                  of the system; it is thus the operating system’s role to manage those re-
                  sources, doing so efficiently or fairly or indeed with many other possible
                  goals in mind. To understand the role of the OS a little bit better, let’s take
                  a look at some examples.

                        Another early name for the OS was the supervisor or even the master control program.
                  Apparently, the latter sounded a little overzealous (see the movie Tron for details) and thus,
                  thankfully, “operating system” caught on instead.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                             WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
