                  14                               I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS

                  These overheads arise in a number of forms: extra time (more instruc-
                  tions) and extra space (in memory or on disk). We’ll seek solutions that
                  minimize one or the other or both, if possible. Perfection, however, is not
                  always attainable, something we will learn to notice and (where appro-
                  priate) tolerate.
                     Another goal will be to provide protection between applications, as
                  well as between the OS and applications. Because we wish to allow
                  many programs to run at the same time, we want to make sure that the
                  malicious or accidental bad behavior of one does not harm others; we
                  certainly don’t want an application to be able to harm the OS itself (as
                  that would affect all programs running on the system). Protection is at
                  the heart of one of the main principles underlying an operating system,
                  which is that of isolation; isolating processes from one another is the key
                  to protection and thus underlies much of what an OS must do.
                     The operating system must also run non-stop; when it fails, all appli-
                  cations running on the system fail as well. Because of this dependence,
                  operating systems often strive to provide a high degree of reliability. As
                  operating systems grow evermore complex (sometimes containing mil-
                  lions of lines of code), building a reliable operating system is quite a chal-
                  lenge — and indeed, much of the on-going research in the field (including
                  some of our own work [BS+09, SS+10]) focuses on this exact problem.
                     Other goals make sense: energy-efficiency is important in our increas-
                  ingly green world; security (an extension of protection, really) against
                  malicious applications is critical, especially in these highly-networked
                  times; mobility is increasingly important as OSes are run on smaller and
                  smaller devices. Depending on how the system is used, the OS will have
                  different goals and thus likely be implemented in at least slightly differ-
                  ent ways. However, as we will see, many of the principles we will present
                  on how to build an OS are useful on a range of different devices.

        2.6       Some History
                     Before closing this introduction, let us present a brief history of how
                  operating systems developed. Like any system built by humans, good
                  ideas accumulated in operating systems over time, as engineers learned
                  what was important in their design. Here, we discuss a few major devel-
                  opments. For a richer treatment, see Brinch Hansen’s excellent history of
                  operating systems [BH00].

                  Early Operating Systems: Just Libraries
                  In the beginning, the operating system didn’t do too much. Basically,
                  it was just a set of libraries of commonly-used functions; for example,
                  instead of having each programmer of the system write low-level I/O
                  handling code, the “OS” would provide such APIs, and thus make life
                  easier for the developer.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                       WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS                                      15

    Usually, on these old mainframe systems, one program ran at a time,
as controlled by a human operator. Much of what you think a modern
OS would do (e.g., deciding what order to run jobs in) was performed by
this operator. If you were a smart developer, you would be nice to this
operator, so that they might move your job to the front of the queue.
    This mode of computing was known as batch processing, as a number
of jobs were set up and then run in a “batch” by the operator. Computers,
as of that point, were not used in an interactive manner, because of cost:
it was simply too expensive to let a user sit in front of the computer and
use it, as most of the time it would just sit idle then, costing the facility
hundreds of thousands of dollars per hour [BH00].

Beyond Libraries: Protection
In moving beyond being a simple library of commonly-used services, op-
erating systems took on a more central role in managing machines. One
important aspect of this was the realization that code run on behalf of the
OS was special; it had control of devices and thus should be treated dif-
ferently than normal application code. Why is this? Well, imagine if you
allowed any application to read from anywhere on the disk; the notion of
privacy goes out the window, as any program could read any file. Thus,
implementing a file system (to manage your files) as a library makes little
sense. Instead, something else was needed.
    Thus, the idea of a system call was invented, pioneered by the Atlas
computing system [K+61,L78]. Instead of providing OS routines as a li-
brary (where you just make a procedure call to access them), the idea here
was to add a special pair of hardware instructions and hardware state to
make the transition into the OS a more formal, controlled process.
    The key difference between a system call and a procedure call is that
a system call transfers control (i.e., jumps) into the OS while simultane-
ously raising the hardware privilege level. User applications run in what
is referred to as user mode which means the hardware restricts what ap-
plications can do; for example, an application running in user mode can’t
typically initiate an I/O request to the disk, access any physical memory
page, or send a packet on the network. When a system call is initiated
(usually through a special hardware instruction called a trap), the hard-
ware transfers control to a pre-specified trap handler (that the OS set up
previously) and simultaneously raises the privilege level to kernel mode.
In kernel mode, the OS has full access to the hardware of the system and
thus can do things like initiate an I/O request or make more memory
available to a program. When the OS is done servicing the request, it
passes control back to the user via a special return-from-trap instruction,
which reverts to user mode while simultaneously passing control back to
where the application left off.

                                                                                T HREE
                      c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                  E ASY
                                                                                P IECES
                  16                                       I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS

                  The Era of Multiprogramming
                  Where operating systems really took off was in the era of computing be-
                  yond the mainframe, that of the minicomputer. Classic machines like
                  the PDP family from Digital Equipment made computers hugely more
                  affordable; thus, instead of having one mainframe per large organization,
                  now a smaller collection of people within an organization could likely
                  have their own computer. Not surprisingly, one of the major impacts of
                  this drop in cost was an increase in developer activity; more smart people
                  got their hands on computers and thus made computer systems do more
                  interesting and beautiful things.
                      In particular, multiprogramming became commonplace due to the de-
                  sire to make better use of machine resources. Instead of just running one
                  job at a time, the OS would load a number of jobs into memory and switch
                  rapidly between them, thus improving CPU utilization. This switching
                  was particularly important because I/O devices were slow; having a pro-
                  gram wait on the CPU while its I/O was being serviced was a waste of
                  CPU time. Instead, why not switch to another job and run it for a while?
                      The desire to support multiprogramming and overlap in the presence
                  of I/O and interrupts forced innovation in the conceptual development of
                  operating systems along a number of directions. Issues such as memory
                  protection became important; we wouldn’t want one program to be able
                  to access the memory of another program. Understanding how to deal
                  with the concurrency issues introduced by multiprogramming was also
                  critical; making sure the OS was behaving correctly despite the presence
                  of interrupts is a great challenge. We will study these issues and related
                  topics later in the book.
                      One of the major practical advances of the time was the introduction
                  of the U NIX operating system, primarily thanks to Ken Thompson (and
                  Dennis Ritchie) at Bell Labs (yes, the phone company). U NIX took many
                  good ideas from different operating systems (particularly from Multics
                  [O72], and some from systems like TENEX [B+72] and the Berkeley Time-
                  Sharing System [S+68]), but made them simpler and easier to use. Soon
                  this team was shipping tapes containing U NIX source code to people
                  around the world, many of whom then got involved and added to the
                  system themselves; see the Aside (next page) for more detail10 .

                  The Modern Era
                  Beyond the minicomputer came a new type of machine, cheaper, faster,
                  and for the masses: the personal computer, or PC as we call it today. Led
                  by Apple’s early machines (e.g., the Apple II) and the IBM PC, this new
                  breed of machine would soon become the dominant force in computing,
                     10
                        We’ll use asides and other related text boxes to call attention to various items that don’t
                  quite fit the main flow of the text. Sometimes, we’ll even use them just to make a joke, because
                  why not have a little fun along the way? Yes, many of the jokes are bad.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                               WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS                                     17

                     A SIDE : T HE I MPORTANCE OF U NIX
It is difficult to overstate the importance of U NIX in the history of oper-
ating systems. Influenced by earlier systems (in particular, the famous
Multics system from MIT), U NIX brought together many great ideas and
made a system that was both simple and powerful.
Underlying the original “Bell Labs” U NIX was the unifying principle of
building small powerful programs that could be connected together to
form larger workflows. The shell, where you type commands, provided
primitives such as pipes to enable such meta-level programming, and
thus it became easy to string together programs to accomplish a big-
ger task. For example, to find lines of a text file that have the word
“foo” in them, and then to count how many such lines exist, you would
type: grep foo file.txt|wc -l, thus using the grep and wc (word
count) programs to achieve your task.
The U NIX environment was friendly for programmers and developers
alike, also providing a compiler for the new C programming language.
Making it easy for programmers to write their own programs, as well as
share them, made U NIX enormously popular. And it probably helped a
lot that the authors gave out copies for free to anyone who asked, an early
form of open-source software.
Also of critical importance was the accessibility and readability of the
code. Having a beautiful, small kernel written in C invited others to play
with the kernel, adding new and cool features. For example, an enter-
prising group at Berkeley, led by Bill Joy, made a wonderful distribution
(the Berkeley Systems Distribution, or BSD) which had some advanced
virtual memory, file system, and networking subsystems. Joy later co-
founded Sun Microsystems.
Unfortunately, the spread of U NIX was slowed a bit as companies tried to
assert ownership and profit from it, an unfortunate (but common) result
of lawyers getting involved. Many companies had their own variants:
SunOS from Sun Microsystems, AIX from IBM, HPUX (a.k.a. “H-Pucks”)
from HP, and IRIX from SGI. The legal wrangling among AT&T/Bell
Labs and these other players cast a dark cloud over U NIX, and many
wondered if it would survive, especially as Windows was introduced and
took over much of the PC market...

as their low-cost enabled one machine per desktop instead of a shared
minicomputer per workgroup.
   Unfortunately, for operating systems, the PC at first represented a
great leap backwards, as early systems forgot (or never knew of) the
lessons learned in the era of minicomputers. For example, early operat-
ing systems such as DOS (the Disk Operating System, from Microsoft)
didn’t think memory protection was important; thus, a malicious (or per-
haps just a poorly-programmed) application could scribble all over mem-

                                                                               T HREE
                      c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                                 E ASY
                                                                               P IECES
                  18                              I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS

                                      A SIDE : A ND T HEN C AME L INUX
                  Fortunately for U NIX, a young Finnish hacker named Linus Torvalds de-
                  cided to write his own version of U NIX which borrowed heavily on the
                  principles and ideas behind the original system, but not from the code
                  base, thus avoiding issues of legality. He enlisted help from many others
                  around the world, took advantage of the sophisticated GNU tools that
                  already existed [G85], and soon Linux was born (as well as the modern
                  open-source software movement).
                  As the internet era came into place, most companies (such as Google,
                  Amazon, Facebook, and others) chose to run Linux, as it was free and
                  could be readily modified to suit their needs; indeed, it is hard to imag-
                  ine the success of these new companies had such a system not existed.
                  As smart phones became a dominant user-facing platform, Linux found
                  a stronghold there too (via Android), for many of the same reasons. And
                  Steve Jobs took his U NIX-based NeXTStep operating environment with
                  him to Apple, thus making U NIX popular on desktops (though many
                  users of Apple technology are probably not even aware of this fact). Thus
                  U NIX lives on, more important today than ever before. The computing
                  gods, if you believe in them, should be thanked for this wonderful out-
                  come.

                  ory. The first generations of the Mac OS (v9 and earlier) took a coopera-
                  tive approach to job scheduling; thus, a thread that accidentally got stuck
                  in an infinite loop could take over the entire system, forcing a reboot. The
                  painful list of OS features missing in this generation of systems is long,
                  too long for a full discussion here.
                      Fortunately, after some years of suffering, the old features of mini-
                  computer operating systems started to find their way onto the desktop.
                  For example, Mac OS X/macOS has U NIX at its core, including all of the
                  features one would expect from such a mature system. Windows has sim-
                  ilarly adopted many of the great ideas in computing history, starting in
                  particular with Windows NT, a great leap forward in Microsoft OS tech-
                  nology. Even today’s cell phones run operating systems (such as Linux)
                  that are much more like what a minicomputer ran in the 1970s than what
                  a PC ran in the 1980s (thank goodness); it is good to see that the good
                  ideas developed in the heyday of OS development have found their way
                  into the modern world. Even better is that these ideas continue to de-
                  velop, providing more features and making modern systems even better
                  for users and applications.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                       WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
