                  20                                           I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS

                  References
                  [BS+09] “Tolerating File-System Mistakes with EnvyFS” by L. Bairavasundaram, S. Sundarara-
                  man, A. Arpaci-Dusseau, R. Arpaci-Dusseau. USENIX ’09, San Diego, CA, June 2009. A fun
                  paper about using multiple file systems at once to tolerate a mistake in any one of them.
                  [BH00] “The Evolution of Operating Systems” by P. Brinch Hansen. In ’Classic Operating
                  Systems: From Batch Processing to Distributed Systems.’ Springer-Verlag, New York, 2000.
                  This essay provides an intro to a wonderful collection of papers about historically significant systems.
                  [B+72] “TENEX, A Paged Time Sharing System for the PDP-10” by D. Bobrow, J. Burchfiel, D.
                  Murphy, R. Tomlinson. CACM, Volume 15, Number 3, March 1972. TENEX has much of the
                  machinery found in modern operating systems; read more about it to see how much innovation was
                  already in place in the early 1970’s.
                  [B75] “The Mythical Man-Month” by F. Brooks. Addison-Wesley, 1975. A classic text on software
                  engineering; well worth the read.
                  [BOH10] “Computer Systems: A Programmer’s Perspective” by R. Bryant and D. O’Hallaron.
                  Addison-Wesley, 2010. Another great intro to how computer systems work. Has a little bit of overlap
                  with this book — so if you’d like, you can skip the last few chapters of that book, or simply read them to
                  get a different perspective on some of the same material. After all, one good way to build up your own
                  knowledge is to hear as many other perspectives as possible, and then develop your own opinion and
                  thoughts on the matter. You know, by thinking!
                  [G85] “The GNU Manifesto” by R. Stallman. 1985. www.gnu.org/gnu/manifesto.html.
                  A huge part of Linux’s success was no doubt the presence of an excellent compiler, gcc, and other
                  relevant pieces of open software, thanks to the GNU effort headed by Stallman. Stallman is a visionary
                  when it comes to open source, and this manifesto lays out his thoughts as to why.
                  [K+61] “One-Level Storage System” by T. Kilburn, D.B.G. Edwards, M.J. Lanigan, F.H. Sumner.
                  IRE Transactions on Electronic Computers, April 1962. The Atlas pioneered much of what you see
                  in modern systems. However, this paper is not the best read. If you were to only read one, you might
                  try the historical perspective below [L78].
                  [L78] “The Manchester Mark I and Atlas: A Historical Perspective” by S. H. Lavington. Com-
                  munications of the ACM, Volume 21:1, January 1978. A nice piece of history on the early devel-
                  opment of computer systems and the pioneering efforts of the Atlas. Of course, one could go back and
                  read the Atlas papers themselves, but this paper provides a great overview and adds some historical
                  perspective.
                  [O72] “The Multics System: An Examination of its Structure” by Elliott Organick. MIT Press,
                  1972. A great overview of Multics. So many good ideas, and yet it was an over-designed system,
                  shooting for too much, and thus never really worked. A classic example of what Fred Brooks would call
                  the “second-system effect” [B75].
                  [PP03] “Introduction to Computing Systems: From Bits and Gates to C and Beyond” by Yale
                  N. Patt, Sanjay J. Patel. McGraw-Hill, 2003. One of our favorite intro to computing systems books.
                  Starts at transistors and gets you all the way up to C; the early material is particularly great.
                  [RT74] “The U NIX Time-Sharing System” by Dennis M. Ritchie, Ken Thompson. CACM, Vol-
                  ume 17: 7, July 1974. A great summary of U NIX written as it was taking over the world of computing,
                  by the people who wrote it.
                  [S68] “SDS 940 Time-Sharing System” by Scientific Data Systems. TECHNICAL MANUAL,
                  SDS 90 11168, August 1968. Yes, a technical manual was the best we could find. But it is fascinating
                  to read these old system documents, and see how much was already in place in the late 1960’s. One of
                  the minds behind the Berkeley Time-Sharing System (which eventually became the SDS system) was
                  Butler Lampson, who later won a Turing award for his contributions in systems.
                  [SS+10] “Membrane: Operating System Support for Restartable File Systems” by S. Sundarara-
                  man, S. Subramanian, A. Rajimwale, A. Arpaci-Dusseau, R. Arpaci-Dusseau, M. Swift. FAST
                  ’10, San Jose, CA, February 2010. The great thing about writing your own class notes: you can ad-
                  vertise your own research. But this paper is actually pretty neat — when a file system hits a bug and
                  crashes, Membrane auto-magically restarts it, all without applications or the rest of the system being
                  affected.

O PERATING
S YSTEMS                                                  WWW. OSTEP. ORG
[V ERSION 1.01]
