I NTRODUCTION TO O PERATING S YSTEMS                                 21

Homework
    Most (and eventually, all) chapters of this book have homework sec-
tions at the end. Doing these homeworks is important, as each lets you,
the reader, gain more experience with the concepts presented within the
chapter.
    There are two types of homeworks. The first is based on simulation. A
simulation of a computer system is just a simple program that pretends to
do some of the interesting parts of what a real system does, and then re-
port some output metrics to show how the system behaves. For example,
a hard drive simulator might take a series of requests, simulate how long
they would take to get serviced by a hard drive with certain performance
characteristics, and then report the average latency of the requests.
    The cool thing about simulations is they let you easily explore how
systems behave without the difficulty of running a real system. Indeed,
they even let you create systems that cannot exist in the real world (for
example, a hard drive with unimaginably fast performance), and thus see
the potential impact of future technologies.
    Of course, simulations are not without their downsides. By their very
nature, simulations are just approximations of how a real system behaves.
If an important aspect of real-world behavior is omitted, the simulation
will report bad results. Thus, results from a simulation should always be
treated with some suspicion. In the end, how a system behaves in the real
world is what matters.
    The second type of homework requires interaction with real-world
code. Some of these homeworks are measurement focused, whereas oth-
ers just require some small-scale development and experimentation. Both
are just small forays into the larger world you should be getting into,
which is how to write systems code in C on U NIX-based systems. Indeed,
larger-scale projects, which go beyond these homeworks, are needed to
push you in this direction; thus, beyond just doing homeworks, we strongly
recommend you do projects to solidify your systems skills. See this page
(https://github.com/remzi-arpacidusseau/ostep-projects)
for some projects.
    To do these homeworks, you likely have to be on a U NIX-based ma-
chine, running either Linux, macOS, or some similar system. It should
also have a C compiler installed (e.g., gcc) as well as Python. You should
also know how to edit code in a real code editor of some kind.

                                                                             T HREE
                     c 2008–19, A RPACI -D USSEAU
                                                                               E ASY
                                                                             P IECES
