Chapter 9

Conventions

    This chapter is used to document some features special to the AMD64 ABI. The different sections might
be moved to another place or removed completely.

                            AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
9.1    C++
For the C++ ABI we will use the IA-64 C++ ABI and instantiate it appropriately. The
current draft of that ABI is available at:
http://mentorembedded.github.io/cxx-abi/

                      AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
9.2        Fortran
A formal Fortran ABI does not exist. Most Fortran compilers are designed for very spe-
cific high performance computing applications, so Fortran compilers use different pass-
ing conventions and memory layouts optimized for their specific purpose. For example,
Fortran applications that must run on distributed memory machines need a different data
representation for array descriptors (also known as dope vectors, or fat pointers) than ap-
plications running on symmetric multiprocessor shared memory machines. A normative
ABI for Fortran is therefore not desirable. However, for interoperability of different For-
tran compilers, as well as for interoperability with other languages, this section provides
some some guidelines for data types representation, and argument passing. The guidelines
in this section are derived from the GNU Fortran 77 (G77) compiler, and are also followed
by the GNU Fortran 95 (gfortran) compiler (restricted to Fortran 77 features). Other For-
tran compilers already available for AMD64 at the time of this writing may use different
conventions, so compatibility is not guaranteed.
    When this text uses the term Fortran procedure, the text applies to both Fortran
FUNCTION and SUBROUTINE subprograms as well as for alternate ENTRY points, unless
specifically stated otherwise.
    Everything not explicitly defined in this ABI is left to the implementation.

9.2.1       Names
External names in Fortran are names of entities visible to all subprograms at link time.
This includes names of COMMON blocks and Fortran procedures. To avoid name space con-
flicts with linked-in libraries, all external names have to be mangled. And to avoid name
space conflicts of mangled external names with local names, all local names must also be
mangled. The mangling scheme is straightforward as follows:

   • all names that do not have any underscores in it should have one underscore ap-
     pended

   • all external names containing one or more underscores in it (wherever) should have
     two underscores appended 2 .

   • all external names should be mapped to lower case, following the traditional UNIX
     model for Fortran compilers

      For examples see figure 9.1:
      Historically, this is to be compatible with f2c.

                                AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
                              Figure 9.1: Example mapping of names

                                  Fortran external name   Linker name
                                  FOO                     foo_
                                  foo                     foo_
                                  Foo                     foo_
                                  foo_                    foo___
                                  f_oo                    f_oo__

    The entry point of the main program unit is called MAIN__. The symbol name for the
blank common block is __BLNK__. the external name of the unnamed BLOCK DATA routine
is __BLOCK_DATA__.

9.2.2         Representation of Fortran Types
For historical reasons, GNU Fortran 77 maps Fortran programs to the C ABI, so the data
representation can be explained best by providing the mapping of Fortran types to C types
used by G77 on AMD643 as in figure 9.2. The “TYPE*N” notation specifies that variables
or aggregate members of type TYPE shall occupy N bytes of storage.

                             Figure 9.2: Mapping of Fortran to C types

                   Fortran                  Data kind                   Equivalent C type
                 INTEGER*4    Default integer                       signed int
                 INTEGER*8    Double precision integer              signed long
                 REAL*4       Single precision FP number            float
                 REAL*8       Double precision FP number            double
                 COMPLEX*4    Single precision complex FP number    complex float
                 COMPLEX*8    Double precision complex FP number    complex double
                 LOGICAL      Boolean logical type                  signed int
                 CHARACTER    Text string                           char[] + length

         The values for type LOGICAL are .TRUE. implemented as 1 and .FALSE. implemented as
0.
    G77 provides a header g2c.h with the equivalent C type definitions for all supported Fortran scalar
types.

                             AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
    Data objects with a CHARACTER type4 are represented as an array of characters of the
C char type (not guaranteed to be “\0” terminated) with a separate length counter to dis-
tinguish between CHARACTER data objects with a length parameter, and aggregate types of
CHARACTER data objects, possibly also with a length parameter.
    Layout of other aggregate types is implementation defined. GNU Fortran puts all
arrays in contiguous memory in column-major order. GNU Fortran 95 builds an equivalent
C struct for derived types without reordering the type fields. Other compilers may use other
representations as needed. The representation and use of Fortran 90/95 array descriptors
is implementation defined. Note that array indices start at 1 by default.
    Fortran 90/95 allow different kinds of each basic type using the kind type parameter of
a type. Kind type parameter values are implementation defined.
    Layout of he commonly used Cray pointers is implementation defined.

9.2.3       Argument Passing
For each given Fortran 77 procedure, an equivalent C prototype can be derived. Once this
equivalent C prototype is known, the C ABI conventions should be applied to determine
how arguments are passed to the Fortran procedure.
     G77 passes all (user defined) formal arguments of a procedure by reference. Specifi-
cally, pointers to the location in memory of a variable, array, array element, a temporary
location that holds the result of evaluating an expression or a temporary or permanent lo-
cation that holds the value of a constant (xf. g77 manual) are passed as actual arguments.
Artificial compiler generated arguments may be passed by value or by reference as they
are inherently compiler and hence implementation specific.
     Data objects with a CHARACTER type are passed as a pointer to the character string and
its length, so that each CHARACTER formal argument in a Fortran procedure results in two
actual arguments in the equivalent C prototype. The first argument occupies the position
in the formal argument list of the Fortran procedure. This argument is a pointer to the
array of characters that make up the string, passed by the caller. The second argument
is appended to the end of the user-specified formal argument list. This argument is of
the default integer type and its value is the length of the array of characters, that is the
length, passed as the first argument. This length is passed by value. When more than one
CHARACTER argument is present in an argument list, the length arguments are appended in
the order the original arguments appear. The above discussion also applies to sub-strings.
     This ABI does not define the passing of optional arguments. They are allowed only in
Fortran 90/95 and their passing is implementation defined.
      This includes sub-strings.

                               AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
    This ABI does not define array functions (function returning arrays). They are allowed
only in Fortran 90/95 and requires the definition of array descriptors.
    Note that Fortran 90/95 procedure arguments with the INTENT(IN) attribute should also
passed by reference if the procedure is to be linked with code written in Fortran 77. Fortran
77 does not and can not support the INTENT attribute because it has no concept of explicit
interfaces. It is therefore not possible to declare the callee’s arguments as INTENT(IN). A
Fortran 77 compiler must assume that all procedure arguments are INTENT(INOUT) in the
Fortran 90/95 sense.

9.2.4         Functions
The calling of statement functions is implementation defined (as they are defined only
locally, the compiler has the freedom to apply any calling convention it likes).
    Subroutines with alternate returns (e.g. "SUBROUTINE X(*,*)" called as "CALL
X(*10,*20)") are implemented as functions returning an INTEGER of the default kind. The
value of this returned integer is whatever integer is specified in the "RETURN" statement
for the subroutine 5 , or 0 for a RETURN statement without an argument. It is up to the caller
to jump to the corresponding alternate return label. The actual alternate-return arguments
are omitted from the calling sequence.
    An example:
              SUBROUTINE SHOW_ALTERNATE_RETURN (N)
                  INTEGER N
                  CALL ALTERNATE_RETURN_EXAMPLE (N, *10, *20, *30)
                  WRITE (*,*) ’OK - Normal Return’
                  RETURN
10               WRITE (*,*) ’1st alternate return’
                  RETURN
20               WRITE (*,*) ’2nd alternate return’
                  RETURN
30               WRITE (*,*) ’2nd alternate return’
                  RETURN
              END

              SUBROUTINE ALTERNATE_RETURN_EXAMPLE (N, *, *, *)
                  INTEGER N
                  IF (N .EQ. 0 ) RETURN    ! Implicit "RETURN 0"
                  IF ( N .EQ. 1 ) RETURN 1
                  IF ( N .EQ. 2 ) RETURN 2
                  RETURN 3
              END
         This integer indicates the position of an alternate return from the subroutine in the formal argument list

                                  AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
    Here the SUBROUTINE ALTERNATE_RETURN_EXAMPLE is implemented as a function return-
ing an INTEGER*4 with value 0 if N is 0, 1 if N is 1, 2 if N is 2 and 3 for all other values of N.
This return value is used by the caller as if the actual call were replaced by this sequence:
             INTEGER X
             X = CALL ALTERNATE_RETURN_EXAMPLE (N)
             GOTO (10, 20, 30), X

    All in all the effect is that the index of the returned to label (starting from 1) will be
contained in %rax after the call.
    Alternate ENTRY points of a SUBROUTINE or FUNCTION should be treated as separate sub-
programs, as mandated by the Fortran standard. I.e. arguments passed to an alternate
ENTRY should be passed as if the alternate ENTRY is a separate SUBROUTINE or FUNCTION. If a
FUNCTION has alternate ENTRY points, the result of each of the alternate ENTRY points must be
returned as if the alternate ENTRY is a separate FUNCTION with the result type of the alternate
ENTRY. The external naming of alternate ENTRY points follows section 9.2.1.

9.2.5    COMMON blocks
In absence of any EQUIVALENCE declaration involving variables in COMMON blocks the layout
of a COMMON block is exactly the same as the layout of the equivalent C structure (with types
of variables substituted according to section 9.2.2), including the alignment requirements.
    This ABI defines the layout under presence of EQUIVALENCE statements only in some
cases:

   • the layout of the COMMON block must not change if one ignores the EQUIVALENCE, which
     amongst other things means:

   • If two arrays are equivalenced, the larger array must be named in the COMMON block,
     and there must be complete inclusion, in particular the other array may not extend
     the size of the equivalenced segment. It may also not change the alignment require-
     ment.

   • If an array element and a scalar are equivalenced, the array must be named in the
     COMMON block and it must not be smaller than the scalar. The type of the scalar must
     not require bigger alignment than the array.

   • if two scalars are equivalenced they must have the same size and alignment require-
     ments.

                          AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
    Other cases are implementation defined.
    Because the Fortran standard allows the blank COMMON block to have different sizes in
different subprograms, it may be impossible to determine if it is small enough to fit in the
.bss section. When compiling for the medium or large code models the blank COMMON
block should therefore always be put in the .lbss section.

9.2.6    Intrinsics
This sections lists the set of intrinsics which has to be supported at minimum by a con-
forming compiler. They are separated by origin. They follow regular calling and naming
conventions.
    The signature of intrinsics uses the syntax return − type(argtype1, argtype2, ...),
where the individual types can be the following characters: V (as in void) designates
a SUBROUTINE, L a LOGICAL, I an INTEGER, R a REAL, and C a CHARACTER. Hence I(R,L)
designates a FUNCTION returning an INTEGER and taking a REAL and a LOGICAL. If an argument
is an array, this is indicated using a trailing number, e.g. I13 is an INTEGER array with 13
elements. If a CHARACTER argument or return value has a fixed length, this is indicated
using an asterisk and a trailing number, for example C*16 is a CHARACTER(len=16). If a
CHARACTER argument of arbitrary length must be passed, the trailing number is replaced
with N, for example C*N.

                                  Table 9.1: Mil intrinsics

                 Name      Signature                   Meaning
                 BTest     L(I,I)         Test bit
                 IAnd      I(I,I)         Boolean AND
                 IOr       I(I,I)         Boolean OR
                 IEOr      I(I,I)         Boolean XOR
                 Not       I(I)           Boolean NOT
                 IBClr     I(I,I)         Clear a bit
                 IBits     I(I,I,I)       Extract a bit subfield of a variable
                 IBSet     I(I,I)         Set a bit
                 IShft     I(I,I)         Logical bit shift
                 IShftC    I(I,I,I)       Circular bit shift
                 MvBits    V(I,I,I,I,I)   Move a bit field

                          AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
 BTest (I, Pos) Returns .TRUE. if bit Pos in I is set, returns .FALSE. otherwise.

   IAnd (I, J) Returns value resulting from a boolean AND on each pair of bits in I and
        J.

    IOr (I, J) Returns value resulting from a boolean OR on each pair of bits in I and J.

   IEOr (I, J) Returns value resulting from a boolean XOR on each pair of bits in I and
        J.

    Not (I) Returns value resulting from a boolean NOT on each bit in I.

 IBClr (I, Pos) Returns the value of I with bit Pos cleared (set to zero).

 IBits (I, Pos, Len) Extracts a subfield starting from bit position Pos and with a
       length (towards the most significant bit) of Len bits from I. The result is right-
       justified and the remaining bits are zeroed.

 IBSet (I, Pos) Returns the value of I with the bit in position Pos set to one.

 IShft (I, Shift) All bits of I are shifted Shift places. Shift.GT.0 indicates a left shift,
       Shift.EQ.0 indicates no shift, and Shift.LT.0 indicates a right shift. Bits shifted out
       from the least (when shifting right) or most (when shifting left) significant position
       are lost. Bits shifted in at the opposite end are not set (i.e. zero).

IShftC (I, Shift, Size) The rightmost Size bits of the argument I are shifted circu-
       larly Shift places. The unshifted bits of the result are the same as the unshifted bits
       of I.

MvBits (From, FromPos, Len, To, ToPos) Move Len bits of From from bit po-
       sitions FromPos through FromPos+Len-1 to bit positions ToPos through ToPos+Len-1
       of To. The bit portions of To that are not affected by the movement of bits are un-
       changed.

                            AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
                    Table 9.2: F77 intrinsics

 Name                            Meaning
Abs     Absolute value
ACos    Arc cosine
AInt    Truncate to whole number
ANInt   Round to nearest whole number
ASin    Arc sine
ATan    Arc Tangent
ATan2   Arc Tangent
Char    Character from code
Cmplx   Construct COMPLEX(KIND=1) value
Conjg   Complex conjugate
Cos     Cosine
CosH    Hyperbolic cosine
Dble    Convert to double precision
DiM     Difference magnitude (non-negative subtract)
DProd   Double-precision product
Exp     Exponential
IChar   Code for character
Index   Locate a CHARACTER substring
Int     Convert to INTEGER value truncated to whole number
Len     Length of character entity
LGe     Lexically greater than or equal
LGt     Lexically greater than
LLe     Lexically less than or equal
LLt     Lexically less than
Log     Natural logarithm
Log10   Common logarithm
Max     Maximum value
Min     Minimum value
Mod     Remainder
NInt    Convert to INTEGER value rounded to nearest whole number
Real    Convert value to type REAL(KIND=1)
Sin     Sine
SinH    Hyperbolic sine
SqRt    Square root
Tan     Tangent
TanH    Hyperbolic tangent
            AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
      Refer to the Fortran 77 language standard for signature and definition of the F77 in-
  trinsics listed in table 9.2. These intrinsics can have a prefix as per the standard hence the
  table is not exhaustive.

                                     Table 9.3: F90 intrinsics

                        Name                         Meaning
                    AChar              ASCII character from code
                    Bit_Size           Number of bits in arguments type
                    CPU_Time           Get current CPU time
                    IAChar             ASCII code for character
                    Len_Trim           Get last non-blank character in string
                    System_Clock       Get current system clock value

      Refer to the Fortran 90 language standard for signature and definition of the F90 in-
  trinsics listed in table 9.3.

                                    Table 9.4: Math intrinsics

                      Name      Signature              Meaning
                      BesJ0     R(R)        Bessel function
                      BesJ1     R(R)        Bessel function
                      BesJN     R(I,R)      Bessel function
                      BesY0     R(R)        Bessel function
                      BesY1     R(R)        Bessel function
                      BesYN     R(I,R)      Bessel function
                      ErF       R(R)        Error function
                      ErFC      R(R)        Complementary error function
                      IRand     I(I)        Random number
                      Rand      R(I)        Random number
                      SRand     V(I)        Random seed

BesJ0 (X) Calculates the Bessel function of the first kind of order 0 of X. Returns a REAL
      of the same kind as X.

                             AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
BesJ1 (X) Calculates the Bessel function of the first kind of order 1 of X. Returns a REAL
      of the same kind as X.

BesJN (N, X) Calculates the Bessel function of the first kind of order N of X. Returns a
      REAL of the same kind as X.

BesY0 (X) Calculates the Bessel function of the second kind of order 0 of X. Returns a
      REAL of the same kind as X.

BesY1 (X) Calculates the Bessel function of the second kind of order 1 of X. Returns a
      REAL of the same kind as X.

BesYN (N, X) Calculates the Bessel function of the second kind of order N of X. Returns
      a REAL of the same kind as X.

  ErF (X) Calculates the error function of X. Returns a REAL of the same kind as X.

 ErFC (X) Calculates the complementary error function of X, i.e. 1 - ERF(X). Returns a
      REAL of the same kind as X.

IRand (Flag) Flag is optional. Returns a uniform quasi-random number up to a system-
      dependent limit. If Flag .EQ. 0 or Flag is not passed, the next number in sequence
      is returned. If Flag .EQ. 1, the generator is restarted. If Flag has any other value,
      the generator is restarted with the value of Flag as the new seed.

 Rand (Flag) Flag is optional. Returns a uniform quasi-random number between 0 and
      1. If Flag .EQ. 0 or Flag is not passed, the next number in sequence is returned. If
      Flag .EQ. 1, the generator is restarted. If Flag has any other value, the generator is
      restarted with the value of Flag as the new seed.

SRand (Seed) Reinitializes the random number generator for IRand and Rand with the
      seed in Seed.

                          AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
                                   Table 9.5: Unix intrinsics

             Name         Signature                        Meaning
             Abort    V()               Abort the program
             Access   I(C,C)            Check file accessibility
             DTime    V(R2,R)           Get elapsed time since last call
             ETime    V(R2,R)           Get elapsed time for process
             Flush    V(I)              Flush buffered output
             FNum     I(I)              Get file descriptor from Fortran unit number
             FStat    V(I,I13,I)        Get file information
             GError   V(C*N)            Get error message for last error
             GetArg   V(I,C*N)          Obtain command-line argument
             GetCWD   V(C*N,I)          Get current working directory
             GetEnv   V(C*N,C*N)        Get environment variable
             GetGId   I()               Get process group ID
             GetPId   I()               Get process ID
             GetUId   I()               Get process user ID
             GetLog   V(C*N)            Get login name
             HostNm   V(C*N,I)          Get host name
             IArgC    I()               Obtain count of command-line arguments
             IDate    V(I3)             Get local date info
             IErrNo   I()               Get error number for last error
             ITime    V(I3)             Get local time of day
             LStat    V(C*N,I13,I)      Get file information
             PError   V(C*N)            Print error message for last error
             Rename   V(C*N,C*N,I)      Rename file
             Sleep    V(I)              Sleep for a specified time
             System   V(C*N,I)          Invoke shell (system) command

 Abort () Prints a message and potentially causes a core dump.
Access (Name, Mode) Checks file Name for accessibility in the mode specified by Mode.
       Returns 0 if the file is accessible in that mode, otherwise an error code. Name must
       be a NULL-terminated string of CHARACTER (i.e. a C-style string). Trailing blanks in
       Name are ignored. Mode must be a concatenation of any of the following characters:
       r meaning test for read permission, w meaning test for write permission, x meaning
       test for execute/search permission, or a space meaning test for existence of the file.

                            AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
DTime (TArray, Result) When called for the first time, returns the number of sec-
      onds of runtime since the start of the program in Result, the user component of this
      runtime in TArray(1), and the system time in TArray(2). Subsequent invocations
      values based on accumulations since the previous invocation.

ETime (TArray, Result) Returns the number of seconds of runtime since the start
      of the program in Result, the user component of this runtime in TArray(1), and the
      system time in TArray(2). Subsequent invocations values based on accumulations
      since the previous invocation.

Flush (Unit) Flushes the Fortran I/O unit with ID Unit. The unit must be open for
      output. If the optional Unit argument is omitted, all open units are flushed.

 FNum (Unit) Returns the UNIX(tm) file descriptor number corresponding to the Fortran
      I/O unit Unit. The unit must be open.

FStat (Unit, SArray, Status) Obtains data about the file open on Fortran I/O
      unit Unit and places it in the array SArray. The values in this array are as follows:

          1. Device ID
          2. Inode number
          3. File mode
          4. Number of links
          5. Owner’s UID
          6. Owner’s GID
          7. ID of device containing directory entry for file
          8. File size (bytes)
          9. Last access time
         10. Last modification time
         11. Last file status change time
         12. Preferred I/O block size (-1 if not available)
         13. Number of blocks allocated (-1 if not available)

        If an element is not available, or not relevant on the host system, it is returned as 0
        except when indicated otherwise in the above list. If the optional Status argument
        is supplied, it contains 0 on success or a nonzero error code upon return.

                           AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
Gerror (Message) Returns the system error message corresponding to the last system
       error (errno in C). The message is returned in Message. If Message is longer than the
       error message, it is padded with blanks after the message. If Message is not long
       enough to hold the error message, the error message is truncated to the length of
       Message.

GetArg (Pos, Value) Returns in Value the command-line argument in position Pos. If
       there are fever than Pos command-line arguments, Value is filled with blanks. If Pos
       is 0, the name of the program is returned. If Value is longer than the command-line
       argument, it is padded with blanks after the argument. If Value is not long enough to
       hold the command-line argument, the argument is truncated to the length of Value.
GetCWD (Name, Status) Returns in Name the current working directory. If the optional
       Status argument is supplied, it contains 0 on success or a nonzero error code upon
       return.
GetEnv (Name, Value) Returns in Value the environment variable identified with Name.
       If Name has not been set, Value is filled with blanks. A null character marks the end
       of the name in Name. Trailing blanks in Name are ignored. If Value is longer than the
       environment variable, it is padded with blanks after the variable. If Value is not long
       enough to hold the environment variable, the variable is truncated to the length of
       Value.

GetGId () Returns the group ID for the current process.
GetPId () Returns the process ID for the current process.
GetUId () Returns the user ID for the current process.
GetLog (Login) Returns the login name for the process in Login, or a blank string if the
       host system does not support getlogin(3). If Login is longer than the login name, it
       is padded with blanks after the login name. If Login is not long enough to hold the
       login name, the login name is truncated to the length of of Login.
 HotNm (Name, Status) Returns in Name system’s host name. If the optional Status
       argument is supplied, it contains 0 on success or a nonzero error code upon return.
       If Name is longer than the host name, it is padded with blanks after the host name.
       If Name is not long enough to hold the host name, the host name is truncated to the
       length of of Name.
 IArgC () Returns the number of command-line arguments. The program name itself is not
       included in this number.

                            AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
 IDate (TArray) Returns the current local date day, month, year in elements 1, 2, and 3
       of Tarray, respectively. The year has four significant digits.

IErrno () Returns the last system error number (errno in C).

 ITime (TArray) Returns the current local time hour, minutes, and seconds in elements
       1, 2, and 3 of TArray, respectively.

 LStat (File, SArray, Status) Obtains data about a file named File and places
       places it in the array SArray. The values in this array are as follows:

            1. Device ID
            2. Inode number
            3. File mode
            4. Number of links
            5. Owner’s UID
            6. Owner’s GID
            7. ID of device containing directory entry for file
            8. File size (bytes)
            9. Last access time
           10. Last modification time
           11. Last file status change time
           12. Preferred I/O block size (-1 if not available)
           13. Number of blocks allocated (-1 if not available)

          If an element is not available, or not relevant on the host system, it is returned as 0
          except when indicated otherwise in the above list. If the optional Status argument
          is supplied, it contains 0 on success or a nonzero error code upon return.

PError (MsgPrefix) Prints a newline-terminated error message corresponding to the last
       system error. This is prefixed by the string MsgPrefix, a colon and a space. The error
       message is printed on the C stderr stream.

Rename (Path1, Path2, Status) Renames the file named Path1 to Path2. A null
       character marks the end of the names. Trailing blanks are ignored. If the optional
       Status argument is supplied, it contains 0 on success or a nonzero error code upon
       return.

                             AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
 Sleep (Seconds) Causes the program to pause for Seconds seconds.

System (Command, Status) Passes the string in Command to a shell though
       system(3). If the optional argument Status is present, it contains the
       value returned by system(3).

                        AMD64 ABI 1.0 – March 12, 2025 – 14:05
