Chapter 2.3

I.26: If you want a cross-compiler ABI, use a C-style
subset

Creating libraries
Writing libraries in C++ is a simple matter. Compile your source files, glue them
together into a library, expose your exports in a header, or module if your compiler
supports it, and supply the library file and header or module definition to your client.
   Unfortunately, that is not the end of the story. There is a substantial amount of detail
to get right. The purpose of this guideline is to show you a way to minimize this
overhead, to prevent a truly overwhelming amount of work from landing on your desk at
some random point in the future, and to enable you to create libraries that will serve the
community for many years to come.
   Recall the operation of the linker. It matches missing symbols from object files or
libraries with exported symbols other object files or libraries. The declarations in the
header point to definitions in the library file.
   For example, imagine you have written a library that contains, among other items, the
function
Click here to view code image

id retrieve_customer_id_from_name(std::string const&
name);

and a header that declares it. This is a handy way of doing things: it allows you to cre-
ate a package of functionality with a header, and your user does not need to spend time
recompiling. Maybe your source is proprietary, and you are not allowed to share it.
    The likely operation of this function is that it will retrieve the character buffer from
the string reference, query a database Somewhere In The Cloud with it, and return an
id formed from the result of the query. A string implementation may contain a length
followed by a pointer to a buffer, so retrieving the character buffer and passing it to the
database is a trivial matter.
    Now, imagine that your library becomes insanely popular: perhaps the database is
full of particularly useful information and everyone wants a piece. You have hun-dreds,
then thousands, then tens of thousands of clients, all cheerfully parting with their cash in
exchange for this functionality. Suddenly, a trickle of complaints come in telling you that
the library is crashing during the execution of this function. The trickle becomes a
torrent and then a veritable flood of ire. You investigate and notice that there has been a
toolset upgrade: the compiler, linker, and standard library have changed.
    The next thing you do is rebuild the library and the unit tests with the new toolset and
run everything. It all passes. There is no crash. You attempt to reproduce the bug report,
but to no avail. What has happened?
    The answer is that the definition of std::string has changed. When you first
shipped the library, std::string was implemented as a length followed by a
pointer. Unfortunately, your clients have upgraded to a new toolset which now
implements string as a pointer followed by a length. They are now supplying a
std::string const& to your function whose memory layout is different from
what it is expecting. On attempting to dereference the pointer, it is in fact dereferencing
the length, reach-ing into forbidden memory, and engendering a hasty exit.
    Of course, when you recompiled the library and the unit tests, they were all built
with the new toolset, so the definition of std::string agreed throughout, as a
pointer followed by a length. Everything passed. It is only when new code called your
old code that things went wrong.

What is an ABI?
What happened was that there was a change to the ABI. The API for your library did not
change, but the ABI did. The term “ABI” may be new to you. It stands for appli-cation
binary interface. Just as an API, an application programming interface, is a guide to
humans about what you can do with a library, so is an ABI a guide to machines about
how libraries interact. Think of it as the compiled version of an API.
   An ABI defines several things: not just how objects are laid out in the standard
library, but also how things are passed to functions. For example, the System V AMD64
ABI1 specifies that the first six integer or pointer arguments are passed in registers RDI,
RSI, RDX, RCX, R8, and R9. This ABI is followed by Unix and Unix-like operating
systems. Other considerations include how exceptions are handled and propagated,
function prolog and epilog code, the virtual table layout, virtual function calling
conventions, and so on.
1. https://wiki.osdev.org/System_V_ABI
 A library that does not use types from another library in the signatures of its
 functions cannot suffer an ABI break if that library changes. Eventually, all
 libraries change, and this is a rather problematic fact of development.

   The need for an ABI is one of the rea-sons why code compiled for one operating
system will not work with another operat-ing system: although they might have the same
processor architecture, for exam-ple x86, they may have different ABIs. Of course, if
there were one unifying ABI this would not matter, but ABIs are intimately bound up
with the performance character-istics of the hardware. Pinning everything to one ABI
would come at a performance cost. A library that does not use types from another
library in the signatures of its functions cannot suffer an ABI break if that library
changes. Eventually, all libraries change, and this is a rather problematic fact of
development.
   It is therefore important to keep your ABI stable. Changing a function in any way, the
return type or the types, the quantity and order of arguments, or the noexcept
specification, is an ABI break. It is also an API change. Changing definitions of data
types or data structures in the private interface is not an API change but it IS an ABI
break.
   Even name mangling isn’t immune from ABI breaks. An ABI can define a stand-ard
way of uniquely identifying the name of a function so that libraries built with different
languages, for example C and Pascal, can be linked together. If you have ever seen the
declaration extern "C" in a header file, that is a signal to the compiler that the
function names within the declaration should have their names inserted into the exports
table using the same naming scheme as a C compiler on that platform would use.
   The earlier hypothetical problem with a library that takes a std::string is
unlikely to trouble you. Today’s linkers will simply prevent clients of different stand-
ard libraries from linking. There are a number of ways to do this: the ABI version can
be embedded in the mangled name of the symbol, or the compiler can insert the ABI
version into the object file and emit an error should anyone try to link conflicting ver-
sions together. The labor of dealing with conflicting ABIs is not eliminated, but it is
exposed and added to the engineer’s plate.
   Recall the guideline: “If you want a cross-compiler ABI, use a C-style subset.” We
have now explained the nature of a cross-compiler ABI, and why observing it is
important for both today and the future. Let us now move on to the C-style subset.

Paring back to the absolute minimum
So, what does a C-style subset consist of? The C types are often referred to as the built-
in types. They are the types that are not made up of any other types. I would say they are
the atomic types, but sadly that has another meaning in C++. You can, however, think of
them as the fundamental building blocks of all your types. The list consists of2
2. https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/types

void
bool
char
int
float
double

Some of these types can be modified by sign or by size. The keywords signed and
unsigned can be applied to char and int. The keyword short can be applied to
int. The keyword long can be applied to int and double. This keyword can also
be applied twice to int. In fact, the keyword int can be omitted entirely and replaced
with the sign or size modifiers. The modifiers can also be applied in any order: the type
long unsigned long is entirely valid.
   This might seem at first glance to be somewhat cumbersome, although if I saw long
unsigned long in any code submitted for review, I would return it with a request
for justification. The presence of the size modifier gives rise to a favorite interview
question of mine: “How big is an int?” the answer to which is, “It depends.” The
standard offers some guarantees.

      A short int and an int are at least 16 bits wide.
      A long int is at least 32 bits wide.
      A long long int is at least 64 bits wide.
      1 == sizeof(char) <= sizeof(short) <= sizeof(int) <=
      sizeof(long) <= sizeof(long long).

   The implementation decides on these widths. This set of choices is known as the
data model. There are four models that have found wide acceptance:

      LP32 or 2/4/4 (int is 16-bit, long and pointer are 32-bit) as used in the
      Win16 API
      ILP32 or 4/4/4 (int, long, and pointer are 32-bit) as used in the Win32 API and
      some Unix systems
    LLP64 or 4/4/8 (int and long are 32-bit, pointer is 64-bit) as used in the Win64
    API
    LP64 or 4/8/8 (int is 32-bit, long and pointer are 64-bit) as also used in some
    Unix systems

   This highlights the significance of the word “cross-compiler” in the guideline. Your
library needs to work on your compiler today, but it also needs to work a year from
now, and on the compiler used by your clients. If the compilers have different opinions
on the size of an int or a pointer, then their behavior will differ in ways that you did
not intend.
   The floating-point types are simpler than the integral types, since they are defined by
reference to another standard, particularly ISO/IEC/IEEE 60559:2011, which is the
same as IEEE 754-2008. This makes them utterly reliable between platforms. char
can be signed, unsigned, or neither; all three are distinct types. unsigned char is
used for dealing with raw memory.
   It is clear from this that changing data models is an ABI break: I first encoun-tered
ABI breaks (although I didn’t understand the problem in this way) when I first installed
Win32s on my Windows 3.11 machine in the early 1990s. Suddenly, all my ints took
up twice as much memory and some of my programs fell over. More recently, the slight
difference between LLP64 and LP64 (width of long) caused me pain writing for
Windows and MacOS, the former using LLP64 and the latter using LP64.
   You may now relax, breathe out, and raise an eyebrow. The advice is “If you want a
cross-compiler ABI, use a C-style subset” and yet we have just demonstrated how
fragile the built-in types are. However, this fragility is only present when you are try-
ing to move between data models. Also, there is a way to overcome the data model
hazard and that is with the use of fixed-width integer types. These embed the width of
the type in the identifier, and have names like int32_t and uint8_t. These are
defined in C in the header <stdint.h> and in C++ in the header <cstdint>.
   To be clear, the original function declaration at the start of this chapter should not
have taken a std::string across an ABI boundary, because the definition of string
can change. It changed in GCC for C++11, and the pain was considerable. The function
should have taken a char* and an int, or better still a uint8_t, because those will
never change.

Exception propagation
This sounds like the job is done: pass and return fixed-width built-in types and there
should be no problems. However, there is another way that data passes between
functions, which is via the exception-handling machinery. When an exception is thrown,
the compiler will allocate space for the exception and then start unwinding the stack via
a call to a special function in the standard library implementation. On some platforms,
this function will iterate through each catch statement via data inserted by the compiler
corresponding to each function body. It’s looking for a catch statement that will handle
the type of exception that has been thrown.
    There are two possible outcomes: either a matching catch statement is found, or no
matching catch statement is found. In the latter case, the standard library imple-
mentation will call std::terminate which, by default, will call std::abort.
This returns control to the host environment without cleaning up. If the stack unwinder
is fortunate enough to find a matching catch statement, it will then go back through the
stack and clean up each function, calling destructors and restoring the stack, before
resuming execution at this matching catch statement. After the catch state-ment is
executed, the memory allocated for the exception is released.
    Setting aside the matter of what might happen when the exception is thrown because
of a lack of memory, this behavior is deeply implementation specific. The mechanism
used to allocate space for the exception, and the format of the data inserted by the
compiler after each function body, will depend on the implemen-tation, as will the
means by which each catch statement is described to the stack-unwinding function. This
information is all written by the toolset at compile time, and if two libraries built with
two compilers differing by even the version number coexist in the same program, there
is a risk of ABI incompatibility. The risk is quite small, however: the exception-
handling info format is defined by the platform ABI, and the exception types are defined
by the library, and the vendors go to great lengths not to change those things. However,
if you are feeling particularly cautious, the only option here is to ensure that exceptions
do not leave your library, and to decorate each function in the API with noexcept or
noexcept(true) depending on your local style.
    As you can see, some work is required to ensure a cross-compiler ABI for a library.
This is a manifestation of the perils of binary dependency. You may decide to dis-
tribute (or consume) a library as source or as a prebuilt binary. In the example above
the notion of proprietary code was observed, along with compilation time for your
client. This can be a serious matter: a GUI library I use at my studio takes most of the
day to configure and build. Binary versions of the library are available. I sim-ply have
to identify which version of the toolset I am using and press the download button on
their website. This delivers a variety of libraries contained in a directory structure
which reflects whether or not NDEBUG is defined, and whether the binaries are
statically or dynamically linked. This set of four permutations may be in danger of
becoming a set of 12 permutations, since at the time of writing there is a contracts
proposal that offers three different configurations. Supplying for NDEBUG definition
choice, static versus dynamic linking, and contract configuration will be a nontrivial
task.
   This does not apply to libraries distributed as source. If your library consists solely
of class templates and function templates, then you cannot distribute your library as a
prebuilt binary: class and function templates require full definitions to be instantiated. If
the responsibility of building is delegated to your consumer, then all ABI considerations
are delegated to them as well unless your library is itself depend-ent on a prebuilt
binary library.

Summary
You might decide, perhaps somewhat pessimistically, that your library will not have the
life span necessary to require considerations of ABI stability. Perhaps it is merely a
short-term patch until a more comprehensive solution is available.
    Please, please, never, ever think that.
    In 1958 the United States Department of Defense launched a computerized con-tract
management system that it dubbed Mechanization of Contract Administration Services,
or MOCAS. It was written in COBOL, and was still in use in 2015, having enjoyed a
green screen upgrade to replace the punched card input and latterly the introduction of a
web interface. Good things are built to last and see a lot of use. Trillions of dollars
have passed through MOCAS.3
3. https://www.technologyreview.com/2015/08/06/166822/what-is-the-oldest-computer-program-still-in-use

    C has been with us for 50 years, and C++ has been with us for 40. The ubiquity of C
has led to C interfaces being emitted and consumed by other languages, such as Perl,
Python, Lua, PHP, Ruby, Tcl, and many others. The C interface has become the de facto
lingua franca of language interoperability. Libraries and programs exist with “ancient”
pedigrees. For example, a library I use very often, libcurl, was first released in 1997. I
first used it in the early 2000s. It is still a critical part of the infra-structure of the game
franchise I have been involved with since 2000. Windows devel-opers may be familiar
with MFC, the Microsoft Foundation Classes. It is a set of classes for developing with
the Windows SDK. Version 1 of this library dropped in 1992, and it is still in wide use.
Anyone writing image manipulation software is very likely to be using libjpeg. The
initial release was in October 1991. The iostreams library was written in 1985.
Despite it being superseded in part by the fmt library in the C++20 standard, it is still in
wide use. It seems unlikely that, at release time, any of the authors thought their
creations would be in use 20, 30, or 60 years later. We ask you to develop with the
future in mind and to remove every possible barrier to the use of your library in future.
Follow this guideline and your libraries may join the elders of the C++ ecosystem. Your
fame will be assured as legend status is conferred upon you. Avoid ABI problems and
build your ABI from a C-style subset.
