Chapter 2.4

C.47: Define and initialize member variables in the order
of member declaration

There is only one order of initialization of member data, which is the order of decla-
ration. You cannot change this. There are very good reasons for this being an immu-
table rule, which we will describe in this chapter.
    But first, an example. Bryn, a new engineer at a large firm, is asked to write a pop-
ulation service for finding out how many people are in the building. A server locked
away in the bowels of the building handles admissions and exits. It is old and slow.
Etched on the front in red lettering is the name of a forgotten hardware company long
ago sold to a rapacious and overfunded startup. Queries are rather cumber-some and
time consuming. New safety regulations require the number to be available
instantaneously, but since it takes about a minute for someone to sign in at the front desk
it is considered safe to query the server, cache the value, and retain it for 30 sec-onds.
This will stop queries from building up faster than they can be handled.
    I know you’re laughing. This is a true story, although I have changed the names. Bryn
produces this simple solution:

class population_service {
public:
  population_service(std::string query);
  float population() const;

private:
  mutable float current_population;
  mutable std::time_t expiry;
  std::string query;
};

The class is constructed with the server query. A call to population will check the
expiry time of the population value and update it using the query if necessary. This
lazy evaluation is a typical use case of mutable.
   Bryn writes the constructor:

population_service::population_service(std::string
query_)
{
  query = std::move(query_);
  expiry = std::chrono::system_clock::to_time_t(
                      std::chrono::system_clock::now());
  current_population = population();
}

The population function is a simple matter. All the tests pass, and Bryn submits it
for code review. He is asked to migrate initialization out of the constructor body and
into the initialization list. Keen to make a good impression, Bryn turns this around in
short order and produces this:

population_service::population_service(std::string
query_)
  : query(std::move(query_))
  , expiry(std::chrono::system_clock::to_time_t(
                      std::chrono::system_clock::now()))
  , current_population(population())
{}

He submits it and gets a knock on the door from his lead, Beth.
    “Bryn,” she asks, “did you test this?”
    “Yup, all green,” he answers, innocently.
    “Did you test this AFTER you migrated everything to the initialization list?” she
persists.
    “Well, there was no need, was there?” he responds. “I’ve just moved everything
before the braces.”
    Beth dies a little on the inside. In her mind she is preparing the “automate your tests
and always test prior to submission” lecture in the face of this answer. She did not need
to run the code to see that there was a problem.
    Unfortunately, moving everything up changes the behavior of the code. The first thing
that happens now is that current_population is initialized by a call to
popula-tion. Setting aside the questionable wisdom of calling a member function
from an initializer list, this was not the original intent of the engineer. He wanted to
initialize the query and the expiry time first. Without those values correctly initialized,
the call to population is vanishingly unlikely to succeed.
    To be absolutely clear, member data is initialized in order of declaration. That is the
only order. There is no magical choosing going on, nor is there any variation available
to you. In this case, current_population was declared first, so that was ini-
tialized by the call to the member function population. The expiry member was ini-
tialized next, but std::time_t has no constructor and usually consists of a built-in
integral type, so it was not initialized to a deterministic value. Finally, query was ini-
tialized by move construction.
    There are two ways to fix the problem. The correct way to initialize this object is to
initialize current_population to zero and expiry to now(), and then move-
construct the query, thus:

population_service::population_service(std::string
query_)
  : current_population(0)
  , expiry(std::chrono::system_clock::to_time_t(
                      std::chrono::system_clock::now()))
  , query(std::move(query_))
{}

You could optionally call population in the constructor body. Given that it is an
expensive function that requires caching, though, we would not call it until the value
was needed.
   The other way to fix the problem is to reorder the member data in the class defini-
tion, thus:

class population_service {
public:
  population_service(std::string query_);
  float population() const;

private:
  std::string query;
  mutable std::time_t expiry;
  mutable float current_population;
};

With this ordering, population can be safely invoked in the initialization list,
although for the same reason I would not do this.
    This leads us to an interesting aside about class layout and alignment. Consider this
program:

#include <iostream>
struct int_two_bools {
  bool m_b1;
  int m_i;
  bool m_b2;
};
int main() {
  std::cout << sizeof(int_two_bools);
}

What answer would you expect to see?
   We built and ran this program using x64 MSVC 19.28 on Compiler Explorer and got
the answer 12. Each member takes up four bytes.

Figure 2.4.1. Layout for storing an integer and two bools

Then we exchanged the second and third members, thus:

struct int_two_bools {
  bool m_b1;
  bool m_b2;
  int m_i;
};

Now what answer would you expect to see? You can check the output on Compiler
Explorer and observe that the answer is 8.

Figure 2.4.2. Optimized layout for storing an integer and two bools

   Indeed, if you add a third bool after m_b2 thus:

struct int_two_bools {
  bool m_b1;
  bool m_b2;
  bool m_b3;
  int m_i;
};

you STILL get the answer 8.

Figure 2.4.3. Optimized layout for storing an integer and three bools

   This may come as a surprise. The standard has a few things to say about align-ment,
which you can find at [basic.align].1 In summary, individual objects must be aligned on
boundaries matching their size. In this example, and for this implementa-tion,
sizeof(bool) is 1 and sizeof(int) is 4. In the first definition of
int_two_bools, the first bool member occupies one byte. Three bytes of padding
are then added so that the int member will lie on a four-byte boundary. In the second
definition, the two bool members are consecutive and only need to be aligned on a
one-byte bound-ary. This means that only two bytes of padding are required before the
int member. In the third definition, only a single byte of padding is required since all
three bool members can fit in four bytes.
1. https://eel.is/c++draft/basic.align

    This demonstrates that layout order is significant with regard to the size of an
instance of a class. This is particularly relevant if you are in a size-constrained situa-
tion and have a million objects: those extra four bytes may be very valuable. Solving
initialization order problems may not be as simple as reordering the members, since
that may increase the size of the object.
    You may ask yourself, “Why does the order matter? Why must it match the order of
declaration? Why can’t I dictate the order of initialization?” Indeed, some compil-ers
will in fact warn you if the order is wrong. The answer is that C++ guarantees that
members are destroyed in the reverse order of construction.
    If you were to specify that order in the constructor, this would make matters rather
difficult for the compiler. If no destructor were declared in the class definition, the
compiler would have to define one in the same translation unit as the constructor, using
the constructor to infer what the destruction order should be. If a destructor were
declared in the class definition, you would need to add something like a deini-
tialization list to the language, executed at the end of the destructor body. It would be up
to you to ensure that you kept your constructor and destructor synchronized. The scope
for catastrophe is considerable.
    “No, that’s fine, I’m up to the job,” you reply, with a cheerful smile. You may very
well be, but this is not the only problem. The language allows for the constructor to be
overloaded. You have already decided that initialization order is sensitive to
performance in some way, as is member order. Are you able to guarantee that each
constructor is going to remain synchronized?
    “Yes, yes I am,” you reply. You are very confident of your abilities, it seems. How-
ever, there may be situations in other code where different constructors carry differ-ent
dependencies. In those cases, you will be unable to remain synchronized.
    “Ah-ha! We could have multiple destructors! Each constructor would have a
matching destructor so that each pair could correctly create and destroy the mem-bers in
the right order. It’s brilliant! I’m going to write a proposal to the committee!”
    Your tenacity is admirable, but this won’t fly. What if an object is to be destroyed in
a different translation unit from that in which it was created? The compiler will not
know which destructor to call. There is simply an object falling out of scope without
any information about the constructor.
    “Easy, we just add a tag to the class that describes how the object was built and
examine that at the time of destruction, and then we call the correct destructor.”
    You’re just making this up as you go along now. The trouble with this solution is that
you have now added another field to the class to support a feature that is rarely used.
You have introduced a run-time overhead for every class. You have created an
abstraction that you must pay for regardless of whether or not it is used. This goes
against one of the fundamental principles of the design of the language: do not pay for
what you do not use. There are billions and billions of lines of C++ out there. If you
were to introduce this feature to the language, then you would impact negatively on
millions of projects. It is not going to happen. There will not be multiple destruc-tors
and there will not be specifiable initialization order. Members are initialized in the
order in which they are declared, and in no other order. We do hope that is clear.
    The preeminent feature of C++ is, in my opinion, deterministic destruction. There
are many languages out there, many of which manage lifetimes for you. With C++ YOU
decide when the lifetime of an object comes to an end, and when all its resources are
released. When the name of an object of automatic storage duration falls out of scope,
its destructor is invoked, and the destructors of the members are invoked. When you
explicitly delete an object of dynamic storage duration, its destructor is invoked, and
the destructors of the members are invoked. When a pro-gram ends, all objects of static
storage duration are destroyed in the reverse order of their construction: their
destructors are invoked, and the destructors of their mem-bers are invoked. When a
thread is destroyed, all thread-local instances of objects are destroyed in the reverse
order of their construction: their destructors are invoked, and the destructors of their
members are invoked.
    You may feel that we are belaboring the point here, but this is an extremely valu-able
property of the language, and if you have been exposed to managed lifetimes before you
will appreciate why. For example, imagine that you have a connection to a database
stored as a member of an object, and that connections are a limited resource. You rely
on that connection being closed when the destructor is invoked. It should not be closed
before the object is destroyed; it should be closed only when it is certain that it is no
longer needed. This is precisely what a destructor is for. It is the function invoked at the
end of the life of an object. It is guaranteed to be invoked at scope exit, something that
garbage collection simply cannot offer. Using scope, you can minimize the lifetime of an
object and maximize your resource usage efficiency. If you are working in some other
language, and that lifetime is managed by some other system, such as the language
runtime, then you are in danger of holding open a connection to the database while you
wait for the runtime to do the garbage col-lection. This can be outstandingly frustrating,
and the only solution is to manually close the connection when you are pretty sure that
the object is ready to be destroyed. This kind of manual lifetime management was
endemic in C and is precisely what C++ aims to get away from.
    Deterministic destruction cannot be achieved without the one constraint that informs
this guideline: all objects must be constructed deterministically, in an order that can be
determined statically, at compile time. To achieve this, construction order is inferred
from the class definition, which may only exist once, and from the order of declaration
of member data. There are other ways that the order could have been chosen: reverse
order of declaration, alphabetical order of member identifier, a special member that
specifies the order with numeric tags… we are sure you can think of plenty of others.
However, these all seem somewhat perverse when a clear order already exists: the
order of definition.
    There is a related Core Guideline, C.41: “A constructor should create a fully ini-
tialized object.” One way of avoiding this error is to write a constructor that con-structs
every member in its initialization list. If you recall Bryn’s feedback from his lead, she
asked him to move everything into the initialization list, possibly in recogni-tion of this
handy approach. By matching the initialization list with each one of the members, you
guarantee that every item is initialized before you reach the construc-tor body, where
any additional work involving objects outside of the class may be involved, such as
logging construction or subscribing to callback handlers.
    If you adopt this approach, be mindful of the role of in-class member initializ-ers.
These provide default initial values for objects so that a default constructor is
unnecessary. If any member data has such a value, make sure you choose your value
appropriately.
    We should mention what is known as “leading punctuation style” here. If you review
the code earlier, you will see that the initialization list of each constructor was written
in such a way that each member was on its own line, preceded by a comma, or a colon
in the case of the first member. Other ways of writing a constructor might include
putting everything all on one line within the class definition or using a more natural-
looking approach to punctuation and putting the commas and colon at the end of each
line. The advantage of leading punctuation style is that reordering mem-bers can be
easily achieved by moving the entire line up or down, without leaving a trailing comma
at the end of the list. This is a small thing, but it is an annoying com-pilation bug to be
caught by.
    You may be wondering about the compilation overhead this may incur: if you
initialize a member in the initializer list and then modify it in the constructor body,
surely this will generate redundant code? Fortunately, we have the as-if rule. This is
described in the standard at [intro.abstract],2 which says that “…conforming imple-
mentations are required to emulate (only) the observable behavior of the abstract
machine…” This allows the compiler to make code transformations for the purpose of
optimization. In the example above, the current_population member could be
ini-tialized to zero in the initialization list, then the population function could be called
in the constructor body, and the compiler, if it could see the definition of the popula-tion
function, would know that the first initialization is redundant.
2. https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.abstract
    Do not fear putting apparently redundant code in the initialization list. If it is
redundant the compiler will eliminate it if it can. The purpose of writing code is to tell
the compiler what to do, and to give it as much information and context as possi-ble. By
maximizing this, you give the compiler the best chance of generating optimal code. A
constructor should create a fully initialized object, ready to go and safe to use, with no
members flapping in the wind. If a constructor cannot do that, you have a failure in your
abstraction that should be remedied as soon as possible. This is a warning that needs
attending to immediately, either by redesigning the class, or nar-rowing the abstraction
so that the class can be fully initialized.
    There are some, and we use this word hesitantly, tricks you can use if you really
need to carry out any somewhat exotic initialization in the initialization list. Recall that
the initialization list is formed of a series of initialization expressions. In the example,
current_population was simply initialized to 0, expiry_time was initial-
ized with a call to
std::chrono::system_clock::to_time_t(std::chrono::system_
clock::now()), and query was move-initialized from the constructor parameter.
You are not allowed to execute arbitrary code in the initialization list, only call existing
functions. Use of the ternary operator is also permitted since it is an expression.
    This historically led to private static functions being declared in classes that were
used as helpers for construction. This was a disappointing sight to behold: the inter-
face was populated with functions that only had one use, increasing cognitive load and
maintenance burden.
    C++11 changed the landscape with the introduction of lambda expressions. There is
a technique called IILE or Immediately Invoked Lambda Expression that looks like this:

example::example(int a, int b, int c)
  : x([&](){
 …function body…
  }())
{}

The example class constructor takes three arguments and initializes x by first declar-
ing a lambda expression and then immediately invoking it by adding a pair of paren-
theses after it. This technique is useful for initializing const objects: sometimes you
need extensive calculations for initialization which cannot be successively applied to a
const value.
   However, in the case of initialization, all this has done is moved the problem
around. What were once private static helper functions are now initialization lamb-das.
You have used a shiny new hammer to solve an old problem, but the correct solution is
still to reconsider your abstraction. If there is a need for extensive state manipulation at
initialization time, then perhaps a companion abstraction is lurking somewhere in the
data. In the review of Core Guideline I.23: “Keep the number of function arguments
low,” we discussed minimizing the number of function param-eters, perhaps by forming
a struct to pass to the constructor. Do not ignore these kinds of clues when writing your
code. Finding abstractions is the best thing you can do when developing software.

Summary
In summary:

    The constructor body is less constrained than the initialization list.
    Member initialization is sensitive to order of declaration, supporting deterministic
    destruction.
    Resolve dependencies by reordering your member declarations unless align-ment
    is a consideration.
    Avoid solving the problem by throwing code at it: treat dependency issues as
    signposts to an undiscovered abstraction.
