Chapter 2.5

CP.3: Minimize explicit sharing of writable data

Traditional execution model
The concurrency and parallelism section of the Core Guidelines addresses a well-
known fact of programming life for C++ developers: multithreaded programming is
harder than single-threaded programming. It introduces a unique class of errors to
bemuse the unwary. It is ferociously hard to debug multiple threads of execution since
the primary tool of debugging, stepping through code line by line, is a strictly serial
process.
    Let us consider how we got here. You will almost certainly have encountered a
diagram like that shown in Figure 2.5.1.
Figure 2.5.1. Block diagram of a computer

   The CPU steps through the instructions of the program, one at a time. Some
instructions will load data from primary storage, others will manipulate data, and
others will store data to primary storage. Some instructions will control the order in
which the processor executes subsequent instructions.
   This is a great way of teaching the fundamentals of programming. Data retrieval,
manipulation, storage, and control flow is everything you need to write programs.
   Of course, once you start to deal with actual hardware, things change a little. For
example, different types of storage have different performance characteristics. You
cannot assume that it will take the same amount of time to retrieve data from arbi-trary
locations. The introduction of caches to mainstream desktop processors in the 1990s
highlighted the large amount of waiting incurred by the processor for loading and
storing. Even worse is reading from and writing to external storage such as disk drives
or SSDs. Worse still is reading from and writing to arbitrary storage over net-work
cables or Wi-Fi.
   Typically, during the operation of your program there exists some data stored outside
main memory, on a remote device. There also exist operating system calls which open
connections to these devices. We will consider a file on a local disk drive.
    The program will create a buffer of memory to receive the data, and then direct the
operating system to open a file on the local disk drive, read the data into the buffer, and
close the file. It would be ideal if the program could leave the operating system to its
own devices, and then receive a notification when the data from the disk drive has
filled the buffer. Such a facility is in fact available on all modern operating systems.
Two threads of execution exist, one which creates the buffer and one which fills the
buffer.
    This kind of concurrency is relatively simple. If you handle I/O errors correctly, if
you do not read the buffer prematurely, and if you periodically check for completion, all
is well. Reading the buffer early is a class of error known as a data race. Precisely, a
data race occurs when these conditions are met:

    Two or more threads access the same memory location concurrently.
    One of the threads is writing to the memory.
    The threads are not using anything to control or schedule their accesses to that
    memory.

   Sadly, as programs increase in complexity, it is too easy to create a data race. A
branch of your code may not be checking if the buffer has been filled. Perhaps a new-
comer to the codebase doesn’t realize that I/O is handled in this way, believing that
once they have asked for a file, the program waits, or blocks, until it has been read into
the buffer.
   The error here is exposing the unfilled buffer to two threads, allowing the thread that
created the buffer access to the data before it is ready. One solution to this prob-lem is
to hide the buffer until it is full: instruct the I/O thread to create and fill the buffer, and
then hand it back to the calling thread when it has been filled.

Wait, there’s more
In the early 1990s, fresh from university, I became a Windows developer, working on
Windows machines. I wrote a lot of multimedia software: I really wanted to write
games, but I took what I could get. It was fun.
    One of the features of developer life back then was the sudden, unexpected freeze of
your system. A badly written program would bring your session down, and if you
couldn’t bring up the Task Manager and kill the offending process, the only option was
to hit the reset button. Sadly, the environment I worked in meant that I was, in fact,
rarely able to bring up the Task Manager in the case of a freeze. Although I quickly
learned to save often, it was a quite maddening aspect of soft-ware development.
    I wrote presentations for workstation manufacturers (among other businesses) to
assist their sales teams, and one day a Windows NT 3.51 workstation with two Intel
Pentium processors turned up on my desk. I was used to servers with multiple pro-
cessors, but not desktop machines. The transition was amazing. After a day or so of
installing my development environment, I was up and running and the first thing I
noticed was how often I was able to bring up the Task Manager and kill stalled pro-
cesses. I could just do my work. It was an utter joy to develop on.
    Of course, being an inquisitive developer, the first thing I did was see if I could
make use of both processors in a single program. I decided to write a decoder that
would decompress backups from the network and write them to the local disk. One
processor would read and write, the other would decompress.
    It took me less than an hour to stall my program entirely. I had no idea why. I was
being super careful waiting for my buffers to fill before decompressing them: each one
had its own lock, which was released when the buffer was filled. I spent ages trying to
work out what was causing the problem. Maddeningly, if I single-stepped through the
code, everything worked fine. Worse still, when I ran the code on other machines it also
worked fine.
    I’m not going to detail the descent into madness that I endured over the follow-ing 12
days (and nights) as I tried to work out what on earth was going on. It turned out that the
problem was an artifact of timing, and both threads were waiting for a buffer owned by
the other thread. This timing artifact was unique to multiprocessor machines, it turned
out. I could reproduce it nowhere else in the building.
    I had encountered my first deadlock.
    A deadlock occurs when two threads of execution are waiting for a resource held by
the other. Each thread was waiting on the other buffer before completing its work and
releasing its lock. On the single-processor machines, things proceeded as expected: one
buffer would fill and release its lock, allowing the other thread to carry on. With two
processors it was possible, and in fact usual, to block both threads at the same time,
each waiting for the other to finish.
    Once I realized what was happening, I reconsidered my logic and fixed everything.
That wasn’t the end of it, though. Other code I had written earlier would also fail on
this machine. Situations that were very rare on single-processor machines were sud-
denly frequently exposed on this multiprocessor machine.
    It became clear to me that the purpose of multiprocessor machines was for run-ning
multiple processes and making Windows a nicer place to be. Running multiple threads
in a single program was clearly not worth the trouble. It was an interesting academic
exercise, but I had been bitten badly and I wasn’t planning on returning to that particular
idiom.
   One of the features of developing in the 1990s was the steady growth in speed of the
processors. My first work PC featured an Intel 80286 processor running at 8MHz. This
was 1992 and it was somewhat underpowered but still in wide use. By the end of the
decade the Pentium III could run at up to 1.13GHz. I grew very used to processors Just
Getting Faster. I even discovered that there was a name for this: Moore’s Law, which
stated that the number of transistors on a chip doubles every two years.1
1. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/silicon-innovations/moores-law-technology.xhtml

    It isn’t a law, of course. It’s an observation of engineering practice. Unfortunately,
all good things come to an end and eventually physics took over. In December 2004
Herb Sutter, one of the authors of the C++ Core Guidelines, wrote an article titled “The
Free Lunch Is Over.”2 He highlighted the problem with Moore’s Law, predict-ing the
necessity of a hard turn toward concurrency in software to exploit the full potential of
upcoming CPUs with increasing numbers of cores. He observed the lack of
understanding of concurrency among most programmers, and how efficiency and
optimization would become more important than ever.
2. www.gotw.ca/publications/concurrency-ddj.htm

    Cramming more and more transistors onto a processor was no longer an option for
achieving faster compute speeds. At around the end of 2006 I encountered my first dual-
core processor. Processors might not be able to get faster, but they could do more things
at once, which is just as good, right?
    Of course it isn’t. Two cores only execute your code twice as fast if they are not
waiting for each other. My heart sank a little. I knew what was coming and I was not
disappointed. Race conditions and deadlocks became part of the life of a developer as
we tried to squeeze more and more out of the processor. I had become comfortable with
I/O threads: now the world was filling up with compute threads. Multithreaded
programs have become the new normal, particularly in my domain of games. Proces-
sors with dozens of cores are common. Core Guideline CP.1: “Assume that your code
will run as part of a multi-threaded program” acknowledges this truth.

Avoiding deadlocks and data races
Deadlocks and data races are caused by breakdowns in turn-taking. Two threads are
competing for a single resource: access to a piece of data. That is the motivation for this
guideline. If writable data is not shared, then races and deadlocks will not be a
problem. Unfortunately, threads need to communicate with one another. What is needed
is a way of reading and writing data with a guarantee of no interference from other
threads.
   C++11 introduced std::atomic, a library type that supports this. Particularly, if
one thread writes to an atomic object while another thread reads from it, the behav-ior
is well defined, and all is well with the world. But what happens if two threads want to
write to the object? Now we need a flag to warn other threads that the object is being
written to and no other threads should attempt to write to it. This is prob-lematic: how
do we know if it is safe to write to the flag? Two threads may write to the flag and spoil
everything.
   Fortunately, we have the concept of a mutex. This is an abstraction of the single-
thread-access flag. C++11 also introduced std::mutex, a library type that allows
you to secure exclusive access to something. The API is simple: there are two lock
func-tions, lock() and try_lock(), and one unlock function, unlock(). Once a
thread suc-cessfully locks a mutex, no other thread may do so.
   Problem solved! Why all the bother? Sadly, it is quite easy to find yourself in a
position where two threads are both waiting on each other to release a mutex.

void thread1()
{
 // Lock writing mutex
 // Lock logging mutex
 // Do writing
 // Do logging
 // Unlock writing mutex
 // Unlock logging mutex
}

void thread2()
{
 // Lock logging mutex
 // Lock writing mutex
 // Do writing
 // Do logging
 // Unlock writing mutex
 // Unlock logging mutex
}

If both threads start simultaneously, thread 1 can lock the writing mutex while thread 2
can lock the logging mutex. Now both threads are waiting for the other thread to unlock
their mutex before continuing.
    “That’s silly,” you say. “They should simply lock the mutex they need, do the thing
they need it for, and unlock it before locking the next mutex.”

void thread1()
{
 // Lock writing mutex
 // Do writing
 // Unlock writing mutex
 // Lock logging mutex
 // Do logging
 // Unlock logging mutex
}

void thread2()
{
 // Lock writing mutex
 // Do writing
 // Unlock writing mutex
 // Lock logging mutex
 // Do logging
 // Unlock logging mutex
}

“Surely, nothing can go wrong now. The guideline should read ‘Don’t lock more than
one mutex at a time.’ Honestly, I could write this stuff.”
    Well, yes, that would be a useful guideline, but how would you enforce it? What if
the writing function locks another mutex? Are you suggesting that we need a way of
decorating functions, like the const keyword, that does not lock mutexes? Isn’t this
rather a severe constraint to enforce on multithreaded software development? There is
in fact another Core Guideline, CP.22: “Never call unknown code while holding a lock
(e.g., a callback),” that addresses this situation.
    Unfortunately, this is not a solved problem. You could call std::lock(), or make
use of the std::scoped_lock class, but as a programming style, sharing writable
data is an accident waiting to happen, and so you should minimize it if not avoid it
entirely. In fact, all this mutex infrastructure is solving the wrong problem: we should
not be communicating by sharing memory, we should be sharing memory by
communicating.

Setting aside locks and mutexes
The phrase “Don’t communicate by sharing memory; share memory by communi-cating”
is the first Go proverb: it is a piece of wisdom as old as concurrency. The application
of this wisdom in C++ requires setting aside mutexes and associated data entirely and
embracing a different way of communicating between threads. This is achieved by
passing messages.
    Messages are small objects passed by value to message queues. Each thread will
maintain a message queue and periodically inspect it for new messages, acting upon
them as appropriate. Messages are sent when one thread has finished something and
needs to tell another thread that the results of its activity are now available. The result
may be referenced in a std::unique_ptr object—not a std::shared_ptr
object, as that would defeat the point of the approach.
    Of course, we’ve just moved the problem around. Ultimately, we can’t get away
from sharing some data somewhere, but what we have done here is abstracted it into a
queue object. The queue object is the only place where there will be any kind of write-
sharing shenanigans, relieving you from the risk of shooting yourself in the foot.
    However, by using std::unique_ptr objects as handles to data, and by moving
them from thread to thread through a message queue,3 we can treat each thread as a self-
contained unit of work, minimizing shared writable data to the management of the
queue.
3. As of writing, there is no standard concurrent queue, although a paper has been in development for several years;
   see www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2017/p0059r4.pdf.

    So, in summary:

      Shared writable data can cause data races and deadlocks
      Correct synchronization is a hard problem
      Minimize sharing by, for example, exchanging messages

   Although this is the end of this guideline, this is not the end of the chapter. We have
taken a journey of abstractions which we haven’t quite finished.
   Our first abstraction was the atomic object: an object that couldn’t be written to by
two different threads simultaneously. The next abstraction was the mutex: an atomic
object signaling permission to access a resource. Our third abstraction was the message
queue: a mechanism for safely communicating between threads. Our final abstraction
turns threads into tasks and is the theme of Core Guideline CP.4: “Think in terms of
tasks, rather than threads.”
    Consider the earlier job of filling a buffer from an I/O device. The heart of the
complexity associated with multithreading is the matter of sharing memory. If a thread is
completely insulated from the rest of the program, then nothing can go wrong. The
thread is very easy to make safe: do not share the buffer being filled until it has been
filled. The task could be described as “given a filename, return a buffer filled with the
contents of that file.” That can easily be encapsulated in a single class, like this:

class file_contents
{
public:
  file_contents(std::string const& filename);
  ~file_contents();
  std::pair<std::byte*, size_t> buffer() const;

private:
 …
};

The class is constructed with a filename. The constructor looks at the file, finds out how
large it is, creates a buffer, and starts a thread, requesting notification when it
completes. Before completion, buffer() will return {nullptr, 0}. After
completion, buffer() will return the address of the buffer and the number of bytes it
contains. Error handling can be a tricky matter: you could decide to throw an exception
when buffer() is called to signal errors, or add a good() predicate.
   There is private implementation to consider as well, but it is clear that there is no
scope for a data race or a deadlock here: access to the buffer is carefully ordered by the
I/O completion and no mutexes can cause any trouble.
   A more complex example is a typical phone, console, or PC game. While a game is
running, there are different pieces of hardware to be mindful of. The game collects input
from a controller, and possibly from a network port. It collects data in the form of
graphics data, audio data, and text from offline storage. It runs a model of the world the
game takes place in, updating at a particular frequency. These tasks all run concurrently.
The model ticks over, examining input, and meanwhile the video renderer draws a
snapshot of it and the audio renderer plays sound effects. The input task sends data to
the model task, which sends data to the renderers. It’s all tasks, all the way down.
    Consider the dual-processor workstation: the operating system was able to treat
each process as a separate “task,” with no communication between them (aside from
perhaps the clipboard, Dynamic Data Exchange, OLE, and so on, all of which were
scheduled by the operating system). If a task failed, the system could recover easily. It
was not dependent on any one task.
    Creating and destroying threads can be an expensive activity. A superior approach to
sending messages between threads is to create a pool of threads that simply wait,
sleeping. Periodically the pool is notified with bundles of instructions and data,
whereupon it prods a thread into life. It executes the instructions using the data, returns
the value to the sender, and goes back to sleep.
    Besides saving on the thread creation and destruction overhead, this is an immensely
scalable approach. I first started concurrent computation with two pro-cessors each
with one core. Today I can buy processors whose cores number well into double
figures. Exploiting all these cores can only be achieved by completely factor-ing your
problem into tasks that can be run independently of one another.
    The secret is to stop thinking in terms of threads, which are part of the solution
domain, and think in terms of tasks, which are part of the problem domain. Par-ticularly,
the Core Guideline says, “A thread is an implementation concept, a way of thinking
about the machine. A task is an application notion, something you’d like to do,
preferably concurrently with other tasks. Application concepts are easier to reason
about.”
    Tasks are the substance of your program, the set of things that you want your program
to achieve. Make your tasks independent and describe them as bundles of instructions
and data. Core Guideline CP.4: “Think in terms of tasks, rather than threads” addresses
this. The standard will eventually add thread pools to the concur-rency support library,
at which point there will be no need for you to think about threads at all. Until then, only
involve yourself with threads at the appropriate level of abstraction, and don’t share
writable data.

Summary
There are several things to think about here. Concurrent programming still remains the
most taxing area of software development in C++. Data races and deadlocks are beastly
problems to resolve and migrating to tasks will make your life much easier. Until then:

    Beware of holding multiple mutexes.
    Build loosely coupled abstractions that reflect the tasks you want to carry out.
    Minimize the need to use the lowest level abstractions of the concurrency library.
