Chapter 3.5

E.28: Avoid error handling based on global state (e.g.
errno)

Error handling is hard
There may be some people whose code never goes wrong and is perfect in every way at
all times. Sadly, for us mere mortals, sometimes things do not go according to plan. This
can be for a variety of reasons: the problem was incorrectly specified, or the range of
input was exceeded, or the hardware has broken down. It is not usually acceptable for
the program to simply shrug its metaphorical shoulders, mumble “meh,” and stop
working, nor simply attempt to carry on to the best of its abilities. Programs are not
people: they are machines, with moving parts and without con-science. They are
supremely good at doing what they are told, although you may find this rather hard to
believe at times.
    Error handling has a long, varied, and checkered history. The presence of the word
“varied” should alert you to the fact that there are many ways of handling errors and a
universally useful facility has yet to emerge.

C and errno
This guideline is about avoiding signaling error in global state, so we’ll start there.
Two problems should immediately spring to mind when we think of global state:
   1. Thread ownership
   2. Error reference
   The thread ownership problem is simple enough: in today’s multithreaded world, a
global error object would need to contain thread information about which thread
signaled the error. You might try using an object with thread-local storage duration, but
that would mean that errors relevant beyond a particular thread would be hidden.
Alternatively, you could create a single object containing per-thread error informa-tion,
which would require some careful synchronization. This is not insurmountable, but it
demotes this approach down my ranking of preferred error-handling solutions.
    Of course, it wasn’t always like this, and legacy code will indeed contain refer-
ences to an object called errno. This is part of the C standard and is simply an int.
Since C++11 it is an object of thread-local storage duration; prior to that it was static. It
is not necessarily a bad approach: if something goes wrong, you want to be able to
invoke an error-handling function to deal with it. A single error code means that it
doesn’t matter where the error happens, the error-handling function can iden-tify what
went wrong. The error code can be divided up into groups of bits: some bits refer to the
domain of the error, others refer to the nature of the error, and still other bits provide
context.
    It is not without problems, though. What happens if another error occurs while you
are navigating to your error code? Your error code can only hold the most recent error,
which makes recovery a tricky proposal. Also, it simply doesn’t scale very well. All
code needs to check the error status after a function call in case that function has
signaled an error. Even if no error signaling is documented, that doesn’t mean that the
function won’t change and start signaling errors. Finally, clients can and will ignore or
forget about error codes, no matter how forcefully you exhort them not to do so in your
documentation.
    This is rather reminiscent of “globals are bad, m’kay?” Since errno has no owner,
there is no way of controlling how it is managed in the case of unusual circum-stances.
What happens if there is an error in the error recovery? As the guideline remarks,
global state is hard to manage.
    Unfortunately, as remarked above, errno is part of the standard, and some parts of
the C Standard Library use errno to signal failure. For example, if you try and cal-
culate the square root of a negative number by calling sqrt, errno will be set to
EDOM.
    It has long been known, since before the advent of C++, that errno is problem-atic.
Plenty of alternatives have been considered, with varying degrees of success, which
permeate codebases around the world, some of which have been adopted as standard
practice. Let’s take a look at other approaches to error handling.

Return codes
The most common way of signaling an error is to simply tell the caller directly. You can
achieve this with a return value. If your function has a well-defined domain of results,
you can use values outside that domain to signal an error. For example, scanf returns
the number of receiving arguments that have been successfully assigned to, which is a
number greater than or equal to zero. However, it signals an error by returning EOF,
which is a negative value.
   This method has one obvious shortcoming, which is that the returned type must
accommodate the result domain and the error domain. Consider the standard library
function for finding the natural logarithm of a number:

double log(double);

Conceptually, the result domain completely exhausts the type. There is no way to signal
an error. The standard has such a function and returns special values which signal that
something has gone wrong; it can do this because there are a few values of double set
aside to represent error conditions. This can be quite a surprise to the new programmer.
   A more practical shortcoming is that callers can ignore return codes unless the
function is marked with [[no_discard]]. Even then, the caller can choose to
ignore the object that contains the return code. While this quietly shifts the blame to the
caller, it is not in anyone’s interests to permit errors to be absorbed without
consequence.
   Another way of returning an error code is to pass an error-reporting destination into
the function. This leads to an API that looks like this:

double log(double, int&);

The caller provides somewhere to report errors and checks after calling that no error
was reported. There are a few things wrong with this solution too. First, it’s just ugly.
Readable APIs will simply tell you what is going on: if you want a logarithm, you
expect to pass in a number and get one back. The extra parameter is a little extra
cognitive load.
   Second, it represents additional overhead in circumstances where you are very
confident of the range of numbers you are expecting to pass to the function. Such an
approach will often lead to a dual-function API, where each function has a matching
overload containing an additional error return parameter. This is rather inelegant.

Exceptions
With the arrival of C++ came constructors. These are special functions that do not return
anything and, in some circumstances, take no arguments. No amount of sig-nature
shenanigans would help you here: unless you sacrificed your default construc-tor there
was nothing you could do to signal error. Worse, the destructor has only one function
signature, taking no arguments and returning nothing. Overloaded operators are
similarly affected.
    Exceptions were introduced to deal with this. They create an additional return path
that can be followed in the event of error, called throwing, which bypasses the usual
return path, and performs all the necessary cleanup normally required at the end of a
function. Additionally, exceptions can be caught anywhere in the call stack, rather than
precisely at the function’s call site, enabling the programmer to deal with errors where
possible or to simply ignore them, bubbling them up through the call stack otherwise.
    This comes at a cost. The end of a function is very obvious: there is a return state-
ment or a final closing brace. An exception can occur during any call which requires a
lot of additional furniture to manage. Whenever you call a function an exception may be
thrown, so the compiler must insert all the code required to clean up what’s on the stack
in that event. This extra furniture comes with not only an execution speed cost, but also
a space cost. This cost is so large that all compilers provide an option to disable
exception unwinding, in exchange for being unable to use try/catch blocks.
    This is really quite a bad thing indeed. In a survey by the C++ Foundation in 2019,1
results suggested that about half of all C++ projects ban exceptions in whole or in part.
This means that the community is divided in two. Worse, banning exceptions shuts
projects off from using those parts of the standard library that use exceptions to signal
errors.
1. https://isocpp.org/files/papers/CppDevSurvey-2019-04-summary.pdf

<system_error>
The second C++ standard, C++11, introduced std::error_code and
std::error_condition which can be found in the <system_error> header.
This is an error-signaling mechanism that provides a way of standardizing error
reporting from the operating system or from low-level interfaces in the case of unhosted
systems. Not only does it include an error code, but it also includes a pointer to an error
category. This innovation allows programmers to create new families of errors by
deriving from the error_category base class.
   This solves the problem of making errors look more like one another. A large col-
lection of error codes are defined in an enumeration called errc which are imported
from POSIX and given more comprehensible names. For example, ENOENT is trans-
lated to no_such_file_or_directory. Predefined error categories include
generic_category, system_category, iostream_category, and
future_category.
   Unfortunately, this is merely an upgrade to errno. It is still an object that needs to
be returned to the caller somehow. It doesn’t persist in global state or propagate through
the stack unless you throw it as an exception, so while it gives you a good way to stop
using errno, it still leaves you with many of the problems inherent to error handling.
   What to do.

Boost.Outcome
Naturally, others have attempted to square the error-handling circle and proposed
alternative solutions. You can find one of these at boost.org,2 which is a rich source of
helpful classes for improving your code. There are two classes in Boost of interest to
the problem of error handling.
2. https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/develop/libs/outcome/doc/html/index.xhtml

    The first is result<T, E, NoValuePolicy>. The first parameter is the type
of the object being returned. The second is the type of object containing information
about the reason for failure when the function fails. An instance of result will
contain either an instance of T or an instance of E. It’s rather like a variant in this
regard. The third parameter you can read about in the Boost documentation; the default
value is enough for most purposes, and the documentation is rather involved.
    By creating an object for returning things, you can offer a bool conversion that
indicates whether the result was successful or whether an error was encountered, along
with functions for interrogating the nature of the error. Since it is either a T or an E, in
the normal error-free case it will cost nothing. You might use it like this:

outcome::result<double> log(double); // function
prototype

r = log(1.385);
if (r)
{
 // Proceed as normal
}
else
{
 // Handle error
}

This is nice: there is a consistent way to test for error, with error information
wrapped up in the object in the case of failure. Everything is local. Unfortunately, it is
still possible to forget to test.
    The second class of interest is outcome<T, EC, EP, NoValuePolicy>.
Where the result class signals a simple success or failure bundled with context, the
outcome class exposes failure in two ways: expected and unexpected failure, which
are speci-fied by the second and third parameters. The expected failure can be
recovered from, while the unexpected failure cannot. This unrecoverable failure is
where an exception would feature in the usual run of things within the language.
    This class is a way of retrofitting exception safety to a codebase. It can trans-port
exceptions across layers of the program that were never designed with exception safety
in mind.
    While boost::outcome is a useful part of the Boost library, it has not been
stand-ardized (more on this shortly), and so is only available in codebases where use of
Boost is permitted. There are a surprising number of environments where this is not the
case, which leaves you with only three error-handling options: throw and catch
exceptions, propagate error codes back through the call stack, or roll your own
superior, solution-domain-specific error-handling mechanism. This seems less than
satisfactory.

Why is error handling so hard?
The first problem is that different types of errors need handling in different ways. Let’s
identify three types of errors.
   Consider a function for converting a string to a number. This will fail if the string
does not include a number and only a number. This is a recoverable error that you
should report back to the caller: there was a logic error in the calling code that meant
that the input did not meet the constraints identified by the author of the function. This is
the simplest kind of error: “I was expecting this, you supplied that, that’s wrong, please
go and think about what you have done.” It is a violation of a precon-dition and the
caller should always be told about this.
   The next kind of error is the programming bug. Rather than the caller getting
something wrong, the thing being called has got something wrong, for example
dereferencing memory that it shouldn’t. The trouble with these bugs is that they put the
program in a corrupted state, and everything should stop. You can no longer rea-son
about what is going on with the program and there is no value in reporting this to the
caller. What could they possibly do about it? The program is in a corrupt state, from
which there is no restoration.
    The final kind of error is a little more subtle. This occurs when the program envi-
ronment breaks. If you have Read The Front Matter of the standard you will have
learned all about the “abstract machine” at the same place that you learned about the as-
if rule. You will find it in the standard at [intro.abstract].3 There are a few ways you
can break the abstract machine: exhausting the free store, or exhausting the stack, are the
two most common. Both are out-of-memory conditions. You would exhaust the free
store by requesting a vector of a billion doubles on a 32-bit machine. You would
exhaust the stack with infinite recursion.
3. https://eel.is/c++draft/intro.abstract

    It is only in the case of the first error, the recoverable error, that you should notify
the calling code by throwing an exception or returning an error value. Otherwise, you
should simply stop the program and tell the programmer via an assert or by writing
to a log file or to stdout. If you have broken the abstract machine your options for
telling the programmer are very limited.

 You do not know how your calling code is going to respond to errors. You cannot
 rely on your caller handling the error.

   The second problem is that you do not know how your calling code is going to
respond to errors. You cannot rely on your caller handling the error. They might
intentionally discard the error value entirely and carry on their merry way, or they may
simply forget about it.
   For example, your string conversion function could return a double and take a
reference to an error code in addition to the string to be converted. That error code may
be ignored entirely. The problem of ignoring return codes in the general case has been
partially solved with the addition of the [[no_discard]] attribute, but this is only
useful if you are exclusively using the return value for returning errors. Even then, the
caller may store the return value and forget to consider it. Forcing users to check for
errors is a bad idea anyway: it is for them to decide how to deal with fail-ure, not you.
   The trouble is that there are more ways for code to go wrong than to perform cor-
rectly. Much like the human body, we can identify when it is in good working order, but
identifying the myriad ways in which it can fail is a tall order.
Light at the end of the tunnel
We mentioned that the Boost solutions have not been standardized and are only avail-
able where use of Boost is permitted. The committee is considering several papers to
improve matters. The first of these proposes std::expected<T, E>, which is a
type that may contain a value of type T, or a value of type E, which represents the
reason why a value of type T is not present. It is rather like a specialized version of
std::variant. This was first proposed shortly after C++14 was finalized, so it has
spent a long time being considered. You can check progress by examining paper
P0323.4
4. www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2021/p0323r10.xhtml

   Next, we have zero-overhead deterministic exceptions, which throw values rather
than types. This paper addresses the divided C++ community by making exception
handling much more palatable. Particularly, the values that are thrown are stack allo-
cated and statically typed, which means no heap allocation is required and RTTI is not
used. They are like a special return type. You can check progress by examining paper
P0709.5 Note that Boost.Outcome is a partial, library-only implementation of this idea.
Language changes will need to be made to fully implement it.
5. www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2019/p0709r4.pdf

   The third paper under consideration proposes a new status_code and standard
error object. This operates with zero-overhead deterministic exceptions. It offers some
improvements over the <system_error> header, such as not including the
<string> header, which brings with it a large quantity of additional machinery such
as allocators and algorithms, greatly increasing build and link times.
   One aspect of error handling we have yet to mention is the use of the assert
macro. This is a way of discovering instances of the second type of error described in
the previous section. It highlights what the programmer is expecting to be the state of the
abstract machine at a particular instant and directs the program to stop execu-tion if that
state turns out to be different. This is different from a broken abstract machine: this is
the programmer getting things wrong.
   As a development of this idea, there is yet another proposal under consideration
which very nearly made it into C++20. In fact, it got as far as the working draft before
being pulled out at the last minute. We are talking about contracts. These define pre- and
post-conditions in the language rather than as a library macro, by decorating the
function definition with programmer-defined expectations.
   Unfortunately, this cornucopia of upgrades to the language and library is yet to be
emptied into the C++ Standard working draft at time of writing. Today, in the
community of C++ users, things have remained largely unchanged for many years.
Programmers are still using old C-style error-handling strategies for want of a better
option. The future looks bright, but it has yet to arrive.

Summary
In summary:

    Global state is a bad place to handle errors. Keep error state local and pay
    attention to it.
    If you can throw and catch exceptions, do so.
    Differentiate between different types of error: bad input, bad logic, bad
    environment, and so on.
    If exception handling is not available to you, consider using Boost.Outcome, but
    pay attention to upcoming changes to the standard; the Core Guidelines do not
    cover this approach since it is outside the scope of the standard.
