               INTRODUCTION

            Welcome to The Art of ARM Assembly. This
            book will teach you how to program 64-bit
           ARM CPUs, such as those found in modern
        Apple macOS machines, ARM-based Linux sys-
tems (including the Raspberry Pi with a 64-bit version
of Raspberry Pi OS, previously known as Raspbian,
which I’ll just call Pi OS), and even mobile devices
such as iPhones, iPads, and some Android devices.
With the arrival of the ARM-based Apple macOS
systems, the need to learn and understand 64-bit ARM
assembly language increased dramatically, leading me
to write this book. However, I’ve made the source code
and other information in this book as portable as pos-
sible so that it applies to all 64-bit ARM machines.
                           This book is a sister volume to The Art of 64-Bit Assembly, which was,
                      itself, a rewrite of The Art of Assembly Language Programming (AoA). AoA
                      was a project I began way back in 1989 as a tool for teaching 80x86 (x86)
                      assembly-language programming to students at California State Polytechnic
                      University, Pomona, and the University of California, Riverside. For over
                      25 years, AoA served as a guide for learning x86 assembly language pro-
                      gramming. During that time, other processors came and went, but x86
                      remained king of the hill in personal computers and high-end workstations,
                      and x86 assembly language remained the de facto assembly language to
                      learn. However, ARM-based PCs became mainstream with the introduction
                      of the Apple M1-based systems (and later Apple machines), so the need to
                      learn ARM assembly language programming is increasing.
                           This book was written using The Art of 64-Bit Assembly as a model for
                      the material to cover. Anyone who has read my earlier books will find
                      this book to be very familiar at a high level. Of course, the ARM instruc-
                      tions and assemblers—either the GNU assembler (Gas) or Apple’s Clang
                      assembler (largely compatible with Gas)—are quite different from the x86
                      instructions and the Microsoft Macro Assembler (MASM). The low-level
                      presentation and programming techniques are therefore also somewhat
                      different.

           0.1        A Brief History of the ARM CPU
                      The ARM CPU has a long and storied history. It was first developed by
                      Acorn Computers Ltd. in late 1983 as a replacement for the venerable 8-bit
                      6502 CPU used in its BBC Micro system. ARM originally stood for Acorn
                      RISC Machine, though this was later changed to Advanced RISC Machine
                      (RISC stands for reduced instruction set computer). That original design was
                      largely a mind meld between the design described in the early University of
                      California, Berkeley, RISC design and the 6502 CPU. For this reason, many
                      would argue that the ARM initially wasn’t a pure RISC design. We might
                      think of the ARM as the spiritual successor to the 6502, inheriting many of
                      the 6502’s features.
                           In many respects, the ARM CPU is modeled on the 6502 CPU’s notion
                      of a reduced instruction set computer. In the original RISC design, each
                      instruction was designed to do as little work as possible so it would require
                      less hardware support and could run faster. Pure RISC architectures, for
                      example, generally don’t use condition code bits (as setting condition codes
                      after the execution of an instruction would require the CPU do extra work),
                      and use fixed-size machine instruction encodings (typically 32 bits). The
                      6502, on the other hand, attempted to reduce the total number of machine
                      instructions as much as possible.
                           Additionally, the original ARM supported both 16-bit and 32-bit
                      instruction encodings. While pure RISC CPUs try to maximize the num-
                      ber of general-purpose registers (generally 32), the original ARM design
                      supported only 16. Furthermore, the ARM used one of the general-
                      purpose registers as the program counter, which allows for all kinds of

    programming tricks but creates problems for pure RISC designs (such as
    handling exceptions). Finally, the ARM partially supported a hardware
    stack, something you don’t see on pure RISC machines. Nevertheless, “pure”
    or not, the ARM design outlasted all the other RISC CPUs of that era.
        Over the years, the ARM CPU variants have largely been used in mobile
    and embedded applications, with the vast majority of ARM CPUs wind-
    ing up in mobile phones and tablets. However, one notable use is in the
    Raspberry Pi computer system (with over 61 million units sold as of this
    writing). In addition to the Pi, millions of ARM-based Arduino-compatible
    and other single-board computers (such as the Teensy series) have been
    sold. At the time of writing, the Raspberry Pi Foundation released the
    Raspberry Pi Pico, an ARM-based microcontroller board for $4 (US), sell-
    ing more than 4 million of these devices by January 2024.

0.2 Why Learn ARM Assembly?
    RISC CPUs were designed to be programmed using high-level languages
    (especially C/C++). Very few programs of note have been written in RISC
    assembly language (though the original ARM Basic is a good counter­
    example). The main reason assembly language is taught in colleges and uni-
    versities is to teach machine organization (an introduction to the machine’s
    architecture). In addition, some applications (or, at the very least, portions
    of some applications) can benefit from an assembly language implementa-
    tion. Speed and space are the two main reasons for using assembly lan-
    guage, though it is also true that certain algorithms are more easily written
    in assembly language (particularly bit-handling operations).
         Finally, learning assembly language can help you write much better
    high-level language code. After all, a compiler for a language like C/C++
    translates that high-level source code into assembly language. Understanding
    the underlying machine language will help you write better high-level lan-
    guage (HLL) code because you can avoid inefficient HLL constructs. This
    understanding can also be helpful when debugging or optimizing HLL code.
    Sometimes you must look at the code that the compiler generated to under-
    stand a bug or inefficiency.
         So why a book on ARM assembly language in particular? Until the
    Apple Silicon M1 CPU came along, the only common personal computer
    using an ARM CPU was the Raspberry Pi. While the Pi was popular, it
    generally wasn’t being used in schools to teach machine organization and
    assembly language programming. A few hobbyists were probably interested
    in picking up ARM assembly language on their own, but most Pi program-
    mers were using Scratch or Python, with the hard-core types program-
    ming in C/C++. While mobile devices such as iPhones, iPads, and Android
    phones and tablets are also popular, developers rarely consider switching
    from Objective-C, Swift, or Java into assembly language for applications on
    those devices.
         However, once Apple released M1-based Mac minis, MacBooks, and
    iMacs, the situation changed. Interest in low-level programming on ARMs

                        spiked, because now ARM assembly could be taught in colleges and uni-
                        versities on “normal” machines. Apple has sold more A-series (iPad and
                        iPhone) and M-series (iPad and Mac) systems than Raspberry Pi since they
                        were introduced. It is conceivable that Apple will have sold around a bil-
                        lion ARM-based personal computers and mobile devices by the time you’re
                        reading this.
                            Given these developments, a lot more people are going to be interested
                        in assembly language programming on ARM CPUs. If you want to be able
                        to write high-performance, efficient, and small code on this new crop of
                        devices, learning ARM assembly language is the place to start.

           0.3 Why Learn 64-Bit ARM?
                        Although the original ARM was a 32-bit CPU, Arm Holdings—the outfit
                        that licenses the ARM design—introduced a 64-bit version in 2011. Apple
                        introduced its 32-bit iPhone 5 a few years after that. Since then, most
                        mobile and personal computer devices (including the Raspberry Pi 3, 4,
                        and 400) have used 64-bit CPUs, while embedded devices have largely stuck
                        with the 32-bit CPU variants. Code written for 32-bit CPUs is generally more
                        memory efficient than that for 64-bit CPUs; unless an application requires
                        more than 4GB, using a 32-bit instruction set is usually better.
                             Nevertheless, for high-performance computing, 64 bits is definitely
                        the future. Why is this the case? Can’t 64-bit ARM CPUs run the older
                        32-bit code? The answer is a qualified yes. For example, the Raspberry Pi
                        provides a 32-bit OS that runs only 32-bit code, even when running on a
                        64-bit CPU such as on the Pi 3, 4, or 400. However, the 64-bit ARM CPUs
                        (ARMv8 or AARCH64, informally abbreviated to ARM64) operate in one
                        of two modes: 32-bit or 64-bit. When in 32-bit mode, they execute the 32-bit
                        instruction set; when in 64-bit mode, they execute the 64-bit instruction
                        set. Though these instruction sets have some similarities, they are not the
                        same. Thus, when operating in one of these modes, you cannot execute the
                        instructions from the other mode.
                             Given the incompatibility of the two instruction sets, this book focuses
                        on 64-bit ARM assembly language. Since you can’t program the Apple M1
                        (and later) in 32-bit ARM assembly language, teaching 32-bit alone would
                        be a nonstarter. Why not teach both? While knowing 32-bit assembly lan-
                        guage would help readers who want to write code for the 32-bit Pi OS and
                        other embedded single-board microcontrollers, this book aims to teach
                        fundamentals. Teaching two different instruction sets complicates the edu-
                        cational experience; better to do one thing well (64-bit assembly) rather
                        than two things poorly. Teaching both 32-bit and 64-bit assembly is almost
                        like trying to teach x86-64 and ARM in the same book; it’s just too much
                        to take in all at once. Moreover, the 32-bit operating modes will likely fade
                        away entirely over time. As I write this, ARM has already introduced a vari-
                        ant that supports only 64-bit code; I expect all future desktop-class proces-
                        sors will head in this direction.

NOTE   Although concentrating on 64-bit ARM assembly language for desktop-class and
       mobile machines (such as iPhones) makes sense, some will want to learn 32-bit ARM
       assembly language to work with embedded devices. Arduino-based single-board com-
       puters (SBCs), Raspberry Pi Pico SBCs, and many other classes of ARM-based embed-
       ded systems use 32-bit ARM variants. Furthermore, if you’re operating a Raspberry
       Pi using a 32-bit version of Pi OS, you’ll need to use 32-bit ARM assembly language.
       For that reason, The Art of ARM Assembly, Volume 2, will cover 32-bit ARM
       assembly language on those systems.

 0.4 Expectations and Prerequisites
       This book assumes that you are already comfortable programming in an
       HLL such as C/C++ (preferred), Python, Swift, Java, Pascal, Ruby, BASIC,
       or another object-oriented or imperative (procedural) programming lan-
       guage. Although many programmers have successfully learned assembly
       language as their very first programming language, I recommend that you
       learn to program first, then learn assembly language programming. This
       book makes use of several HLL examples (typically in C/C++ or Pascal).
       The examples are generally simple, so you should be able to understand
       them if you know a different HLL.
           This book also assumes you’re comfortable with the edit/compile/test/
       debug cycle during program development. You should be familiar with
       source code editors and using standard software development tools, as I
       won’t explain how to edit source files.
           A wide variety of 64-bit ARM systems are out there, and I aimed to
       make this book applicable to as many of them as possible. To that end,
       every example program in this book has been tested on each of the follow-
       ing systems:
       •   Apple M1-based Mac systems such as the Mac mini M1 and Mac mini
           M2. The book’s example code was tested on the mini M1 but should
           work on any of the ARM-based MacBooks or iMacs, as well as future
           Mx systems.
       •   Raspberry Pi 3, 4, 400, and 5 systems (and future 64-bit-capable Pi
           systems) running the 64-bit version of Pi OS.
       •   PINE64 system including the Pinebook, Pinebook Pro, and
           ROCKPro 64.
       •   Almost any 64-bit ARM-based Linux system.
       •   NVIDIA Jetson Nano systems.
            In theory, it should be possible to apply the information in this book
       to ARM-based Windows machines (such as the Surface Laptop Copilot+).
       Unfortunately, Microsoft’s software development tools, particularly its
       assembler, are based on the original ARM assembly syntax defined by Arm
       (the company), not Gas. While Microsoft’s armasm64 is a better tool in many
       respects (as it uses standard ARM assembly language syntax), everyone
       else uses Gas syntax. The machine instructions are more or less the same

                     between the two sets of assemblers, but the other statements (known as
                     assembler directives or pseudo-opcodes) are completely different. Therefore,
                     example programs written in Gas will not assemble under armasm64, and
                     vice versa. Since trying to present both syntax forms in example programs
                     would be just as confusing as trying to teach 32- and 64-bit programming
                     simultaneously, I stick to Gas syntax in my examples.

           0.5 Source Code
                     This book contains considerable ARM assembly language (and some
                     C/C++) source code that typically comes in one of three forms: code snip-
                     pets, single assembly language procedures or functions (modules), or full-
                     blown programs.
                          Code snippets are fragments of a program; they are not stand-alone, and
                     you cannot compile them by using an ARM assembler (or a C++ compiler,
                     in the case of C/C++ source code). They exist to make a point or provide
                     a small example of a particular programming technique. Here is a typical
                     example:

                           .data
                     i64   .quad   0
                            .
                            .
                            .
                           ldr     x1, i64

                         The vertical ellipses denote arbitrary code that could appear in their
                     place.
                         Modules are small blocks of code that can be compiled but won’t run on
                     their own. Modules typically contain a function that will be called by another
                     program. Here is a typical example:

                     someFunc:
                             add x0, x1, x2
                             sub x0, x0, x3
                             ret

                          Full-blown programs are called listings in this book, and I refer to them
                     by listing number or filename. A typical filename usually takes the form
                     ListingC-N.S, where C is the chapter number and N is a listing number
                     within that chapter. For example, the following Listing1-1.S is the first listing
                     that appears in Chapter 1:

                     // Listing1-1.S
                     //
                     // Comments consist of all text from a //
                     // sequence to the end of the line.
                     // The .text directive tells MASM that the
                     // statements following this directive go in

// the section of memory reserved for machine
// instructions (code).

         .text

// Here is the main function.
// (This example assumes that the
// assembly language program is a
// stand-alone program with its own
// main function.)
//
// Under macOS, the main program
// must have the name _main
// beginning with an underscore.
// Linux systems generally don't
// require the underscore.
//
// The .global _main statement
// makes the _main procedure's name
// visible outside this source file
// (needed by the linker to produce
// an executable).

         .global _main

// The .align 2 statement tells the
// assembler to align the following code
// on a 4-byte boundary (required by the
// ARM CPU). The 2 operand specifies
// 2 raised to this power (2), which
// is 4.

         .align 2

// Here's the actual main program. It
// consists of a single ret (return)
// instruction that simply returns
// control to the operating system.

_main:
         ret

     Although most listings take the form ListingC-N.S, some (especially
those from external sources) simply consist of a descriptive filename, such
as the aoaa​.inc header file used by most of the sample programs in this book.
     All listings are available in electronic form at https://artofarm​.randallhyde​
.com, either individually or as a ZIP file containing all the listings found
in this book. That page also contains support information for this book,
including errata and PowerPoint slides for instructors.
     Most of the programs in this book run from a command line. These
examples typically use the bash shell interpreter. Therefore, every build
command and sample output will typically have the text prefix $ or % before
any command you would type from the keyboard on the command line.

                       Under macOS, the default shell (command line) program is zsh. It prints a
                       percent sign (%) rather than $ as the prompt character. If you are completely
                       unfamiliar with the Linux or macOS command line, please see Appendix D
                       for a quick introduction to the command line interpreter.
                            Unless otherwise noted, all source code appearing in this book is cov-
                       ered under the Creative Commons 4.0 license. You may freely use that code
                       in your own projects as per the Creative Commons license. See https://creative­​
                       commons​.org​/licenses​/by​/4​.0​/ for more details.

           0.6 Typography and Pedantry
                       Computer books have a habit of abusing the English language. This book
                       is no exception. Whenever source code snippets appear in the middle of an
                       English sentence, a conflict often arises between the grammar rules of the
                       programming language and English. This section describes my choices for
                       differentiating syntactical rules in English versus programming languages,
                       in addition to a few other conventions.
                            First, this book uses a monospaced font to denote any text that appears
                       as part of a program source file. This includes variable and procedure func-
                       tions, program output, and user input to a program. Therefore, when you
                       see something like get, you know that the book is describing an identifier in
                       a program, not commanding you to get something.
                            A few logic operations have names that also have common English
                       meanings: AND, OR, and NOT. When using these terms as logic functions,
                       this book uses all caps to help differentiate otherwise-confusing English
                       statements. When using these terms as English, this book uses the standard
                       typeset font. The fourth logic operator, exclusive or (XOR), doesn’t nor-
                       mally appear in English statements, but this book still capitalizes it.
                            In general, I always try to define any acronym or abbreviation the first
                       time I use it. If I haven’t used the term in a while, I will often redefine it on
                       that usage. The glossary in Appendix B also includes most of the acronyms
                       appearing in this book.

           0.7         Organization
                       This book is organized into 4 parts comprising 16 chapters and 6 appendixes.
                           Part I, Machine Organization, covers data types and machine architec-
                       ture for the ARM processor:
                           Chapter 1: Hello, World of Assembly Language ​  ​Teaches you a small
                           handful of instructions so you can experiment with the software devel-
                           opment tools and write simple little programs.
                           Chapter 2: Data Representation and Operations ​  ​Discusses the inter-
                           nal representation of simple data types such as integers, characters,
                           and Boolean values. It also discusses the various arithmetic and logical
                           operations possible on these data types. This chapter also introduces
                           some basic ARM assembly language operand formats.

    Chapter 3: Memory Access and Organization ​  ​Discusses how the ARM
    organizes main memory. It explains the layout of memory and how
    to declare and access memory variables. It also introduces the ARM’s
    methods for accessing memory and the stack (a place to store tempo-
    rary values).
    Chapter 4: Constants, Variables, and Data Types ​  ​Describes how to
    declare named constants in assembly language, how to declare and
    use pointers, and the use of composite data structures such as strings,
    arrays, structs (records), and unions.
    Part II, Basic Assembly Language, provides the basic tools and instruc-
tions you need to write assembly language programs.
    Chapter 5: Procedures ​  ​Covers the instructions and syntax you need
    to write your own assembly language functions (procedures). This
    chapter describes how to pass arguments (parameters) to functions and
    return function results. It also describes how to declare (and use) local
    or automatic variables that you allocate on the stack.
    Chapter 6: Arithmetic ​  ​Explains the basic integer arithmetic and logi-
    cal operations in ARM assembly language. It also describes how to con-
    vert arithmetic expressions from an HLL into ARM assembly language.
    Finally, this chapter covers floating-point arithmetic using the hardware-
    based floating-point instructions.
    Chapter 7: Low-Level Control Structures ​  ​Describes how to imple-
    ment HLL-like control structures such as if, elseif, else, while, do...
    while (repeat...until), for, and switch in ARM assembly language. This
    chapter also touches on optimizing loops and other code in assem-
    bly language.
    Part III, Advanced Assembly Language, covers more advanced assembly
language operations.
    Chapter 8: Advanced Arithmetic ​  ​Explores extended-precision arithme-
    tic, mixed-mode arithmetic, and other advanced arithmetic operations.
    Chapter 9: Numeric Conversion ​  ​Provides a very useful set of library
    functions you can use to convert numeric values to string format and
    convert string values to numeric format.
    Chapter 10: Table Lookups ​  ​Describes how to use memory-based
    lookup tables (arrays) to accelerate certain computations.
    Chapter 11: Neon and SIMD Programming ​  Discusses the ARM
    Advanced SIMD instruction set that allows you to speed up certain
    applications by operating on multiple pieces of data at once.
    Chapter 12: Bit Manipulation ​  ​Describes various operations and func-
    tions that allow you to manipulate data at the bit level in ARM assem-
    bly language.
    Chapter 13: Macros and the Gas Compile-Time Language ​  ​Covers the
    Gas macro facilities. Macros are powerful constructs enabling you to

                           design your own assembly language statements that expand to a large
                           number of individual ARM assembly language instructions.
                           Chapter 14: String Operations ​  ​Explains the use and creation of vari-
                           ous character string library functions in ARM assembly language.
                           Chapter 15: Managing Complex Projects ​  ​Describes how to create
                           libraries of assembly language code, and build those libraries by using
                           makefiles (along with a discussion of the make language).
                           Chapter 16: Stand-Alone Assembly Language Programs ​  ​Shows how
                           to write assembly language applications that don’t use the C/C++ stan-
                           dard library for I/O and other operations. This chapter includes system
                           call examples for both Linux (Pi OS) and macOS.
                           Part IV, Reference Materials, provides reference information, includ-
                       ing a table listing the full ASCII character set, a glossary, instructions for
                       installing and using Gas on your system, an introduction to the bash shell
                       interpreter, useful C/C++ functions you can call from your assembly lan-
                       guage programs, and answers to the questions at the end of each chapter.

