                               1
               H E L L O, WO R L D O F
             A S S E M B LY L A N G U A G E

            This “quick-start” chapter gets you writ-
            ing basic assembly language programs as
           rapidly as possible, giving you the skills you
        need to learn new assembly language features
in the following chapters. You’ll learn the foundations
of 64-bit ARM architecture and the basic syntax of
the GNU assembler (Gas) program, a compiler for
assem­bly language.
    You’ll also learn to set aside memory for variables, control the CPU by
using machine instructions, and link a Gas program with C/C++ code so
that you can call routines in the C standard library (C stdlib). Gas running
under Linux and macOS is by far the most common assembler for writing
real-world ARM assembly language programs. Vendors (especially Apple)
have produced variants of Gas with slightly different syntax; for instance,
under macOS, Gas is known as the Clang or Mach-O assembler. To make the
source code in this book portable between macOS and Linux, this chapter
                  also introduces a header file, aoaa​.inc, that eliminates the differences
                  between Gas and the Clang assembler.

            1.1   What You’ll Need
                  To learn assembly language programming with Gas, you’ll need a version of
                  the assembler for your platform, plus a text editor for creating and modify-
                  ing Gas source files, a linker, various library files, and a C++ compiler. You’ll
                  learn to set up the Gas assembler and text editor in this section, and the
                  other tools later in this chapter.

                  1.1.1 Setting Up Gas
                  The GNU Compiler Collection (GCC) emits Gas source code as its out-
                  put (which Gas then converts to object code). Therefore, if you have the
                  compiler suite running on your system, you also have Gas. Apple macOS
                  uses a compiler based on the LLVM compiler suite rather than GCC, so
                  if you have a macOS, you’ll need to install its Xcode integrated develop-
                  ment environment (IDE) to gain access to the assembler (see Appendix C).
                  Otherwise, if you don’t have the GCC compiler, install it with the instruc-
                  tions in your operating system (OS) documentation.

        NOTE      The GNU assembler and the Clang assembler’s executable name is actually as (assem-
                  bler). The examples in this book rarely invoke the assembler directly, so you won’t use
                  the as program often. Therefore, this book refers to the assembler by using the name
                  Gas rather than as (or Clang assembler).

                  1.1.2 Setting Up a Text Editor
                  To write ARM assembly language programs, you will need some sort of pro-
                  grammer’s text editor to create assembly language source files. The choice
                  of editor is dictated by personal tastes and editor availability for your OS or
                  development suite.
                       The standard suffix for assembly language source files is .s, since GCC
                  emits this suffix when it converts a C/C++ file into assembly language dur-
                  ing compilation. For handwritten assembly language source files, the .S
                  suffix is a better choice, since it tells the assembler to route the source file
                  through the C preprocessor (CPP) before assembly. Since this allows the
                  use of CPP macros (#define statements), conditional compilation, and other
                  facilities, all example files in this book use .S.
                       GCC always produces assembly language output files, which are then
                  processed by Gas. GCC automatically invokes the assembler and then
                  deletes the assembly source file after the assembly is complete.

                  1.1.3 Understanding C/C++ Examples
                  Today’s software engineers drop into assembly language only when their
                  C/C++, C#, Java, Swift, or Python code is running too slowly and they need

4   Chapter 1
    to improve the performance of certain modules or functions. The examples
    in this book use C/C++ because you’ll typically interface assembly language
    with C/C++ or other high-level language (HLL) code in the real world.
        The C/C++ standard library is another good reason to use this language.
    To make the C stdlib immediately accessible to Gas programs, I present
    examples with a short C++ main function that calls a single external function
    written in assembly language using Gas. Compiling the C++ main program
    along with the Gas source file produces a single executable file that you can
    run and test.
        This book spoon-feeds you the C++ you’ll need to run the example
    HLL programs, so you’ll be able to follow even if you’re not fluent in the
    language. However, you’ll have an easier time if you have a little prior
    familiarity with C/C++. At minimum, this book assumes that you have
    some experience in a language such as Pascal (or Delphi), Java, Swift,
    Rust, BASIC, Python, or any other imperative or object-oriented program-
    ming language.

1.2 The Anatomy of an Assembly Language Program
    A typical (stand-alone) Gas program takes the form shown in Listing 1-1.

    // Listing1-1.S
    //
    // Comments consist of all text from a //
    // sequence to the end of the line.
    // The .text directive tells Gas that the
    // statements following this directive go in the
    // section of memory reserved for machine
    // instructions (code).

          1 .text

    // Here is the main function. (This example assumes
    // that the assembly language program is a
    // stand-alone program with its own main function.)
    //
    // Under macOS, the main program must have the name
    // _main beginning with an underscore. Linux
    // systems generally don't require the underscore.
    //
    // The .global _main statement makes the _main
    // procedure's name visible outside this source file
    // (needed by the linker to produce an executable).

            .global _main, main

    // The .align 2 statement tells the assembler to
    // align the following code on a 4-byte boundary
    // (required by the ARM CPU). The 2 operand
    // specifies 2 raised to this power (2), which is 4.

                                                       Hello, World of Assembly Language   5
                      2 .align 2

                // Here's the actual main program. It consists of a
                // single ret (return) instruction that simply
                // returns control to the operating system.

                _main:
                main:
                         ret

                     Assembly language programs are broken into sections. Some sections
                contain data, some contain constants, some contain machine instruction
                (executable statements), and so on. Listing 1-1 contains a single code sec-
                tion, called text in macOS and Linux. The .text statement 1 tells the assem-
                bler that the following statements are associated with the code section.
                     In assembly language source files, symbols are usually local or private
                to a source file. When creating an executable source file, you must pass one
                or more symbols to the system linker—at least the name of the main pro-
                gram. You can accomplish this by using the .global statement, specifying
                the global name as an operand: _main in the macOS case, main in the Linux
                case. Leaving out this statement gives you an error when you try to compile
                the source file.
                     The ARM instruction set requires all machine instructions to begin on
                a 32-bit (4-byte) boundary in memory. Therefore, before the first machine
                instruction in a .text section, tell the assembler to align the addresses on
                a 4-byte boundary. The .align statement 2 raises 2 to the power specified
                by its operand and aligns the next instruction on that boundary. Since 22 is
                equal to 4, this statement aligns the next instruction on a 4-byte boundary.
                     A procedure, or function, in ARM assembly simply consists of the
                name of that function (_main or main in this case) followed by a colon. The
                machine instructions follow. The main program in this example consists
                of a single machine instruction: ret (return). This instruction immediately
                returns control to whatever called the main program—that is, the OS.
                     Identifiers in Gas are similar to identifiers in most HLLs. Gas identifiers
                may begin with a dollar sign ($), an underscore (_), or an alphabetic char-
                acter and may be followed by zero or more alphanumeric, dollar sign, or
                underscore characters. Symbols are case sensitive.

                                    LINU X V S. MACOS: GLOBAL NAMES

                    The C/C++ compiler treats global (extern) names differently in macOS and
                    Linux programs. The Clang compiler (macOS) automatically prepends an under-
                    score character ( _) to the beginning of each external/global symbol, as in _main
                    in Listing 1-1; the GCC compiler does not.

6   Chapter 1
             I’ve written the source code appearing in this book to make it easy to port
        between the two OSes, by using equates for all the global symbols so that they
        have to be changed in only one spot. We’ll discuss using equates to resolve
        external symbols in section 4.1, “Gas Constant Declarations,” on page 170;
        also see section 1.12, “For More Information,” on page 43 for details specific to
        macOS and Linux assembly language programming.

         While the program in Listing 1-1 doesn’t really do anything, you can use
    it to learn how to use the assembler, linker, and other tools necessary for
    writing ARM assembly language programs, as we’ll do in the next section.

1.3 Running Your First Assembly Language Program
    Once you have an assembly source file, you can compile and run that pro-
    gram. In theory, you could run the assembler (as) and then the linker (ld,
    supplying appropriate library files needed by the OS). Here’s how that would
    look for macOS (where the $ appearing at the beginning of each line is the
    OS’s shell prompt):

    $ as -arch arm64 Listing1-1.S -o Listing1-1.o
    $ ld -o Listing1-1 Listing1-1.o -lSystem \
         -syslibroot `xcrun -sdk macosx --show-sdk-path` \
         -e _main -arch arm64
    $ ./Listing1-1

         However, the command lines differ depending on your OS, and pro-
    ducing an executable in this way takes a lot of typing. An easier way to com-
    pile the program and produce an executable is to use the GCC compiler
    (g++) by running this command:

    $ g++ -o Listing1-1 Listing1-1.S

         This command line even works on macOS, which uses the Clang
    compiler rather than GCC; macOS has an alias for Clang named g++. On
    macOS, you could also use the clang -o Listing1-1 Listing1-1.S command
    line. This book, however, will stick to the g++ command line, as that works
    on macOS and Linux.
         The g++ command is smart enough to note that this is an assembly lan-
    guage source file and run Gas on it to produce an object file. GCC will then
    run the linker (ld) and supply all the default libraries the OS requires.
         You can run the resulting executable file from the command line
    as follows:

    $ ./Listing1-1

                                                              Hello, World of Assembly Language   7
                       This program immediately returns without any output, since that’s all
                 Listing 1-1 does; it’s simply intended to demonstrate how to compile and
                 run ARM assembly language programs.
                       In addition to reducing the amount of typing required, using g++ to
                 assemble your assembly language source files provides another advantage:
                 it’s the easiest way to run the CPP, which many of the example files in this
                 book require. You can invoke the CPP (by itself) on an assembly source file
                 by using a command like the following, to see the modifications the CPP
                 makes to your assembly source files:

                 $ g++ -E Listing1-1.S

                    You can even pipe the output from the CPP to Gas, using the following
                 command:

                 $ g++ -E Listing1-1.S | as -o Listing1-1.o

                     However, at that point, you may as well have typed

                 $ g++ -o Listing1-1.o Listing1-1.S

                 as it’s shorter and easier to input.

           1.4   Running Your First Gas/C++ Hybrid Program
                 This book commonly combines an assembly language module containing
                 one or more functions written in assembly language with a C/C++ main
                 program that calls those functions. Because the compilation and execution
                 process is slightly different from a stand-alone Gas program, this section
                 demonstrates how to create, compile, and run a hybrid assembly/C++ pro-
                 gram. Listing 1-2 provides the main C++ program that calls the assembly
                 language module.

                 // Listing1-2.S
                 //
                 // A simple C++ program that calls
                 // an assembly language function
                 //
                 // Need to include stdio.h so this
                 // program can call printf().

                 #include <stdio.h>

                 // extern "C" namespace prevents
                 // "name mangling" by the C++
                 // compiler.

                 extern "C"
                 {
                     // Here's the external function,

8   Chapter 1
     // written in assembly language,
     // that this program will call:

      void asmMain( void );
};

int main(void)
{
    printf( "Calling asmMain:\n" );
    asmMain();
    printf( "Returned from asmMain\n" );
}

     Listing 1-3, a slight modification of the stand-alone Gas program, con-
tains the asmMain() function that the C++ program calls. The main differ-
ence between Listing 1-3 and Listing 1-1 is that the function’s name changes
from _main to _asmMain. The C++ compiler and linker would get confused
if we continued to use the name _main, as that’s also the name of the C++
main function.

// Listing1-3.S
//
// A simple Gas module that contains
// an empty function to be called by
// the C++ code in Listing 1-2

         .text

// Here is the asmMain function:

         .global _asmMain, asmMain
         .align 2     // Guarantee 4-byte alignment.
_asmMain:
asmMain:

// Empty function just returns to C++ code.

         ret          // Returns to caller

   Finally, to compile and run these source files, run the following
commands:

$ g++ -o Listing1-2 Listing1-2.cpp Listing1-3.S
$ ./Listing1-2
Calling asmMain:
Returned from asmMain
$

    Granted, this assembly language example doesn’t accomplish much
other than demonstrate how to compile and run some assembly code. To
write real assembly code, you’re going to need a lot of support code. The

                                                       Hello, World of Assembly Language   9
                 next section describes the aoaa​.inc header file that provides some of this
                 support.

           1.5   The aoaa​.inc Include File
                 The example code in this book was written to be as portable between
                 macOS and Linux assemblers as possible, a difficult task requiring consid-
                 erable advanced behind-the-scenes trickery. Many of those tricks are a bit
                 too advanced to easily explain to beginning ARM programmers, so I’ve
                 incorporated all this magic code in a special header file, aoaa​.inc, that I use
                 in most of the example programs from this point forward.
                      This human-readable include file is little more than a typical advanced
                 C/C++ header file; it just contains a bunch of macros (for example, C/C++
                 #define statements) that help smooth out some of the differences between
                 the macOS and Linux versions of the assembler. By the time you get to the
                 end of this book (especially by the time you read Chapter 13), most of the
                 material in the header file will make perfect sense. For now, I won’t distract
                 you with advanced macros and conditional assembly information.
                      You can find aoaa.inc along with all the other example code at https://
                 artofarm.randallhyde.com. If you’re curious about this file’s content and don’t
                 want to wait for Chapter 13, load it into a text editor and take a look.
                      To include this file in an assembly, use the following CPP statement in
                 your assembly language source files:

                 #include "aoaa​.inc"

                      Just as in C/C++, this statement will automatically insert the content
                 of this file into the current source file during assembly (at the point of the
                 #include statement).
                      Gas has its own include statement, used as follows:

                 .include "include_file_name"

                      However, don’t use this statement to include aoaa​.inc in your source
                 files. The Gas ​.include directive executes after the CPP runs, but aoaa​.inc
                 contains CPP macros, conditional compilation statements, and other code
                 that must be processed by the CPP. If you use the ​.include directive rather
                 than #include, the CPP will never see the contents of the aoaa​.inc file, and
                 Gas will generate errors when it processes the file.
                      The aoaa​.inc file must be present in the same directory as your assembly
                 source file during the assembly process (or you must supply an appropriate
                 path to the file in the #include "aoaa​.inc" statement). If the header file isn’t
                 in the current directory, Gas will complain that it can’t find the file and ter-
                 minate the assembly. Also remember to use the .S suffix with your assembly
                 source files when using #include "aoaa​.inc", or GCC won’t run the CPP on
                 those files.

10   Chapter 1
1.6 The ARM64 CPU Architecture
    Thus far, you’ve seen a pair of Gas programs that compile and run. However,
    the statements appearing in those programs do nothing more at this point
    than return control to the OS. Before you learn some real assembly lan-
    guage, you’ll need to understand the basic structure of the ARM CPU fam-
    ily so you can follow the machine instructions.
         The ARM CPU family is generally classified as a Von Neumann archi-
    tecture machine. Von Neumann computer systems contain three main
    building blocks: the central processing unit (CPU), memory, and input/output
    (I/0) devices. These three components are interconnected via the system bus
    (consisting of the address, data, and control buses). Figure 1-1 shows this
    relationship.

                                 Memory

       CPU

                 I/O devices

    Figure 1-1: A Von Neumann computer
    system block diagram

        The CPU communicates with memory and I/O devices by placing
    a numeric value on the address bus to select one of the memory or I/O
    device port locations, each of which has a unique binary numeric address.
    Then the CPU, memory, and I/O devices pass data among themselves by
    placing the data on the data bus. The control bus contains signals that
    determine the direction of the data transfer (to/from memory and to/from
    an I/O device).

    1.6.1 ARM CPU Registers
    There are two categories of ARM CPU registers: general-purpose registers
    and special-purpose kernel-mode registers. The special-purpose registers are
    intended for writing OSes, debuggers, and other system-level tools. Such
    software construction is well beyond the scope of this text.
        The ARM64 supports 32 general-purpose 64-bit registers (named X0
    through X31) and 32 general-purpose 32-bit registers (named W0 through
    W31). This doesn’t imply there are 64 registers total; instead, the 32-bit
    registers overlay the low-order (LO) 32 bits of each of the 64-bit registers.
    (Chapter 2 discusses LO components in more depth.) Modifying one of
    the 32-bit registers also modifies the corresponding 64-bit register, and vice
    versa, as outlined in Figure 1-2.

                                                      Hello, World of Assembly Language   11
                             64 bits

                  X0              W0
                  X1              W1
                  X2              W2
                  X3              W3
                  X4              W4
                  X5              W5
                  X6              W6
                  X7              W7
                  X8              W8
                  X9              W9
                 X10              W10
                 X11              W11
                 X12              W12
                 X13              W13
                 X14              W14
                 X15              W15
                 X16              W16
                 X17              W17
                 X18              W18
                 X19              W19
                 X20              W20
                 X21              W21
                 X22              W22
                 X23              W23
                 X24              W24
                 X25              W25
                 X26              W26
                 X27              W27
                 X28              W28
                 X29              W29
                 X30              W30
                 X31              W31

                                 32 bits

                 Figure 1-2: The 32- and 64-bit
                 registers on the ARM

                      Those new to assembly language are often surprised that all calcula-
                 tions on the ARM64 involve a register. For example, to add two variables
                 together, storing the sum into a third variable, you must load one of the
                 variables into a register, add the second operand to the value in the regis-
                 ter, and then store the register away in the destination variable. Registers
                 are a middleman in nearly every calculation, so they’re important in
                 ARM64 assembly language programs.

12   Chapter 1
                      Although these registers are known as general-purpose registers, a few of
                   them have special purposes:
                   •    X31, usually referred to as SP in code, is called the stack pointer, since it’s
                        used to maintain a hardware stack on the ARM (another non-RISC, or
                        reduced instruction set computer, feature), always as a 64-bit register.
                        Because it’s used as the stack pointer, SP cannot be used for other pur-
                        poses in most code. This register is accessible only by a few instructions.
                   •    The XZR/WZR register (also treated as X31/W31 by the hardware) is
                        called the zero register. It always returns 0 when read and is a convenient
                        way to obtain the constant 0 in a program.
                   •    Register X30 is the link register, referred to by the name LR rather than
                        X30. The ARM CPU uses this register to hold return addresses when
                        the code makes a function call. (Chapter 5 discusses the LR in greater
                        detail.) This register is also always accessed in 64-bit mode. While you
                        could theoretically use X30/W30 as a general-purpose register, you
                        should avoid doing so, because function calls will wipe out the value in
                        this register.
                   •    Although this special purpose isn’t enforced by the hardware, most soft-
                        ware uses X29 as a 64-bit frame pointer (FP). Software generally uses this
                        register to provide access to function parameters and local variables.
                        Technically, you could use any of the general-purpose registers for this
                        purpose, but using X29/FP is conventional.
                   •    Apple reserves X18 for its own internal purposes. Programs written
                        for macOS, iOS, iPadOS, and so on must not use this register. Since 29
                        other registers are available, the examples in this book don’t use X18,
                        even for Linux examples.
                        In addition to the 32 general-purpose registers, the ARM64 CPUs have
                   two additional special-purpose registers accessible to user programs: the
                   32-bit processor state (PSTATE) register and the 64-bit program counter (PC) reg-
                   ister. The PC register always contains the address of the machine instruc-
                   tion being executed. Because instructions are always 32 bits long, the CPU
                   will increment this register by 4 whenever it finishes the execution of one
                   instruction and moves on to the next (more on this activity in Chapter 2).

         NOTE      32-bit ARM CPUs refer to the PSTATE register as the CPSR or PSR. You may see
                   references to those names in various documents.

                       The PSTATE register is 32 bits wide (of which only 16 bits are used at
                   the time of this writing) and is really just a collection of individual Boolean
                   flags. Its layout appears in Figure 1-3.

31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22 21 20 19 18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
 N   Z   C   V              UAO PAN   SS   IL                           D   A   I   F        0    cEL        SPS

Figure 1-3: The PSTATE register layout

                                                                         Hello, World of Assembly Language   13
                     Most user applications use only the N, Z, C, and V bits in the PSTATE
                 register. These bits, also known as the condition codes, have the following
                 meanings:
                     N ​  ​?Negative (sign) flag, set when an instruction produces a negative
                           result
                     Z ​  ​Zero flag, set when an instruction produces a zero result
                     C ​  ​Carry flag, set when an unsigned arithmetic overflow occurs
                     V ​  ​O verflow flag, set when a signed arithmetic overflow occurs
                      Most of the remaining flags are inaccessible or of little use in user pro-
                 grams. UAO and PAN control CPU access features, allowing user programs
                 to access kernel memory. SS is the single-step control bit for debugging. IL is
                 the illegal instruction flag, set when the CPU executes an illegal instruction.
                 D, A, I, and F are interrupt flags. cEL selects an exception level, usually 00
                 for user mode. SPS selects a stack pointer to use (kernel versus user mode).
                      In addition to the 32 general-purpose registers, the ARM64 provides
                 32 floating-point and vector registers to handle nonintegral arithmetic.
                 Chapters 6 and 11 discuss these registers in greater detail when covering
                 floating-point arithmetic and single-instruction/multiple data (SIMD)
                 operations.

                 1.6.2 The Memory Subsystem
                 A typical ARM64 processor running a modern 64-bit OS can access a
                 maximum of 248 memory locations, or just over 256TB—probably far more
                 than any of your programs will ever need. Since the ARM64 supports byte-
                 addressable memory, the basic memory unit is a byte, which is sufficient to
                 hold a single character or a very small integer value (discussed further in
                 Chapter 2).
                     Because 248 is a frightfully large number, the following discussion uses
                 the 4GB address space of 32-bit ARM processors. Scaled up, the same dis-
                 cussion applies to 64-bit ARM processors.

       NOTE      While the ARM64 supports 64 address bits in software, the hardware supports only
                 48 to 52 address bits for virtual memory operations. Most OSes limit this to 48 bits.

                     Think of memory as a linear array of bytes. The address of the first
                 byte is 0, and the address of the last byte is 232 – 1. For an ARM processor,
                 the following pseudo-Pascal array declaration is a good approximation of
                 memory:

                 Memory: array [0..4294967295] of byte;

14   Chapter 1
    C/C++ and Java users might prefer the following syntax:

byte Memory[4294967296];

    To execute the equivalent of the Pascal statement Memory [125] := 0;,
the CPU places the value 0 on the data bus, places the address 125 on the
address bus, and asserts the write line (which generally involves setting that
line to 0), as shown in Figure 1-4.

             Address = 125               Memory

             Data = 0                    Location
   CPU                                     125

             Write = 0

Figure 1-4: The memory write operation

    To execute the equivalent of CPU := Memory [125];, the CPU places the
address 125 on the address bus, asserts the read line (because the CPU is
reading data from memory), and reads the resulting data from the data bus
(see Figure 1-5).

             Address = 125               Memory

             Data = Memory[125]          Location
   CPU                                     125

             Read = 0

Figure 1-5: The memory read operation

     This discussion applies only when accessing a single byte in memory.
To store values larger than a single byte, like half words (2 bytes) and words
(4 bytes), the ARM uses a sequence of consecutive memory locations, as
shown in Figure 1-6. The memory address is the address of each object’s
first byte (that is, the lowest address).

                                                    Hello, World of Assembly Language   15
                                                   195

                 Double word
                                                   192
                 at address 192
                                                   191
                                                         Address
                                                   190

                 Word at
                                                   188
                 address 188
                                                   187
                 Byte at                           186
                 address 186

                 Figure 1-6: Byte, half-word, and word storage
                 in memory

                      The ARM64 generally supports unaligned memory access, meaning the
                 CPU can read or write an object of any size—byte, half word, word, or
                 double word (dword)—at any address in memory. Certain instructions,
                 however, require that memory access be aligned on the natural size of the
                 transfer. Generally, this means that 16-, 32-, and 64-bit memory accesses
                 must take place on addresses that are a multiple of 2, 4, or 8; otherwise, the
                 CPU may raise an exception. Regardless of exceptions, the CPU can usually
                 access memory locations aligned on a natural boundary faster.
                      Modern ARM processors don’t connect directly to memory. Instead, a
                 special memory buffer on the CPU known as the cache (pronounced “cash”)
                 acts as a high-speed intermediary between the CPU and main memory.
                 You’ll learn to set the alignment of memory objects and the effects of the
                 cache on data alignment in Chapter 3.

           1.7 Declaring Memory Variables in Gas
                 Referencing memory by using numeric addresses in assembly language is
                 possible, but painful and error-prone. Rather than having your program
                 state, “Give me the 32-bit value held in memory location 192 and the 16-bit
                 value held in memory location 188,” it’s much nicer to state, “Give me the
                 contents of elementCount and portNumber.” Using variable names, rather than
                 memory addresses, makes your program much easier to write, read,
                 and maintain.
                      To create (writable) data variables, you have to put them in a data sec-
                 tion of the Gas source file, defined using the .data directive. The .data direc-
                 tive tells Gas that all following statements (up to the next .text or other
                 section-defining directive) will define data declarations to be grouped into
                 a read/write section of memory.
16   Chapter 1
    Within a .data section, Gas allows you to declare variable objects by
using a set of data declaration directives. The basic form of a data declara-
tion directive is

label:   directive value(s)

where label is a legal Gas identifier and directive is one of the directives in
the following list:
    .byte ​  ​Byte (8-bit) values. One or more comma-separated 8-bit expres-
    sions appear in the operand field (values).
    .hword, .short, .2byte ​  ​Half-word (16-bit) values. One or more comma-
    separated 16-bit expressions appear in the operand field.
    .word, .4byte ​  ​Word (32-bit) values. One or more comma-separated
    32-bit expressions appear in the operand field.
    .quad, .8byte ​  ​D word (64-bit) values. One or more comma-separated
    64-bit expressions appear in the operand field. .quad is an unfortunate
    misnomer for ARM64, since a 64-bit value is actually a double word, not
    a quad word (on the ARM, a quad word is 128 bits). The term predates
    the ARM assembler, coming from “quad word” in the x86 and 68000
    assembly language days. To avoid confusion, this book uses the .dword
    directive in place of .quad.
    .dword ​  ​The .dword macro appearing in the aoaa​.inc include file is a syn-
    onym for the .quad directive that emits 8 bytes (64 bits) for each oper-
    and. Using .dword is preferable to .quad. You must include the aoaa​.inc
    file in order to use this directive.
    .octa ​  ​Octaword (oword, 128-bit/16-byte) values. One or more comma-
    separated 128-bit expressions appear in the operand field. .octa is an
    unfortunate misnomer for ARM64, since a 128-bit value is actually a quad
    word, not an “octa” word (on the ARM, an octaword is 256 bits). To avoid
    confusion, this book avoids the .octa directive and uses .qword instead.
    .qword ​  ​This is a macro appearing the aoaa​.inc include file. It is a syn-
    onym for the .octa directive and emits 16 bytes for each operand. You
    must include the aoaa​.inc file in order to use this directive.
    .ascii ​  ​String values. A single string constant (surrounded by quota-
    tion marks) appears in the operand field. Note that Gas does not termi-
    nate this string with a 0 byte.
    .asciz ​  ​Zero-terminated string values. A single string constant (sur-
    rounded by quotation marks) appears in the operand field. Gas will
    emit a 0 after the last character in the string operand.
    .float ​  ​Single-precision floating-point values. One or more comma-
    separated 32-bit single-precision floating-point expressions appear in
    the operand field.
    .double ​  ​Double-precision floating-point values. One or more comma-
    separated 64-bit double-precision floating-point expressions appear in
    the operand field.

                                                    Hello, World of Assembly Language   17
                       Gas provides additional synonyms for some of the directives in this
                 list; see the link to the Gas documentation in section 1.12, “For More
                 Information,” on page 43.
                       Here are some examples of valid Gas data declarations:

                 byteVar:      .byte   0
                 halfVar:      .hword 1,2 // Actually reserves 2 half-words
                 wordVar:      .word   -1
                 dwordVar:     .dword 123456789012345
                 str1:         .ascii "Hello, world!\n" // Uses C-style escape for newline
                 str2:         .asciz "How are you?\n"  // Sequences are legal.
                 pi:           .float 3.14159
                 doubleVar:    .double 1.23456e-2

                     Whenever you declare a variable in this manner, Gas will associate the
                 current location in the output object-code file with the label at the begin-
                 ning of the line. It will then emit the appropriate-sized data value into
                 memory at that location, adjusting the assembler’s location counter (which
                 tracks the current location) by the size of each operand it emits.
                     The label field in these data declaration directives is optional. If you do
                 not include the label, Gas simply emits the data in the operand field, start-
                 ing at the current location counter and incrementing the location counter
                 afterward. This is useful, for example, when you want to insert a control
                 character or special Unicode character into a string:

                 longStr:     .ascii "A bell character follows this string"
                              .byte 7, 0    // Bell (7) and zero termination

                      Gas allows C-style escape sequences within quoted strings. Although
                 Gas doesn’t support the full set of escape characters, it does support the
                 following:
                     \b ​    ​ ackspace character (0x08)
                             B
                     \n ​  ​Newline character/line feed (0x0A)
                     \r ​  ​C arriage return (0x0D)
                     \t ​   ​Tab (0x09)
                     \f ​    ​Form feed character (0x0C)
                     \\ ​   ​Backslash character
                     \nnn ​  ​?W here nnn is a three-digit octal value; emit the value to the code
                               stream
                     \xhh ​  ​?W here hh is a two-digit hexadecimal value; emit the value to the
                               code stream
                     Gas does not support \a, \e, \f, \v, \', \", \?, \uhhhh, or \Uhhhh escape
                 sequences.

18   Chapter 1
1.7.1 Associating Memory Addresses with Variables
With an assembler like Gas, you don’t have to worry about numeric memory
addresses. Once you declare a variable in Gas, the assembler associates that
variable with a unique set of memory addresses. For example, say you have
the following declaration section:

        .data
i8:     .byte    0
i16:    .hword   0
i32:    .word    0
i64:    .dword   0

       Gas will find an unused 8-bit byte in memory and associate it with the
i8 variable; it will likewise associate a pair of consecutive unused bytes with
i16, 4 consecutive unused bytes with i32, and 8 consecutive unused bytes
with i64. You’ll always refer to these variables by their names and generally
don’t have to concern yourself with their numeric addresses. Still, be aware
that Gas is doing this for you.
    When Gas is processing declarations in a .data section, it assigns con-
secutive memory locations to each variable. Assuming i8 (in the previous
declarations) as a memory address of 101, Gas will assign the addresses
appearing in Table 1-1 to i8, i16, i32, and i64.

Table 1-1: Variable Address Assignments
Variable         Memory address
i8               101
i16              102 (address of i8 plus 1)
i32              104 (address of i16 plus 2)
i64              108 (address of i32 plus 4)

     Technically, Gas assigns offsets into the .data section to variables.
Linux/macOS converts these offsets to physical memory addresses when it
loads the program into memory at runtime.
     Whenever you have multiple operands in a data declaration statement,
Gas will emit the values to sequential memory locations in the order in
which they appear in the operand field. The label associated with the data
declaration (if one is present) is associated with the address of the first
(leftmost) operand’s value. See Chapter 4 for more details.

1.7.2 Aligning Variables
As noted already, your programs may run faster if your variables are aligned
on a natural boundary (alignment to the size of the object). Alignment is accom-
plished with the .align directive, which you saw in Listing 1-1.
     Byte variables don’t require any alignment. Use the .align 1 directive
to put half words at an even address (2-byte boundary); remember, Gas will

                                                    Hello, World of Assembly Language   19
                 align the next statement on a boundary that is equal to 2n , where n is the
                 .align statement’s operand. For words, use the .align 2 directive. For double
                 words (.dword), use the .align 3 directive.
                     For example, let’s return to the declaration given earlier:

                      .data
                 i8: .byte     0
                 i16: .hword   0
                 i32: .word    0
                 i64: .dword   0

                      Sticking .align directives in front of every declaration (except i8) will
                 start to clutter up your code and make it harder to read:

                      .data
                 i8:  .byte    0   // No alignment necessary for bytes
                      .align   1
                 i16: .hword   0
                      .align   2
                 i32: .word    0
                      .align   3
                 i64: .dword   0

                      If your variables don’t have to be declared in a particular order, you
                 can clean this up by declaring the largest variables first and the remaining
                 variables sorted by decreasing size. If you do this, you have to align only the
                 first variable in your declaration list:

                               .data
                      .align    3
                 i64: .dword    0
                 i32: .word     0
                 i16: .hword    0
                 i8: .byte      0 // No alignment necessary for bytes

                      Because the i64 declaration appears immediately after the .align 3
                 statement in this code, the i64 address will be aligned on an 8-byte bound-
                 ary. As i32 immediately follows i64 in memory, it will also be aligned on
                 an 8-byte boundary (which, of course, is also a 4-byte boundary). This
                 is because i64 is aligned on an 8-byte boundary and consumes 8 bytes;
                 therefore, the address following i64 (the address of i32) will also be 8-byte
                 aligned.
                      Meanwhile, because i16 immediately follows i32 in memory, it will be
                 aligned on a 4-byte boundary (which is also an even address). The align-
                 ment of i8 doesn’t matter, but it happens to be at an even address, as it fol-
                 lows i16, which was aligned on a 4-byte boundary and consumes 2 bytes.

20   Chapter 1
NOTE   Gas also provides a .balign directive whose operand must be a power of 2 (1, 2, 4,
       8, 16, . . .) to specify the alignment value directly, rather than as a power of 2. While
       this book uses .align because it’s the original directive, feel free to use .balign if you
       prefer.

            Strings are sequences of bytes, so their alignment usually doesn’t matter.
       However, it is possible to write very high-performance string functions in
       assembly language that process strings eight or more characters at a time.
       If you have access to such library code, it might run faster if your strings are
       aligned on an 8-byte boundary.
            Of course, floats and doubles should be aligned on 4-byte and 8-byte
       boundaries for the highest performance. In fact, as you’ll see in Chapter 11,
       16-byte alignment is also sometimes better.

       1.7.3 Declaring Named Constants in Gas
       Gas allows you to declare manifest constants by using the .equ directive. A
       manifest constant is a symbolic name (identifier) that Gas associates with a
       value. Everywhere the symbol appears in the program, Gas will directly sub-
       stitute its value.
            A manifest constant declaration takes the following form:

       .equ label, expression

          Here, label is a legal Gas identifier, and expression is a constant arith-
       metic expression (typically a single literal constant value). The following
       example defines the symbol dataSize to be equal to 256:

       .equ dataSize, 256

           Constant declarations, or equates in Gas terminology, may appear any-
       where in your Gas source file prior to their first use: in a .data section, in a
       .text section, or even outside any sections.
           Once you define a constant symbol with .equ, it cannot be further modi-
       fied in the source file during assembly. If you need to reassign the value
       associated with a label during assembly (see Chapter 13 for reasons you’d
       want to do this), use the .set directive:

           .set valueCanChange, 6
             .
             . // valueCanChange has the value 6 here.
             .
           .set valueCanChange, 7

       // From this point forward, valueCanChange has the value 7.

            Equates can specify textual arguments as well as numeric constants.
            Because Gas will run your source files through the CPP if the filename
       suffix is .S, you can also use the CPP #define macro definition to create

                                                                 Hello, World of Assembly Language   21
                 named constants. Although the .equ directive is probably the better choice,
                 the C macro form offers a few advantages, like allowing arbitrary textual
                 substitution, not just numeric expression substitution. For more on this,
                 see Chapter 13.

                 1.7.4 Creating Register Aliases in Gas and Substituting Text
                 As you begin to write more complex ARM assembly language programs,
                 you’ll discover that the 32 general-purpose register names (X0 to X30 and
                 SP) obscure the meaning of their values in the program. It’s been decades
                 since BASIC supported only variable names like A0, A1, B2, and Z3. To
                 avoid returning to those days by using meaningless two-character names,
                 Gas provides a way to create more meaningful aliases of register names in
                 your programs: the .req directive.
                     The syntax of the .req directive is

                 symbolicName   .req   register

                 where symbolicName is any valid Gas identifier and register is one of the
                 32- or 64-bit register names. After this statement in the source file, if you
                 use ­symbolicName in place of register, Gas will automatically substitute that
                 register for the name.
                      Sadly, the .req directive works only for creating register aliases; you
                 can’t use it as a general-purpose text-substitution facility. However, if you
                 name your assembly language source files with .S, Gas/GCC will first run
                 your source file through the CPP. This allows you to embed C/C++ #define
                 statements in your assembly source file, and the CPP will happily expand
                 any symbols you define in such statements throughout your source file. The
                 following example demonstrates using #define:

                 #define arrayPtr X0

                 // From this point forward, you can use arrayPtr in place of X0.

                     Typically, you’ll use .req for register aliases and #define for any other
                 textual substitutions in the source file, though my personal preference is to
                 use the #define statement for both purposes in this book. Since #define also
                 accepts parameters, it’s flexible. Gas also supports textual substitution via
                 macros; see Chapter 13 for more on this.

           1.8 Basic ARM Assembly Language Instructions
                 Thus far, the programming examples in this chapter have consisted of func-
                 tions that use only the ret instruction. This section describes a few more
                 instructions to get you started writing more meaningful assembly lan-
                 guage programs.

22   Chapter 1
1.8.1 ldr, str, adr, and adrp
One solidly RISC feature of ARM is its use of load/store architecture. All com-
putational activity takes place in the ARM’s registers; the only instructions
that access main memory are those that load a value from memory or store
a value into memory.
    Although the ARM64 has many general-purpose registers for holding
variable values (and thus can avoid using memory), most applications use
more variable data than can fit in all the registers. This is especially true for
larger objects like arrays, structs, and strings. Furthermore, programming
conventions—known as the application binary interface (ABI), discussed later
in this chapter—often reserve many of ARM’s registers so they cannot be
used to hold application variables for any length of time. So variables must
be placed in main memory and accessed via these ldr (load) and str (store)
instructions.
    This is the generic syntax for the load and store instructions

ldr{size}   reg, mem
str{size}   reg, mem

where size is either absent or one of the character sequences b, h, sb, sh, or sw;
reg is one of the ARM’s 32- or 64-bit registers; and mem is a memory address-
ing mode that specifies where to fetch the data from in memory. The ldr
instruction loads the register specified by reg from the memory location
specified by mem. The str instruction stores the value held in the register
operand into the memory location.
     Chapter 2 discusses the size operand in greater depth, but this chapter
largely ignores the size suffixes on the ldr and str instructions. Without a
size prefix, the reg operand determines the operation’s size. If reg is Xn, the
instruction transfers 64 bits; if it’s Wn, then the instruction transfers 32 bits.
     The mem operand is either the name of a variable in your program,
typically in the .data section (Linux only), or a register name surrounded
by square brackets ([]). In this latter case, the register holds the numeric
memory address of the memory location to access. See Chapter 3 for more
on mem.

                               LINU X V S. MACOS:
                POSITION-INDEPENDENT E X ECU TABLES

    One major OS policy difference between macOS and Linux ARM assembly
    language is that macOS requires the use of position-independent executables
    (PIE), while Linux only encourages them. PIE allows the system to load the vari-
    ous sections of a program into different memory locations at runtime. This is
    important for two reasons: it enables the use of shared libraries and addresses
    security concerns.
                                                                          (continued)

                                                         Hello, World of Assembly Language   23
                       Shared libraries contain code shared among applications. An OS will
                 load only one copy of a library’s code into physical memory and share that
                 single copy among multiple running applications. However, the library code
                 has to sit at an address in a given application’s memory space in order for that
                 application to call functions within the library, yet the address used for a library
                 function in one application may already be in use when a second application
                 attempts to load the library. Therefore, the second application will need to call
                 that function at a different address in its own virtual memory address space.
                       If two separate copies of the function were made in real memory, calling
                 the function at different addresses in memory wouldn’t be an issue; the first
                 application could locate the function at an address completely independent of
                 the second. However, one major reason to use shared libraries is to share the
                 exact same code in real (physical) memory.
                       The OS resolves the virtual memory address conflicts by programming the
                 memory management unit (MMU) to map that physical memory to two separate
                 virtual memory addresses in the two applications. However, for this to work,
                 the library code must not access any absolute (fixed) memory addresses; if it
                 does, the second application maps the function to a different address in the
                 virtual memory address space, and the sharing concept fails. For example,
                 if the library code transfers control from location 0x12_3456 to location
                 0x12_3500 in memory, this transfer will fail if the code is moved to a different
                 location; the application will still want to transfer to location 0x12_3500, even
                 though the code has moved elsewhere.
                       For machine instructions, this is not a problem. The ARM instructions that
                 transfer control typically use program-counter-relative (PC-relative) addressing.
                 Rather than transfer control to a fixed location (like 0x12_3500), they transfer
                 control to a location relative to the current location. That is, they transfer to a
                 location a certain number of bytes before or after the current value in the PC
                 register. If the code moves to a different fixed address in memory, the instruction
                 will still transfer to the correct place, because the destination location moved
                 along with the current instruction.
                       Unfortunately, this scheme doesn’t work for data. If a shared library
                 accesses global data, the OS has to create a separate block of data for each
                 application that uses the shared library; you typically don’t want one applica-
                 tion to affect the data in another application. That means data addresses must
                 be relocatable as well.
                       The ARM CPU can also access data at locations relative to the PC, so in
                 theory, the OS can remap the data to a different location for each application,
                 as it does for the code. However, using PIE is still wise for security reasons. In
                 the past, various hacks have taken advantage of the fact that the data for a
                 shared library sits at a fixed offset from the code. To help prevent such exploits,
                 macOS and Linux support address space layout randomization (ASLR). With this
                 feature, the OS randomly assigns a different address to the code and data sec-
                 tions of a program (or library) code when loading it into memory. This makes it
                 more difficult for a hack to exploit the code.

24   Chapter 1
         ASLR also makes it slightly more difficult (and less efficient) to access that
    data. Worse still, Linux and macOS provide completely different mechanisms
    for accessing position-independent data. This is transparent to HLL program-
    mers, but it has to be handled explicitly when writing assembly language code.
    This creates problems in a book such as this one, where the goal is to provide
    example code that compiles and runs on different OSes. As for other Linux ver-
    sus macOS issues, the aoaa​.inc header file contains macros and other code to
    resolve these issues. I’ll have more to say about PIE in Chapter 3.

     Because macOS requires that your applications be written in a position-
independent fashion (as we just discussed in “Linux vs. macOS: Position-
Independent Executables”), you will not be able to use an ldr instruction of
this form:

ldr x0, i64    // i64 is a 64-bit variable declared
               // in the .data section by using .dword.

     To access the i64 variable, you must first load its address into a 64-bit
register, then access that data by using the register-indirect addressing mode, or
Xn. To do so, place the address of the variable you want to access in the reg-
ister by using the adr and adrp instructions:

adr reg64, mem
adrp reg64, mem

     Here, reg64 is the name of a 64-bit general-purpose register, and mem
is a memory addressing mode, like the name of a global variable. The adr
instruction loads reg with the address of the memory variable, which must
be ±1MB from the adr instruction if the operand is just the name of a vari-
able (like i64 from the previous example). The adrp instruction loads the
64-bit destination register with the page (4,096-byte boundary) containing
the memory object. That value will have the LO 12 bits containing all 0s.
     Because of macOS’s PIE requirements, it doesn’t take kindly to instruc-
tions such as the following:

ldr x0, i64

    On the Mac, you must use the register-indirect addressing mode to
access a global variable. Unfortunately

adr x1, i64

fails for the same reason: you’re not allowed to specify the name of a global
variable.

                                                           Hello, World of Assembly Language   25
                    In this book, to get the address of a global variable into a register under
                 macOS, we’ll use the following statement:

                 lea reg, mem

                      The lea (load effective address) macro, included in aoaa​.inc, will expand
                 into two instructions (different ones depending on your OS). These instruc-
                 tions will load the address of the second operand (mem) into the 64-bit regis-
                 ter specified by the first operand (reg). You can use lea in any projects where
                 you’ve included aoaa​.inc at the beginning of your source file.
                      As noted, the aoaa​.inc macros make the code in this book portable
                 between OSes. However, you can choose to go with the appropriate OS-specific
                 code, which can sometimes be more efficient, once you master basic ARM
                 assembly language programming. See Chapter 7 for more details on lea.
                      To conclude this discussion of taking the address of a variable, let’s
                 recap how to load and store values by using ldr and str:

                         .data
                 i64:    .dword 0 // This also requires the aoaa​.inc file.
                          .
                          .
                          .
                 // Load i64's value into X0:

                         lea x0, i64
                         ldr x0, [x0]
                          .
                          .
                          .
                 // Store X0 into i64:

                         lea x1, i64
                         str x0, [x1]

                     When loading X0 with a variable’s value, you can first load X0 with the
                 address of the variable and then load X0 indirectly from the location held
                 in X0. This winds up using only a single register. However, when storing
                 data to memory, you need a second register to hold the address (X1 in this
                 example).
                     If you are referencing a particular variable several times within a small
                 section of code, it’s more efficient to load its address into a register just once
                 and reuse that register value multiple times, rather than constantly reload-
                 ing the address:

                 lea x1, i64
                 ldr x0, [x1]
                  .
                  .
                  .
                 str x0, [x1]

26   Chapter 1
     Of course, this means you can’t use the register for any other purpose
while it holds i64’s address. Fortunately, for just this reason, the ARM64 has
lots of registers.

1.8.2 mov
Beyond the ldr and str instructions, the mov instruction handles two addi-
tional data movement operations: moving data between a pair of registers
and copying a constant into a register. The generic syntax for mov is as
follows:

mov regdest, regsrc
mov regdest, #constant

    The first mov instruction copies the data in the source register (regsrc)
into the destination register (regdest). This instruction is equivalent to the
C/C++ statement regdest = regsrc;. The source and destination registers can
be any of the general-purpose registers but must be the same size (32 or
64 bits).
    The second mov instruction moves a small integer constant into the des-
tination register. Constants encoded as part of the instruction are known as
immediate constants and are generally preceded by a # character (though Gas
often allows you to drop the # when specifying literal numeric constants).
Chapter 2 discusses limitations on constants, but for now, assume any con-
stant less than ±2,047 will work.
    Here are two examples of the mov instruction:

mov x1, x0    // X1 = X0
mov x2, #10   // X2 = 10

    There are many additional variants of mov, covered in depth in later
chapters. For example, if you encounter a constant you cannot load into a
register with a single mov instruction, other variants of mov let you load any
arbitrary 32- or 64-bit constant by using two to three instructions. In the
meantime, this variant of the ldr instruction will load any constant into
a register:

ldr reg, =veryLargeConstant

    The assembler will simply store veryLargeConstant in a memory location
somewhere and then load the contents of that memory location to the speci-
fied register. Use this handy pseudo-instruction when you need to load a
large constant into a register with a single instruction.

                                                   Hello, World of Assembly Language   27
                 1.8.3 add and sub
                 The add and sub instructions handle simple arithmetic on the ARM CPU.
                 These instructions take many forms covered more thoroughly in the next
                 couple of chapters. Their basic forms are the following:

                 add regdest, reglsrc, regrsrc    // regdest = reglsrc + regrsrc
                 add regdest, reglsrc, #const // regdest = reglsrc + const
                 adds regdest, reglsrc, regrsrc    // regdest = reglsrc + regrsrc
                 adds regdest, reglsrc, #const // regdest = reglsrc + const
                 sub regdest, reglsrc, regrsrc    // regdest = reglsrc - regrsrc
                 sub regdest, reglsrc, #const // regdest = reglsrc - const
                 subs regdest, reglsrc, regrsrc    // regdest = reglsrc - regrsrc
                 subs regdest, reglsrc, #const // regdest = reglsrc - const

                 Here, regdest, reglsrc, and regrsrc are 32- or 64-bit registers (which must all be
                 the same size for a given instruction), and const is an immediate constant in
                 the range 0 to 4,095. You’ll learn to specify larger constants later, but these
                 forms are sufficient for the example programs in the next few chapters.

       NOTE      Some assemblers allow a range of –4,095 to +4,095 and swap the add and sub
                 instructions if the immediate constant is negative.

                      The instructions with the s suffix affect the condition code flags. They
                 set the flags according to the conditions specified in the following list:

                      N  ​ ?​Set if the arithmetic operation produces a negative result (high-
                              order, or HO, bit is set); clear if it produces a nonnegative result (HO
                              bit is clear).
                      Z ​   ​?Set if the arithmetic operation produces a 0 result; clear if it pro-
                             duces a nonzero result.
                      C  ​ ?​Set if the addition operation produces an unsigned overflow (carry
                              out of the HO bit). Clear if a subtraction operation produces a
                              borrow (unsigned underflow), and set otherwise.
                      V  ​ ​?Set if the arithmetic operation produces a signed overflow (carry
                              out of the next-to-HO bit).

                     The following instructions negate their source operands, because they
                 subtract the source register from 0 (remember that WZR and XZR are the
                 zero registers and return 0 when read):

                 sub regdest32, wzr, regsrc32 // regdest32 = - regsrc32
                 sub regdest64, xzr, regsrc64 // regdest64 = - regsrc64

                      Gas provides synonyms for these instructions:

                 neg regdest32, regsrc32 // Negate instruction, no flags
                 negs regdest32, regsrc32 // Negate instruction, w/flags

28   Chapter 1
neg regdest64, regsrc64 // Negate instruction, no flags
negs regdest64, regsrc64 // Negate instruction, w/flags

    These forms are a little easier to read.

1.8.4 bl, blr, and ret
Calling procedures and functions is handled by the bl (branch and link)
and blr (branch and link through register) instructions. Here’s their syntax

bl label
blr Xn

where label is a statement label preceding code in the .text section, and
Xn represents one of the 64-bit registers. These two instructions copy the
address of the next instruction (following the bl or blr instruction) into the
link register (LR/X30), then transfer control either to the target label or to
the address specified by the contents of Xn.
     The bl instruction does have a minor limitation: it can transfer control
only to a statement label within ±128MB of the current instruction. This is
generally far more than enough for any function you’ll write. In theory, if
the OS loads code into another section (besides .text), it could be placed
sufficiently far away that it would exceed this range. The OS linker will prob-
ably complain if this occurs. This book generally places all code within the
.text section, as it would be rare for such programs to exceed this limitation.
     The blr instruction copies the full 64-bit address from Xn into the
PC (after copying the address of the next instruction into LR). Therefore,
blr does not have the range limitation of the bl instruction. If you ever do
encounter the range limitation when using bl, overcome it by using the fol-
lowing sequence:

lea x0, farAwayProcedure
blr x0

     This will load the address of farAwayProcedure into X0 (no matter where
it appears in memory), then transfer control to that procedure via blr.
     The ret instruction has appeared in several examples up to this point.
It copies the contents of the LR (X30) register into the PC. Assuming that
LR was loaded with a value as a result of executing the bl or blr instruction,
this returns control to the instruction following the bl/blr.
     The bl, blr, and ret instructions have one issue: the ARM architecture
tracks only a single subroutine call with the LR register. Consider the fol-
lowing code fragment:

someFunc:
        ret
          .
          .
          .

                                                     Hello, World of Assembly Language   29
                 main:
                         bl someFunc
                         ret

                       When the OS calls the main program, it loads the LR register with
                  the return address back to the OS. Normally, when the main program
                  completes execution, its ret instruction transfers control to this location.
                  However, that’s not the case in this example: when the main program
                  begins execution, it immediately calls someFunc with the bl instruction. This
                  instruction copies its return address (the address of the main program’s
                  ret instruction) into the LR register, wiping out the OS’s return address
                  currently residing there. When someFunc executes the return instruction, it
                  returns control back to the main program.
                       Upon return from someFunc, the main program executes the ret instruc-
                 tion. However, the LR register now contains the return address of the
                 ­someFunc call, which is the address of the ret instruction in the main pro-
                 gram, so control transfers there, re-executing ret. The LR register’s value
                  hasn’t changed; it still points at that ret instruction, meaning this code
                  enters an infinite loop continuously executing the return and transferring
                  control back to the return (where LR continues to point).
                       Chapter 3 discusses the high-level solution to this problem. For the
                  time being, we must save the LR register value in the main program before
                  calling someFunc. One quick-and-dirty way to do this is to copy it into another
                  (unused by main) register and restore LR before the final return:

                 someFunc:
                         ret
                           .
                           .
                           .
                 main:
                         mov x1, lr
                         bl someFunc
                         mov lr, x1
                         ret

                      This code saves the return address (in LR) in the X1 register and
                 restores it after returning from someFunc (the call to someFunc overwrote the
                 value in LR).
                      In general, saving the return address in the X1 register is a bad idea,
                 because the ARM’s designers reserve X1 for passing parameters. (Using X1
                 worked in this example because someFunc doesn’t have any parameters, as
                 it just returns to its caller.) The next section covers in greater depth which
                 registers are reserved for various purposes.

           1.9 The ARM64 Application Binary Interface
                 A CPU’s application binary interface (ABI) describes how programs should use
                 registers, pass parameters between functions, represent data, and many

30   Chapter 1
                 other conventions. Its primary purpose is to provide interoperability among
                 programming languages and systems. The ARM64’s ABI, for example,
                 describes the conventions that allow C/C++ programs to call functions writ-
                 ten in Swift, Pascal, and other languages. Since the GCC (and Clang) com-
                 pilers follow these rules, you must also follow them to pass information
                 between your assembly language code and code written in an HLL such
                 as C/C++.
                     An ABI is a convention, not an absolute rule. It is a contract between the
                 code being called and the code making the call. When writing your own
                 assembly language functions to be called by your own assembly language
                 code, you are under no obligation to use the ABI and can use whatever
                 inter-code communication scheme you like. However, if you call C/C++
                 code from your assembly functions, or if your assembly code is being called
                 from C/C++, you must follow the ARM64 ABI. Since this book uses a con-
                 siderable mixture of C/C++ and assembly code, understanding the ARM64
                 ABI is critical for our purposes.

                 1.9.1 Register Usage
                 The ARM64 ABI reserves some of its 32 general-purpose registers for spe-
                 cific uses and defines whether registers are volatile (meaning you don’t have
                 to preserve their values) or nonvolatile (meaning that you must preserve
                 their values within a function). Table 1-2 describes the special purposes and
                 volatility of the 32 ARM registers.

Table 1-2: ARM64 ABI Register Conventions
Register         Volatile       Special meaning
X0/W0            Yes            Pass parameter 1 here, return function results here.
                                Registers X0 through X7 can also be used as a scratchpad/temporary/
                                local variable if not used as a parameter.
X1/W1            Yes            Pass parameter 2 here, return function results here.
X2/W2            Yes            Pass parameter 3 here, return function results here.
X3/W3            Yes            Pass parameter 4 here, return function results here.
X4/W4            Yes            Pass parameter 5 here, return function results here.
X5/W5            Yes            Pass parameter 6 here, return function results here.
X6/W6            Yes            Pass parameter 7 here, return function results here.
X7/W7            Yes            Pass parameter 8 here, return function results here.
X8/W8            Yes            Pointer to large function return results (for example, a large C structure
                                returned by value).
X9/W9            Yes            Can be used as a scratchpad/temporary/local variable.
X10/W10          Yes
X11/W11          Yes
X12/W12          Yes
X13/W13          Yes
X14/W14          Yes
X15/W15          Yes

                                                                                                    (continued)

                                                                          Hello, World of Assembly Language   31
Table 1-2: ARM64 ABI Register Conventions (continued)
Register          Volatile         Special meaning
X16/W16/IP0       Yes, but . . .   You can use this register as a temporary variable, but its value may
                                   change across the execution of a control-transfer instruction; the
                                   ­system linker/loader may use this register to create a veneer, also
                                   known as a trampoline (more on this in Chapter 7).
X17/W17/IP1       Yes, but . . .   You can use this register as a temporary variable, but its value may
                                   change across the execution of a control-transfer instruction; the sys-
                                   tem linker/loader may use this register to create a veneer, also known
                                   as a trampoline (more on this in Chapter 7).
X18/W18/Plat      No access        This register is reserved for use by the OS, and application programs
                                   must not modify its value. Under macOS, you definitely must not
                                   modify this register; under Linux, you may get away with using this
                                   register if you preserve its value, but the safe choice is to avoid
                                   using this register.
X19/W19           No               A function using this register must save and restore the register’s value
X20/W20           No               so that it contains its original value when the function returns.
X21/W21           No
X22/W22           No
X23/W23           No
X24/W24           No
X25/W25           No
X26/W26           No
X27/W27           No
X28/W28           No
X29/W29/FP        N/A              Reserved for use as the system frame pointer.
X30/W30/LR        N/A              Reserved for holding function return addresses.
SP /X31/W31       N/A              Reserved for use as the system stack pointer.

                      Conveniently, when using volatile registers in a function, you don’t have
                 to preserve (save and restore) their values within the function. However,
                 this means that you also cannot expect them to maintain their values across
                 any functions you call via bl or blr. Nonvolatile registers will maintain their
                 values across function calls you make, but you must explicitly preserve their
                 values if you modify them within your functions.

                 1.9.2 Parameter Passing and Function Result Conventions
                 Chapter 5 provides a complete discussion of parameter passing and func-
                 tion results in assembly language. However, when calling functions written
                 in a different languages (particularly HLLs), you must adhere to the con-
                 ventions that language uses. Most HLLs use the ARM ABI as the conven-
                 tion for passing parameters.
                      The ARM ABI uses registers X0 through X7 to pass up to eight integer
                 parameters to a function. These parameters can be 8-, 16-, 32-, or 64-bit
                 entities. You pass the first parameter in X0, the second in X1, and so on. To
                 pass fewer than eight parameters, simply ignore the additional registers in
                 this set. Chapter 5 discusses how to pass more than eight parameters and
                 how to pass data types larger than 64 bits, including arrays and structs.
                 Chapter 6 covers how to pass floating-point values to a function.

32   Chapter 1
            You can also return function results in these registers. Most functions
       return integer results in X0. If you’re returning a large object by value, like
       a structure, array, or string, you typically use X8 to return a pointer to that
       data object. Chapter 6 discusses returning floating-point function results.
            Registers X0 through X7 are volatile, meaning you can’t expect a called
       function to preserve the original register values on return. This is true even
       if you don’t use all eight registers to pass parameter values. If you want to
       preserve a value across function calls, use a nonvolatile register.

1.10   Calling C Library Functions
       All the coding examples in this book so far have immediately returned to
       the OS, apparently without accomplishing anything. While it is theoretically
       possible for a pure assembly language program to produce its own output,
       it takes a lot of work and is largely beyond the scope of this book. Instead,
       this book calls prewritten C/C++ library code to do the I/O. This section
       discusses how this is done.
            Most other books on assembly language that use libraries in this way
       call the OS by using available application programming interfaces (APIs). This
       is a reasonable approach, but such code is tied to the particular OS for
       which the calls are made (see Chapter 16 for examples). This book instead
       relies on library functions written in the C stdlib, since it’s available on
       many OSes.
            In most introductory programming books, the first programming
       example provided is the venerable “Hello, world!” program. Here’s that
       ­program written in C:

       #include <stdio.h>

       int main( int argc, char **argv )
       {
          printf( "Hello, world!\n" );
       }

             Except for an actual printf() statement, the assembly language source
       files given thus far have fulfilled the purpose of the “Hello, world!” example:
       learning how to edit, compile, and run a simple program.
             Most of this book uses the C printf() function to handle program out-
       put to the console. This function requires one or more arguments—that
       is, a variable-length parameter list. The first argument is the address of a
       format string. If that string requires it, additional parameters provide data to
       convert to string form. For the “Hello, world!” program, the format string
       ("Hello, world!\n") is the only argument.
             The C stdlib—and all C functions, for that matter—adheres to the ARM
       ABI. Therefore, printf() expects its first argument, the format string, in the
       X0 register. Instead of trying to pass a string (with 14 characters, including
       the newline) in a 64-bit register, we pass the address of that string in mem-
       ory. If we put the string "Hello, world!\n" in the .text section along with the

                                                          Hello, World of Assembly Language   33
                 program (out of the way, so the CPU doesn’t try to execute it as code), then
                 we can compute the address of that string by using the lea macro:

                 hwStr:   .asciz   "Hello, world!\n"
                            .
                            .
                            .
                           lea     x0, hwStr

                      Once we have this string address in X0, calling printf() prints that
                 string to the standard output device:

                 lea x0, hwStr
                 bl printf

                     To run, this program must be linked against the C stdlib and a small
                 C/C++ program like the one in Listing 1-2. Rather than grabbing that pro-
                 gram, I’ll create a slightly better version in Listing 1-4 to use with almost
                 every example program in the rest of this book.

                 // Listing1.4.cpp
                 //
                 // Generic C++ driver program to call AoAA example programs
                 // Also includes a "readLine" function that reads a string
                 // from the user and passes it on to the assembly language
                 // code
                 //
                 // Need to include stdio.h so this program can call "printf"
                 // and stdio.h so this program can call strlen.

                 #include <errno.h>
                 #include <stdio.h>
                 #include <stdlib.h>
                 #include <string.h>

                 // Extern "C" namespace prevents "name mangling" by the C++
                 // compiler:

                 extern "C"
                 {
                     // asmMain is the assembly language code's "main program":

                   1 void asmMain( void );

                     // getTitle returns a pointer to a string of characters
                     // from the assembly code that specifies the title of that
                     // program (that makes this program generic and usable
                     // with a large number of sample programs in "The Art of
                     // ARM Assembly Language"):

                   2 char *getTitle( void );

                     // C++ function that the assembly
                     // language program can call:
34   Chapter 1
3 int readLine( char *dest, int maxLen );

  };

  // readLine reads a line of text from the user (from the
  // console device) and stores that string into the destination
  // buffer the first argument specifies. Strings are limited in
  // length to the value specified by the second argument
  // (minus 1).
  //
  // This function returns the number of characters actually
  // read, or -1 if there was an error.
  //
  // If the user enters too many characters (maxLen or
  // more), this function returns only the first maxLen - 1
  // characters. This is not considered an error.

  int readLine( char *dest, int maxLen )
  {
      // Note: fgets returns NULL if there was an error, else
      // it returns a pointer to the string data read (which
      // will be the value of the dest pointer):

       char *result = fgets( dest, maxLen, stdin );
       if( result != NULL )
       {
           // Wipe out the newline character at the
           // end of the string:

           int len = strlen( result );
           if( len > 0 )
           {
               dest[ len - 1 ] = 0;
           }
           return len;
       }
       return -1; // If there was an error
  }

  int main(void)
  {
      // Get the assembly language program's title:

       char *title = getTitle();

       printf( "Calling %s:\n", title );
       asmMain();
       printf( "%s terminated\n", title );

  }

     This program contains a few additional features over Listing 1-2. First,
 the name of the assembly language function has changed to asmMain() 1,
 the assembly language main program. This code also requires a second

                                                      Hello, World of Assembly Language   35
                 assembly function, getTitle() 2. This function, provided by the assembly
                 language source code, returns a pointer to a zero-terminated string con-
                 taining the program’s title. The program displays this title before and after
                 calling asmMain().
                      The readLine() function appears in the C program that reads a line of
                 text from the user and stores that text into a buffer specified by the caller 3.
                 You can call this function from the example assembly code, sparing you
                 from having to write the function in assembly (it’s grunt work better done
                 in C). You’ll see examples of this function call in later chapters.
                      This file (appearing as Listing1-4.cpp or c.cpp in the online code) requires
                 the assembly code to provide a getTitle() function that returns the address
                 of a string so the C program can display the name. This string is embedded
                 in the assembly language source file, since most of the programs in this
                 book use only one version of c.cpp. The getTitle() function is the same in
                 every program

                 getTitle:
                             lea        x0, title   // C expects pointer in X0.
                             ret

                 where title is a zero-terminated string appearing elsewhere in your pro-
                 gram (usually in the .data section). That declaration will usually take
                 this form:

                 title:      .asciz "Listing1-5"

                     The getTitle function returns the address of this string to the c.cpp pro-
                 gram. The string following the .asciz directive will typically be the name of
                 the assembly language source file (I used Listing1-5 in this example).

                 1.10.1 Assembling Programs Under Multiple OSes
                 We could easily bang out a “Hello, world!” program for Linux or macOS
                 at this point, but the programs would be slightly different for each OS. So
                 that we don’t need to use a different include file for each OS, I’ve modified
                 aoaa​.inc to look for a couple of symbol definitions: isMacOS and isLinux. Both
                 symbols must be defined with the CPP #define declaration, and one must be
                 true (1) while the other is false (0). The aoaa​.inc file uses these symbols to
                 adjust the definitions present in the file for the appropriate OS.
                      In theory, we could use code like the following to define these symbols:

                 #define isMacOS (1)
                 #define isLinux (0)
                 #include "aoaa​.inc"

                      However, this would force every example program to have two versions,
                 one for macOS (the example just given) and one for Linux, containing the
                 following statements:

36   Chapter 1
#define isMacOS (0)
#define isLinux (1)
#include "aoaa​.inc"

    GCC has a preferable command line option that lets you define a pre-
processor symbol and give it a value:

-D name=value

    This way, the following commands will automatically define the symbol
prior to assembling the source.S file:

g++ -D isMacOS=1 source.S
g++ -D isLinux=1 source.S

     We can specify the OS from the command line in this way so that the
source files (source.S and aoaa​.inc) don’t require any changes under either
macOS or Linux. To avoid any extra typing required to assemble the pro-
gram, we’ll use a command line program known as a shell script.
     While writing a shell script for this purpose, I also further automated
the build process. The script, named build, accepts the base name of an
example file without a suffix and automatically deletes any existing object
or executable files with that base name (a clean operation, in Unix terminol-
ogy). It then determines which OS build is running on and then automati-
cally generates the appropriate GCC command line to build the example.

                       SHELL SCRIP T S V S. MAKEFILES

    If you have experience developing software by using the command line, you
    may wonder why I haven’t built the examples with a makefile. I discuss make-
    files further in Chapter 15, but I’ve chosen not to use them here for a couple of
    reasons:

    •    If you don’t already know the Make language, I’d prefer to put off teaching
         that until you’ve mastered a little more assembly language.
    •    Using Make would mean writing a separate makefile for each example
         program. However, the build shell script this section describes works for
         nearly all the example programs in this book.

    For example, to build a file named example.S, you’d execute the follow-
ing command:

./build example

                                                          Hello, World of Assembly Language   37
                       Under Linux, this would generate the following command:

                  g++ -D isLinux=1 -o example c.cpp example.S

                       Under macOS, it would generate the following:

                  g++ -D isMacOS=1 -o example c.cpp example.S

                      The build script also supports a couple of command line options: -c and
                  -pie. The -c (compile-only) option generates the following command line,
                  which only assembles the assembly file to an object file; it does not compile
                  c.cpp, nor does it produce an executable:

                  ./build -c example

                       This executes the following command as appropriate:

                  g++ -c -D isMacOS=1 -o example.o example.S

                  or

                  g++ -c -D isLinux=1 -o example.o example.S

                       The -pie option applies only to Linux. It issues the appropriate com-
                  mands to tell Linux to produce a position-independent executable file (by
                  default, Linux produces a non-position-independent executable). Because
                  macOS’s assembler always produces PIE code, this option is ignored under
                  macOS.
                       For the curious, I’ve provided the text for this shell script in the file
                  build without further comment, as writing shell scripts is beyond the scope
                  of this book:

#!/bin/bash
#
# build
#
# Automatically builds an Art of ARM Assembly
# example program from the command line
#
# Usage:
#
#    build {options} fileName
#
# (no suffix on the filename.)
#
# options:
#
#    -c: Assemble .S file to object code only.
#    -pie: On Linux, generate a PIE executable.

fileName=""
compileOnly=" "

38   Chapter 1
pie="-no-pie"
cFile="c.cpp"
lib=" "
while [[ $# -gt 0 ]]
do

    key="$1"
    case $key in

        -c)
        compileOnly='-c'
        shift
        ;;

        -pie)
        pie='-pie'
        shift
        ;;

        -math)
        math='-lm'
        shift
        ;;

        *)
        fileName="$1"
        shift
        ;;
    esac
done

# If -c option was provided, only assemble the .S
# file and produce an .o output file.
#
# If -c not specified, compile both c.cpp and the .S
# file and produce an executable:

if [ "$compileOnly" = '-c' ]; then
     objectFile="-o $fileName".o
     cFile=" "
else
     objectFile="-o $fileName"
fi

# If the executable already exists, delete it:

if test -e "$fileName"; then
    rm "$fileName"
fi

# If the object file already exists, delete it:

if test -e "$fileName".o; then
    rm "$fileName".o
fi

                                                       Hello, World of Assembly Language   39
# Determine what OS you're running under (Linux or Darwin [macOS]) and
# issue the appropriate GCC command to compile/assemble the files.

unamestr=$(uname)
if [ "$unamestr" = 'Linux' ]; then
    g++ -D isLinux=1 $pie $compileOnly $objectFile $cFile $fileName.S $math
elif [ "$unamestr" = 'Darwin' ]; then
    g++ -D isMacOS=1 $compileOnly $objectFile $cFile $fileName.S -lSystem $math
fi

                       Check out a book on GNU’s bash shell interpreter if you want to learn
                   how this works (see section 1.12, “For More Information,” on page 43).
                       The build shell script is available in electronic form at https://artofarm​
                   .randallhyde​.com. Execute the following command to make this file execut-
                   able from the bash command line on your Linux or macOS system:

                   chmod u+x build

                      This makes the build script executable. See Appendix D for more infor-
                   mation about the chmod command.

                   1.10.2 Writing a “Hello, World!” Program
                   You finally have the pieces in place to write a complete “Hello, world!” pro-
                   gram, as shown in Listing 1-5.

                   // Listing1-5.S
                   //
                   // The venerable "Hello, world!" program, written
                   // in ARM assembly by calling the C stdlib printf
                   // function
                   //
                   // aoaa​.inc is the Art of ARM Assembly include file.
                   //
                   // This makes asmMain global and
                   // automatically converts it to _asmMain
                   // if this program is being assembled under macOS.
                   // It also converts printf to _printf for macOS.

                               #include "aoaa​.inc"

                               .data

                 1 title:      .asciz   "Listing 1-5"
                   saveLR:     .dword   0       // Save LR here.
                   hwStr:      .asciz   "Hello, world!\n"

                               .text

                   // getTitle function, required by c.cpp, returns the
                   // name of this program. The title string must
                   // appear in the .text section:

40   Chapter 1
                       .align   2       // Code must be 4-byte aligned.

       2 getTitle:
                       lea      x0, title
                       ret

         // Here's the main function called by the c.cpp function:

         asmMain:

         // LR is *highly* volatile and will be wiped
         // out when this code calls the printf() function.
         // We need to save LR in memory somewhere so we
         // can return back to the OS using its value.
         // For now, save it in the saveLR global
         // variable:

                       lea      x0, saveLR
                       str      lr, [x0]

         // Set up printf parameter (format string)
         // and call printf():

                     3 lea      x0, hwStr    // hwStr must be in .text.
                       bl       printf       // Print the string.

         // Back from printf(), restore LR with its original
         // value so we can return to the OS:

                     4 lea      x0, saveLR
                       ldr      lr, [x0]

         // Return to the OS:

                       ret

             The title string 1 holds the program’s title ("Listing 1-5" in this exam-
        ple). The hwStr variable holds the Hello, world! string that the main pro-
        gram will pass to the printf() function. The getTitle() function 2 returns
        the address of the title string to the c.cpp program. As per the ARM ABI,
        this function returns the function result in the X0 register.
             Upon entry into the asmMain() function (the assembly language main
        program), the code must preserve the contents of the LR register because
        the call to printf() will overwrite its value. This code saves the LR register
        (which holds the return address to the c.cpp main function) in the saveLR
        global variable in the .data section 1.

NOTE     Saving the LR register value in this fashion is not good practice. In Chapter 3 you’ll
         learn about the ARM stack and discover a much better place to save return addresses
         held in LR.

                                                                 Hello, World of Assembly Language   41
                     The code that actually prints Hello, world! 3 loads X0 with the printf()
                 format string as per the ARM ABI, then calls printf() by using the bl
                 instruction. Before returning to c.cpp, the assembly code must reload LR
                 with the returned address held in saveLR 4.
                     Here are the commands to build and run the program in Listing 1-5,
                 along with the program’s output:

                 $ ./build Listing1-5
                 $ ./Listing1-5
                 Calling Listing1-5:
                 Hello, world!
                 Listing1-5 terminated

                     You now have a functioning “Hello, world!” program in assembly
                 language.

                               LINU X V S. MACOS: VARIADIC PAR AME TERS

                     Passing parameters to functions with a variable number of parameters, such as
                     printf(), works differently in the standard ARM ABI and the macOS variant.
                     Linux, using the standard ABI, passes the first eight parameters in registers X0
                     through X7, as Table 1-2 describes. However, macOS unfortunately passes only
                     the first parameter of a variadic function (a function with a variable number
                     of parameters) in register X0. It passes all remaining parameters on the stack
                     (described in Chapters 3 and 5).
                           To allow us to write code that will assemble and run on both OSes, the
                     aoaa​.inc include file comes to the rescue once again. This file contains six mac-
                     ros with the following names:

                     vparm2, vparm3, ..., vparm7

                           Each macro takes a single argument: the name of a variable in the .data
                     section. These macros will load the specified variable into the appropriate
                     location (a register or on the stack) for that parameter. For this to work under
                     macOS, the following statement must appear at the very beginning of your
                     ­asmMain() function:

                     sub sp, sp, #64

                          You must also include the following statement before the ret instruction at
                     the end of your asmMain() function:

                     add sp, sp, #64

                         Chapter 5 fully explains the purpose of these instructions; just trust them for
                     now (they are required for macOS and do no harm under Linux).

42   Chapter 1
               If you have two variables, i and j, declared as words in your .data sec-
         tion, here’s how to print them by using printf()

         lea x0, fmtStr // Parameter 1 is still passed in X0.
         vparm2 i
         vparm3 j
         bl printf

         where fmtStr is something like this:

         fmtStr: .asciz "i=%d, j=%d\n"

              We use vparm2, vparm3, and so on only for variadic functions. Functions
         with a fixed number of parameters use registers X0 through X7 for the first eight
         parameters on both Linux and macOS.

1.11 Moving On
     This chapter equipped you with the prerequisites to start learning new
     assembly language features in the chapters that follow. You learned the
     basic syntax of a Gas program and the basic 64-bit ARM architecture, and
     how to use the aoaa​.inc header file to make source files portable between
     macOS and Linux. You also learned how to declare some simple global vari-
     ables, use a few machine instructions, and assemble a Gas program with
     C/C++ code so you can call routines in the C stdlib (using the build script
     file). Finally, you ran that program from the command line.
          The next chapter introduces you to data representation, one of the main
     reasons for learning assembly language in the first place.

1.12 For More Information

     •   For more information about the bash shell interpreter, visit the refer-
         ence manual at https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/bash.html.
     •   For more information about the GNU assembler, visit the reference man-
         ual at https://ftp​.gnu​.org​/old​-gnu​/Manuals​/gas​-2​.9​.1​/html​_chapter​/as​_toc​.html.
     •   You can find an online guide to 64-bit ARM assembly language at
         https://modexp​.wordpress​.com​/2018​/10​/30​/arm64​- assembly​/.
     •   If you’re interested in programming ARM assembly language on Apple
         platforms, see https://developer​.apple​.com​/documentation​/xcode​/writing​
         -arm64 ​- code​-for​- apple​- platforms.
     •   The ARM developer portal at https://developer.arm.com provides
         generic information about ARM CPUs and ARM assembly language
         programming.

                                                                  Hello, World of Assembly Language   43
                                               TES T YOURSELF

                  1.	 What is the name of the Gas executable program file?
                  2.	 What are the names of the three main system buses?
                  3.	 Which register holds the condition code bits?
                  4.	 How many bytes are consumed by the following data types?
                     a.	Word
                     b.	Dword
                     c.	Oword
                     d.	Double

                  5.	 What is the destination (register) operand size for the lea macro?
                  6.	 What is the name of the assembly language instruction you use to call a
                      procedure or function?
                  7.	 What is the name of the assembly language instruction you use to return
                      from a procedure or function?
                  8.	 What does ABI stand for?
                  9.	 In the ARM ABI, where do you return the following function return results?
                     a.	 8-bit byte values
                     b.	 16-bit word values
                     c.	   32-bit integer values
                     d.	 64-bit integer values
                     e.	 64-bit pointer values

                 10.	 Where do you pass the first, second, third, and fourth parameters to an
                      ARM ABI-compatible function?

44   Chapter 1
