                               5
                       PROCEDURES

             In a procedural programming language,
            the basic unit of code is the procedure. A
           procedure is a set of instructions that compute
        a value or take an action, such as printing or
reading a character value. This chapter discusses how
Gas implements procedures, parameters, and local
variables. By the end of this chapter, you should be
well versed in writing your own procedures and func-
tions. You’ll also fully understand parameter passing
and the ARM application binary interface (ABI) call-
ing convention.
    This chapter covers several topics, including the following:
•   An introduction to assembly language programming style, along with
    some aoaa​.inc macros to improve the readability of your programs
                  •   Gas procedures/functions and their implementation (including the use
                      of the bl, br, and ret instructions), along with more aoaa​.inc macros to
                      allow the better declaration of procedures in your source files
                  •   Activation records, automatic variables, local symbols, register preserva-
                      tion, and the ARM stack
                  •   Various ways to pass parameters to a procedure, including pass by value
                      and pass by reference, and how to use procedure pointers and proce-
                      dural parameters
                     This chapter also discusses how to return function results to a caller
                  and how to call and use recursive functions.

          5.1     Assembly Language Programming Style
                  Up until this chapter, I’ve not stressed good assembly language program-
                  ming style for two reasons. First, this book assumes you’re already familiar
                  with the need for good programming style based on your experience with
                  HLLs. Second, the programs quoted up to this point have been relatively
                  trivial, and programming style doesn’t matter much with trivial code.
                  However, as you begin to write more advanced ARM assembly language
                  programs, style becomes more important.
                       As you can probably tell by now, ARM assembly language code is
                  nowhere near as readable as code written in an HLL such as C/C++, Java,
                  or Swift. Therefore, as an assembly language programmer, you must expend
                  extra effort to write assembly code that is as readable and maintainable as
                  possible. As I’ve pointed out, the GNU assembler was written not as a tool
                  for assembly language programmers but as a backend to the GCC com-
                  piler to process the compiler’s output. Because of this and the fact that Gas
                  attempted to absorb as many features as possible from a huge number of
                  assembly languages (for many CPUs, not just the ARM), writing high-quality
                  code with Gas is a difficult task.
                       Fortunately, you can use Gas’s macro processor (and ability to take advan-
                  tage of the CPP) to modify the Gas assembly language somewhat, accessing
                  features that can help improve your programming style. The aoaa​.inc include
                  file contains a fair number of predefined macros and symbol definitions to
                  help achieve this goal. Chapter 13 covers the contents of aoaa​.inc line by line
                  and explains how you can use these macros, and create macros of your own,
                  to improve the readability of your ARM assembly language programs.
                       When you write assembly language source files, feel free to include
                  aoaa​.inc in that code or incorporate any features from that code in your
                  assembly language source files. Even if you don’t require the cross-platform
                  portability offered by aoaa​.inc, its macros and other definitions can help
                  you write more readable and maintainable code. The aoaa​.inc header file is
                  open source and covered by the Creative Commons 4.0 Attribution license
                  (see section 5.12, “For More Information,” on page 290).

            As an example of using macros to make code more readable, consider
       the ​.code macro from aoaa​.inc. It expands into the following two statements:

       .text
       .align 2

             As a general rule, you should always ensure that the .text section is
       aligned on a word boundary (code could get misaligned if you’ve declared
       some data in the previous code section whose length is not a multiple of 4).
       It’s good programming style to always align a .text section; just to be sure
       an instruction begins at a proper address. Rather than clutter up your code
       with a bunch of extra .align directives, I recommend using the ​.code direc-
       tive to automatically handle the alignment. Having less clutter makes your
       code easier to read.
             The aoaa​.inc header file contains several additional macros I will pre­
       sent throughout the rest of this chapter that take the 1960s-style Gas syntax
       and attempt to provide features found in more modern assemblers (such as
       the Microsoft Macro Assembler, or MASM, and the HLA assemblers avail-
       able for the x86 processor family). Using these features (such as formal
       procedure declarations and local variable declarations) can help produce
       easier-to-read assembly language source code.
             Even when writing traditional assembly language source code, you can
       follow certain rules to produce more readable code. Throughout this book,
       I’ve generally organized assembly language statements as follows (braces
       surround optional items and don’t appear in the actual source code):

       {Label:}    {{instruction}        operands}   {// Comment}

            As a general rule, I try to put all label definitions in column 1 and to
       line up all the instruction mnemonics in column 2. I try to start the oper-
       ands in column 3. The exact number of spaces between these columns
       is not important, but be sure that the mnemonics are generally lined up
       together, in one column, and that the operands tend to start in the next
       column. This is the traditional assembly language programming style and
       the format that most assembly language programmers will want to see when
       reading your code.

NOTE   For formatting reasons, this book often compresses the amount of space between the
       columns and sometimes varies the position of each column within the same listing.
       This was done to ensure source lines fit on one line within the book. In a normal
       source file, you should try to keep all the columns aligned (two 4-character tab posi-
       tions for column 2, column 3 around character position 16, and so on).

           In general, don’t try to indent statements as you would blocks in an
       HLL. Assembly language is not a block-structured language and does not
       lend itself to the same indentation techniques that work well for block-­
       structured languages. If you need to set apart a sequence of statements,
       the best approach is to insert two or more blank lines before and after that

                  sequence of statements. Comments are also useful for differentiating two
                  separate, loosely coupled blocks of code.
                      Gas usually expects an entire assembly language instruction to reside
                  on a single line of source code. In theory, you could use the backslash char-
                  acter immediately before a newline character to break a single statement
                  across two lines:

                  b.al   \
                    targetLabel

                  However, there’s almost never a good argument for doing this. Keep your
                  instructions on a single line unless you have a really good reason to split
                  them across multiple lines (for example, if the source line becomes inordi-
                  nately long for some reason, which is rare). The label field is an exception
                  to this rule: labels may appear on a line by themselves even if they are asso-
                  ciated with the next machine instruction in the program.
                       Gas (under Linux) allows putting multiple assembly language instruc-
                  tions on the same line, separated by a semicolon. However, putting multiple
                  statements on the same source line is an even worse idea in assembly lan-
                  guage than it is in HLLs—don’t do it. In any case, the macOS assembler
                  does not support this feature.
                       With a few assembly language style guidelines out of the way, it’s time
                  to consider the main topic of this chapter: procedures (functions) in assem-
                  bly language.

          5.2 Gas Procedures
                  Most procedural programming languages implement procedures by using
                  the call/return mechanism. The code calls a procedure, the procedure per-
                  forms whatever actions it was written to do, and then the procedure returns
                  to the caller. The call and return operations provide the ARM’s procedure
                  invocation mechanism. The calling code calls a procedure with the bl instruc-
                  tion, and the procedure returns to the caller with the ret instruction. For
                  example, the following ARM instruction calls the C stdlib library printf()
                  function:

                  bl printf

                      Alas, the C stdlib does not supply all the routines you’ll need. Most of
                  the time, you’ll have to write your own Gas procedures. A basic Gas proce-
                  dure declaration takes the following form:

                  procName:
                      Procedure statements
                      ret

                      Technically, the procedure does not need to end with a ret instruction;
                  the ret could be somewhere in the middle of the procedure, with a b.al

instruction at the end. However, it’s considered good programming style
to use a ret instruction (or an equivalent) as the last instruction of a proce-
dure’s body.
    Procedure declarations appear in the .text section of your program. In
the preceding syntax example, procName represents the name of the proce-
dure you wish to define. This can be any valid (and unique) Gas identifier.
    Here is a concrete example of a Gas procedure declaration. This pro-
cedure stores 0s into the 256 words at which X0 points upon entry into
the procedure:

zeroBytes:
          mov x1, #256*4       // 1,024 bytes = 256 words
repeatlp: subs x1, x1, #4
          str wzr, [x0, x1]    // Store *after* subtraction!
          bne repeatlp         // Repeat while X1 >= 0.
          ret

     As you’ve probably noticed, this simple procedure doesn’t bother with
the “magic” instructions that add and subtract a value to and from the SP
register. Those instructions are a requirement of the ARM ABI when the
procedure will be calling other C/C++ code (or other code written in an
ARM ABI–compliant language). Because this little function doesn’t call any
other procedures, it doesn’t bother executing such code.
     Also note that this code uses the loop index to count down from 1,024
down to 0 by 4, filling in the 256-word array backward (from end to begin-
ning) rather than filling it in from beginning to end. This is a common
technique in assembly language. Finally, this code decrements X1 by 4
before storing the 0 into memory. This is because the loop index (X1) is ini-
tialized just beyond the end of the array pointed at by X0. The str instruc-
tion does not affect the flags, so the bne instruction responds to the flags set
by the subs instruction.
     You can use the ARM bl instruction to call this procedure. When,
during program execution, the code falls into the ret instruction, the pro-
cedure returns to whoever called it and begins executing the first instruc-
tion beyond bl. Listing 5-1 provides an example of a call to the zeroBytes
routine.

// Listing5-1.S
//
// Simple procedure call example

#include "aoaa​.inc"

stackSpace   =         64
saveLR       =         56

             .section .rodata, ""
ttlStr:      .asciz   "Listing 5-1"

                               .data
                  wArray:      .space    256 * (4), 0xff // Fill with 0xFF.

                               .text
                               .align    2

                  // getTitle
                  //
                  // Return program title to C++ program:

                               .global getTitle
                  getTitle:
                               lea      x0, ttlStr
                               ret

                  // zeroBytes
                  //
                  // Here is the user-written procedure
                  // that zeros out a 256-word buffer.
                  // On entry, X0 contains the address
                  // of the buffer.

                  zeroBytes:
                               mov      x1, #256 * 4
                  repeatlp:    subs     x1, x1, #4
                               str      wzr, [x0, x1] // Store *after* subtraction!
                               bne      repeatlp      // Repeat while X1 != 0.
                               ret

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                               .global asmMain
                  asmMain:
                               sub      sp, sp, #stackSpace // Reserve stack storage.
                               str      lr, [sp, #saveLR]

                               lea      x0, wArray
                               bl       zeroBytes

                               ldr      lr, [sp, #saveLR]    // Restore return address.
                               add      sp, sp, #stackSpace // Clean up stack.
                               ret      // Returns to caller

                  I won’t bother with a build or run command, as this program doesn’t pro-
                  duce any real output beyond saying that it ran and terminated.
                      The Gas language doesn’t really have a syntactical concept of a pro-
                  gram component we think of as a procedure (or function). It has labels you
                  can call with the bl instruction, along with the ret instruction, which you
                  can use to return from a procedure. However, it has no syntactical entity
                  you can use to delineate one procedure from another in your assembly lan-
                  guage source file.

    So far, the few procedures in this book have delineated the code in the
procedure by using a label and a return statement. For example, the follow-
ing procedure begins with zeroBytes and ends with ret:

zeroBytes:
          mov x1, #256 * 4
repeatlp: subs x1, x1, #4
          str wzr, [x0, x1] // Store *after* subtraction!
          bge repeatlp      // Repeat while X1 >= 0.
          ret

     A comment immediately before the procedure might help separate it
 from previous code. However, the person reading the code has to work to
 differentiate the zeroBytes label from the repeatlp label. In fact, there’s
 no reason you couldn’t use both labels as entry points for a procedure
 (zeroBytes would always zero out 256 words starting at the address passed
in X0, and repeatlp would zero out the number of words specified in X1/4).
Of course, a procedure isn’t required to use just a single ret instruction (or
any at all, since there are other ways to return from a procedure). The last
instruction of a procedure also doesn’t have to be a ret. Therefore, relying
on a statement label and a ret instruction to delineate the procedure is not
always appropriate.
     Though it’s always a good idea to put comments at the beginning and
end of your Gas procedures to clarify what’s happening, the best way to
solve this problem would be to use syntactical sugar—statements that clarify
meaning without generating any code—to delineate procedures. Although
Gas does not provide such statements, you can write your own macros for
the same purpose. The aoaa​.inc include file provides a couple of these
­macros: proc and endp. Here is their syntax:

proc procedureName {, public}   // Braces denote optional item.

       Body of the procedure

endp procedureName

Here, procedureName will be the name of the procedure, and you must sup-
ply the same name in the proc and endp statements. The , public argument
is optional, as denoted by the meta-symbol braces. If the public argument is
present, the proc macro will automatically generate a .global directive for
the procedure.
     Here’s a very simple example of using the proc and endp macros with the
getTitle function:

proc     getTitle, public
lea      x0, ttlStr
ret
endp     getTitle

                  These macros generate the usual statements for the getTitle procedure:

                                .global     getTitle // Generated by public
                  getTitle:     // Generated by proc
                                lea         x0, ttlStr
                                ret

                       The endp macro doesn’t generate anything in the program. It simply
                  checks the identifier passed as an argument to ensure that it matches the
                  procedure’s name in the proc macro invocation.
                       Because the proc and endp statements neatly isolate a procedure’s body
                  from other code in the program, this book uses them for procedures from
                  this point forward. I suggest you take advantage of these macros to help
                  make your own future procedures more readable too.
                       Procedures and functions in an HLL provide useful features in the
                  form of local symbols. The next section covers the limited form of local
                  labels supported by Gas.

                  5.2.1 Gas Local Labels
                  Unlike HLLs, Gas does not support lexically scoped symbols. Labels you define
                  in a procedure are not limited in scope to that procedure. Except for one
                  special case, symbols you define in a Gas procedure, including those defined
                  with proc/endp, are visible throughout the source file.
                       However, Gas does support a limited form of local labels, which consist
                  of a single numeric digit followed by a colon (0: through 9:). In your code,
                  refer to these symbols by using Nb or Nf, where N is the digit (0 through 9).
                  A symbol of the form Nb references the previous N: label in the source file
                  (b is for backward). A symbol of the form Nf references the next N: symbol in
                  the source file (f is for forward).
                       Here’s an example of a Gas local label in the zeroBytes procedure
                  (rewritten from the previous section):

                              proc zeroBytes
                              mov x1, #256 * 4
                  0:          subs x1, x1, #4
                              str wzr, [x0, x1] // Store *after* subtraction!
                              bne 0b            // Repeat while X1 != 0.
                              ret
                              endp zeroBytes

                       Local labels are useful when there is no compelling reason to use a
                  more meaningful name. Be careful about using these local symbols, though.
                  When used sparingly, they help reduce the distraction of meaningless labels
                  in your program, but using too many will destroy the readability of your pro-
                  grams (“to which 0 label is this code jumping?”).
                       When you use local labels, your target label should be only a few
                  instructions away; if the code jumps any great distance, you run the risk
                  of inserting that same local label between the source and targets when

enhancing your code later. This would produce undesirable consequences,
and Gas won’t notify you of the error.

5.2.2 bl, ret, and br
Once you can declare a procedure, the next problem is how to call (and
return from) a procedure. As you’ve seen many times throughout this book,
you call procedures by using bl and return from those procedures by using
ret. This section covers those instructions (as well as the br instruction) in
more detail, including the effects of their use.
     The ARM bl instruction does two things: it copies the (64-bit) address
of the instruction immediately following the bl to the LR register, and then
it transfers control to the address of the specified procedure. The value that
bl copies to LR is known as the return address.
     When a procedure wants to return to the caller and continue execution
with the first statement following the bl instruction, that procedure com-
monly returns to its caller by executing a ret instruction. The ret instruction
transfers control indirectly to that address held in the LR register (X30).
     The ARM ret instruction takes two forms

ret
ret reg64

where reg64 is one of the ARM’s thirty-two 64-bit registers. If a 64-bit regis-
ter operand appears, the CPU uses the address held in that register as the
return address; if no register is present, the default is X30 (LR).
     The ret instruction is actually a special case of the br (branch indirect
through register) instruction. The br syntax is

br   reg64

where reg64 is one of the ARM’s thirty-two 64-bit registers. This instruction
also transfers control to the address held in the specified register. Whereas
the ret reg64 instruction provides a hint to the CPU that this is an actual
return-from-subroutine, the br reg64 instruction offers no such hint. In some
circumstances, the ARM can execute the code faster if it’s given the hint.
Chapter 7 covers some uses for the br instruction.
    The following is an example of the minimal Gas procedure:

proc minimal
ret
endp minimal

     If you call this procedure with the bl instruction, minimal will simply
return to the caller. If you fail to put the ret instruction in the procedure,
the program will not return to the caller upon encountering the endp state-
ment. Instead, the program will fall through to whatever code happens to
follow the procedure in memory.

                      Listing 5-2 demonstrates this problem. The main program calls noRet,
                  which falls straight through to followingProc (printing the followingProc was
                  called message).

                  // Listing5-2.S
                  //
                  // A procedure without a ret instruction

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                  stackSpace   =             64
                  saveLR       =             56

                               .section      .rodata, ""
                  ttlStr:      .asciz        "Listing 5-2"
                  fpMsg:       .asciz        "followingProc was called\n"

                               .code
                               .extern       printf

                  // Return program title to C++ program:

                               proc      getTitle, public
                               lea       x0, ttlStr
                               ret
                               endp      getTitle

                  // noRet
                  //
                  // Demonstrates what happens when a procedure
                  // does not have a return instruction

                               proc      noRet
                               endp      noRet

                               proc      followingProc
                               sub       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               str       lr, [sp, #saveLR]

                               lea       x0, fpMsg
                               bl        printf

                               ldr       lr, [sp, #saveLR]
                               add       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               ret
                               endp      followingProc

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                               proc      asmMain, public
                               sub       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               str       lr, [sp, #saveLR]

                 bl        noRet

                 ldr       lr, [sp, #saveLR]
                 add       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                 ret
                 endp      asmMain

       As you can see, there is no ret instruction in noRet, so when the main
    program (asmMain) calls noRet, it will fall straight through into followingProc.
    Here’s the build command and sample execution:

    $ ./build Listing5-2
    $ ./Listing5-2
    Calling Listing5-2:
    followingProc was called
    Listing5-2 terminated

         Although this behavior might be desirable in certain rare circumstances,
    it usually represents a defect in most programs. Therefore, always remember
    to explicitly return from the procedure by using the ret instruction.

5.3 Saving the State of the Machine
    Listing 5-3 attempts to print 20 lines of 40 spaces and an asterisk.

    // Listing5-3.S
    //
    // Preserving registers (failure) example

    #include "aoaa​.inc"

    stackSpace   =             64
    saveLR       =             56
    saveX19      =             48

                 .section      .rodata, ""
    ttlStr:      .asciz        "Listing 5-3"
    space:       .asciz        " "
    asterisk:    .asciz        "*, %d\n"

                 .data
    loopIndex:   .word         .-.      // Used to print loop index value

                 .code
                 .extern       printf

    // getTitle
    //
    // Return program title to C++ program:

                 proc      getTitle, public
                 lea       x0, ttlStr

                               ret
                               endp     getTitle

                  // print40Spaces
                  //
                  // Prints out a sequence of 40 spaces
                  // to the console display

                               proc     print40Spaces
                               sub      sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               str      lr, [sp, #saveLR]

                               mov      w19, #40
                  printLoop:   lea      x0, space
                               bl       printf
                               subs     w19, w19, #1
                               bne      printLoop // Until W19 == 0
                               ldr      lr, [sp, #saveLR]
                               add      sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               ret
                               endp     print40Spaces

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                               proc     asmMain, public

                               sub      sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               str      lr, [sp, #saveLR]   // Save return address.
                               str      x19, [sp, #saveX19] // Must preserve nonvolatile register.

                               mov      w19, #20
                  astLp:       bl       print40Spaces
                               lea      x0, loopIndex
                               str      w19, [x0]
                               lea      x0, asterisk
                               vparm2   loopIndex
                               bl       printf
                               subs     w19, w19, #1
                               bne      astLp

                               ldr      x19, [sp, #saveX19]
                               ldr      lr, [sp, #saveLR]
                               add      sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               ret      // Returns to caller
                               endp     asmMain

                       Unfortunately, a subtle bug creates an infinite loop. The main program
                  uses the bne printLoop instruction to create a loop that calls Print40Spaces
                  20 times. This function uses W19 to count off the 40 spaces it prints, and
                  then returns with W19 containing 0. The main program prints an asterisk
                  and a newline, decrements W19, and then repeats because W19 isn’t 0 (it
                  will always contain –1 at this point).

    The problem here is that the print40Spaces subroutine doesn’t preserve
the W19 register. Preserving a register means you save it upon entry into
the subroutine and restore it before leaving. Had the print40Spaces sub-
routine preserved the contents of the W19 register, Listing 5-3 would have
functioned properly. There is no need to build and run this program; it just
runs in an infinite loop.
    Consider the following code for print40Spaces:

             proc      print40Spaces
             sub       sp, sp, #stackSpace
             str       lr, [sp, #saveLR]
             str       x19, [sp, #saveX19]

             mov       w19, #40
printLoop:   lea       x0, space
             bl        printf
             subs      w19, w19, #1
             bne       printLoop // Until W19 == 0
             ldr       lr, [sp, #saveLR]
             ldr       x19, [sp, #saveX19]
             add       sp, sp, #stackSpace
             ret
             endp      print40Spaces

     This variant of print40Spaces saves and restores X19 on the stack, along
with the LR register. Because X19 is a nonvolatile register (in the ARM
ABI), it is the responsibility of the callee (the procedure) to preserve it.
     Note that print40Spaces uses X19 rather than one of the X0 to X15 reg-
isters specifically because it is nonvolatile. The printf() function does not
have to preserve X0 to X15 because they are volatile registers in the ARM
ABI. Any attempt to use those registers would have likely failed because
printf() doesn’t have to preserve their values.
     In general, either the caller (the code containing the call instruction)
or the callee (the subroutine) can take responsibility for preserving the reg-
isters. When following the ARM ABI, it is the caller’s responsibility to pre-
serve volatile registers and the callee’s responsibility to preserve nonvolatile
registers. Of course, when writing your own procedures that won’t be called
by ABI-compliant functions and don’t call any ABI-compliant functions, you
can choose whichever register preservation scheme you prefer.
     Listing 5-4 shows the corrected version of the program in Listing 5-3,
which properly preserves X19 in the call to print40Spaces.

// Listing5-4.S
//
// Preserving registers (successful) example

#include "aoaa​.inc"

stackSpace   =             64
saveLR       =             56
saveX19      =             48

                               .section      .rodata, ""
                  ttlStr:      .asciz        "Listing 5-4"
                  space:       .asciz        " "
                  asterisk:    .asciz        "*, %d\n"

                               .data
                  loopIndex:   .word         .-.      // Used to print loop index value

                               .code
                               .extern       printf

                  // Return program title to C++ program:

                               proc      getTitle, public
                               lea       x0, ttlStr
                               ret
                               endp      getTitle

                  // print40Spaces
                  //
                  // Prints out a sequence of 40 spaces
                  // to the console display

                               proc      print40Spaces
                               sub       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               str       lr, [sp, #saveLR]
                               str       x19, [sp, #saveX19]

                               mov       w19, #40
                  printLoop:   lea       x0, space
                               bl        printf
                               subs      w19, w19, #1
                               bne       printLoop // Until W19 == 0
                               ldr       lr, [sp, #saveLR]
                               ldr       x19, [sp, #saveX19]
                               add       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               ret
                               endp      print40Spaces

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                               proc      asmMain, public

                               sub       sp, sp, #stackSpace
                               str       lr, [sp, #saveLR]   // Save return address.
                               str       x19, [sp, #saveX19] // Must preserve nonvolatile register.

                               mov       w19, #20
                  astLp:       bl        print40Spaces
                               lea       x0, loopIndex
                               str       w19, [x0]
                               lea       x0, asterisk
                               vparm2    loopIndex
                               bl        printf

             subs    w19, w19, #1
             bne     astLp

             ldr     lr, [sp, #saveLR]
             ldr     x19, [sp, #saveX19]
             add     sp, sp, #stackSpace
             ret     // Returns to caller
             endp    asmMain

    Here’s the build command and sample output for Listing 5-4:

$ ./build Listing5-4
$ ./Listing5-4
Calling Listing5-4:
                                           *, 20
                                           *, 19
                                           *, 18
                                           *, 17
                                           *, 16
                                           *, 15
                                           *, 14
                                           *, 13
                                           *, 12
                                           *, 11
                                           *, 10
                                           *, 9
                                           *, 8
                                           *, 7
                                           *, 6
                                           *, 5
                                           *, 4
                                           *, 3
                                           *, 2
                                           *, 1
Listing5-4 terminated

As you can see, this program executes properly without entering an infi-
nite loop.
     Callee preservation has two advantages: space and maintainability. If
the callee (the procedure) preserves all affected registers, only one copy
of the str and ldr instructions exists—those that the procedure contains.
If the caller saves the values in the registers, the program needs a set of
preservation instructions around every call. This makes your programs not
only longer but also harder to maintain. It’s not easy to remember which
registers to save and restore on each procedure call.
     On the other hand, a subroutine may unnecessarily preserve some reg-
isters if it preserves all the registers it modifies. If the caller is preserving the
registers, the subroutine doesn’t have to save registers it doesn’t care about.
     One big problem with having the caller preserve registers is that your
program may change over time. You may modify the calling code or the
procedure to use additional registers. Such changes, of course, may change

                  the set of registers that you must preserve. Worse still, if the modification
                  is in the subroutine itself, you will need to locate every call to the routine
                  and verify that the subroutine does not change any registers that the calling
                  code uses.
                       Assembly language programmers typically use a common convention
                  with respect to register preservation: unless there is a good reason (perfor-
                  mance) for doing otherwise, most programmers will preserve each register
                  that a procedure modifies (and doesn’t explicitly return a value in a modi-
                  fied register). This reduces the likelihood of defects occurring in a program
                  because a procedure modifies a register the caller expects to be preserved.
                  Of course, you could follow the rules concerning the ARM ABI with respect
                  to volatile and nonvolatile registers; however, such calling conventions
                  impose their own inefficiencies on both programmers and other programs.
                  This book generally adheres to the ARM ABI with respect to volatile and
                  nonvolatile registers, though many examples preserve all affected registers
                  in a procedure.
                       There’s more to preserving the environment than preserving registers.
                  You can also preserve variables and other values that a subroutine might
                  change.

          5.4     Call Trees, Leaf Procedures, and the Stack
                  Imagine a procedure, A, that calls two other procedures B and C. Also
                  assume that B calls two procedures D and E, and procedure C calls two
                  other procedures F and G. We can diagram this calling sequence by using a
                  call tree, as shown in Figure 5-1.

                                       A

                          B                         C

                    D            E           F          G

                  Figure 5-1: A call-tree diagram

                       This entire call graph is the tree, and the procedures at the bottom that
                  do not call any other procedures—in this case, D, E, F, and G—are known
                  as leaf procedures.
                       Leaf procedures are different from non-leaf procedures in ARM assem-
                  bly language because they can leave the return address in the LR register
                  rather than saving it to memory (the stack). As leaf procedures don’t make
                  any other calls via the bl instruction, the procedure won’t disturb the value
                  in LR upon entry into the procedure. (This assumes that the procedure
                  doesn’t explicitly modify LR, but generally, there is no good reason for
                  doing so.) Therefore, leaf procedures can be slightly more efficient than

non-leaf procedures, as they are spared the need to preserve the value in
the LR register. Leaf procedures can also make full use of the volatile regis-
ter set without worrying about their values being scrambled during a call to
another procedure.
     Non-leaf procedures must preserve the value in the LR register because
calls they make (via bl) will overwrite the value in LR. A procedure can pre-
serve LR in a few places: in another register, on a stack, or in a global mem-
ory location, as our examples did before Chapter 3 introduced the stack.
     I’ve already pointed out that using global variables to preserve LR
is a poor choice in nearly every case. That scheme can handle only one
level of calls and completely fails when using recursion (see section 5.8,
“Recursion,” on page 277) or writing multithreaded applications. It’s also
slower, uses more code, and is less convenient to use than other schemes.
     You could use another register to temporarily hold the return address
while calling another procedure. Of course, that register must be nonvola-
tile (or, at least, the procedure you’re calling must not modify that register’s
value) so that it will still contain the saved return address whenever the
procedure you call returns. Using a register to preserve LR like this is very
fast. Unfortunately, guaranteeing that other procedures won’t modify the
saved value often means you have to preserve that value in memory within
the second procedure to be called. Since you still have to write the value to
memory (and read it back), you may as well have saved LR directly to mem-
ory in the first place.
     The most common place to save the return address in LR is on the
stack. Usually, one of the first instructions in a procedure will move the con-
tents of the LR register into the stack. This is typically done in one of two
ways. The first is to directly push the LR register onto the stack:

str lr, [sp, #-16]!

The second is to adjust the stack down in memory and store LR into the
storage area just created:

sub sp, sp, #someAmount   // Make room for LR on stack.
str lr, [sp, #someOffset] // Store LR into space allocated on stack.

Here, someAmount is a multiple of 16 (or another value that keeps the stack
16-byte aligned), and someOffset is an index into the space just allocated on
the stack by the sub instruction.
     Notice that the former example uses the pre-indexed addressing mode
to adjust SP downward and store LR into the vacated space (because of
stack alignment issues, this actually reserves 16 bytes, though it uses only
8 of them). The latter example uses the indirect-plus-offset addressing
mode to simply store the return address into the storage allocated by the sub
instruction. This book most commonly uses the latter form because the cost
of sub is often shared by other code that uses the stack.
     Wasting 8 bytes by using the pre-indexed addressing mode won’t turn
out to be an issue. As you’ll see shortly, most of the time you’ll want to

                  preserve the value of the FP register along with the return address, so you’ll
                  commonly use an stp instruction, like one of the following, that won’t waste
                  any memory:

                  stp fp, lr, [sp, #-16]!

                  or

                  sub sp, sp, #someAmount
                  stp fp, lr, [sp, #someOffset]

                      The following subsections cover the use of the stack in procedures,
                  including activation records, accessing data within activation records (local
                  and automatic variables as well as parameters), how the ARM ABI influ-
                  ences activation records and passing parameters, and how to build and
                  destroy activation records.

                  5.4.1 Activation Records
                  When you call a procedure, the program associates certain information with
                  that procedure call, including the return address, parameters, and automatic
                  local variables (which I’ll discuss in later sections). To do so, it uses a data
                  structure called an activation record, also known as a stack frame. The program
                  creates an activation record when calling (activating) a p  ­ rocedure, and the
                  data in the record is organized in a manner identical to structs.
                       This section covers traditional activation records created by a hypothet-
                  ical compiler, ignoring the parameter-passing conventions of the ARM ABI.
                  A later section of this chapter presents the ARM ABI conventions.
                       Construction of an activation record begins in the code that calls a
                  procedure. The caller makes room for the parameter data (if any) on the
                  stack and copies the data onto the stack. The bl instruction then passes the
                  return address into the procedure. At this point, construction of the activa-
                  tion record continues within the procedure itself. The procedure typically
                  pushes the value in LR onto the stack along with other registers and other
                  important state information, then makes room in the activation record for
                  local variables. The procedure might also update the FP register (X29) so
                  that it points at the base address of the activation record.
                       To see what a traditional activation record looks like, consider the fol-
                  lowing C++ procedure declaration:

                  void ARDemo(unsigned i, int j, unsigned k)
                  {
                       int a;
                       float r;
                       char c;
                       bool bb;

     short w;
      .
      .
      .
}

     Whenever a program calls this ARDemo procedure, it begins by pushing
the data for the parameters onto the stack. In the original C/C++ call-
ing convention (ignoring the ARM ABI), the calling code pushes all the
parameters onto the stack in the opposite order in which they appear in
the parameter list, from right to left. Therefore, the calling code pushes
first the value for the k parameter, then the value for the j parameter, and
finally the data for the i parameter (with possible padding for the param-
eters to keep the stack aligned).
     Next, the program calls ARDemo. Immediately upon entry into the ARDemo
procedure, the stack contains these three items arranged as shown in
Figure 5-2. Since the program pushes the parameters in reverse order, they
appear on the stack in the correct order, with the first parameter at the low-
est address in memory.

            Previous
             stack
            contents

            k’s value

            j’s value

            i’s value                       SP

Figure 5-2: Stack organization immediately upon
entry into ARDemo

    The first few instructions in ARDemo push the current values of LR and
FP onto the stack, then copy the value of SP into FP. Next, the code drops
the stack pointer down in memory to make room for the local variables.
This produces the stack organization shown in Figure 5-3.

                                  Previous
                                   stack
                                  contents

                                  k‘s value

                                  j‘s value

                                  i‘s value

                             Return address (LR)

                               Old FP value                      FP

                   a

                   r

                   c
                  bb
                   w

                              Possible padding                   SP

                  Figure 5-3: The activation record for ARDemo

                       Because local variables can be any size in the activation record, their
                  total storage might not be a multiple of 16 bytes. However, the entire block
                  of local variables must be a multiple of 16 bytes so that SP remains aligned
                  on a 16-byte boundary as required by the ARM CPU—hence the presence
                  of possible padding in Figure 5-3.

                  5.4.2 Objects in the Activation Record
                  To access objects in the activation record, you can use offsets from the FP
                  register to the desired object. The two items of immediate interest to you
                  are the parameters and the local variables. You can access the parameters
                  at positive offsets from the FP register; you can access the local variables at
                  negative offsets from the FP register, as Figure 5-4 shows (the figure assumes
                  that the i, j, and k parameters are all 64-bit integers with appropriate pad-
                  ding to 8 bytes each).
                      ARM specifically reserves the X29/FP register for use as a pointer to
                  the base of the activation record. This is why you should avoid using the FP
                  register for general calculations. If you arbitrarily change the value in the
                  FP register, you could lose access to the current procedure’s parameters and
                  local variables.

                                       Offset from FP
                 Previous
                  stack
                 contents

                k‘s value              +32

                 j‘s value             +24

                 i‘s value             +16

              Return address           +8

              Old FP value             +0               FP

 a                                     –4

 r                                     –8
 c                                     –9
bb                                     –10
 w                                     –12

                Padding                –16              SP

Figure 5-4: Offsets of objects in the ARDemo activation
record

     The local variables are aligned on offsets that are equal to their native
size: chars are aligned on 1-byte addresses; shorts/hwords are aligned on
2-byte addresses; longs, ints, unsigned, and words are aligned on 4-byte
addresses; and so forth. In the ARDemo example, all the locals just happen to
be allocated on appropriate addresses (assuming a compiler allocates stor-
age in the order of declaration).

5.4.3 ARM ABI Parameter-Passing Conventions
The ARM ABI makes several modifications to the activation record model:
•    The caller passes the first eight (non-floating-point) parameters in reg-
     isters (X0 through X7) rather than on the stack.
•    Parameters are always 8-byte values, either in registers or on the stack
     (if the formal parameter is fewer than 8 bytes in size, the unused HO
     bits are undefined).
•    Structures and unions greater than 16 bytes in size are passed by value
     on the stack above any other parameters, but with a pointer to the value
     in the normal parameter position (in a register or on the stack). Structs
     and unions that are 8 bytes (or fewer) are passed in a 64-bit register;
     those that are 9 to 16 bytes are passed in two consecutive registers.
    You must follow these conventions only when calling ARM ABI–compliant
code. For assembly language procedures that you write and call, you can use
any convention you like.

                       Apple’s calling conventions for macOS (iOS, iPadOS, and so on) vary
                  a little from the standard ARM ABI. This will affect your assembly code if
                  you’re doing the following:
                  •   Passing more than eight parameters to a procedure
                  •   Passing parameters to a variadic procedure
                       When passing parameters on the stack—that is, when you’re passing
                  more than eight arguments to a function—Apple packs them on the stack,
                  meaning it doesn’t simply allocate 8 bytes for each parameter on the stack.
                  It does ensure that each value is aligned in memory on its natural size
                  (chars = 1 byte, half words = 2 bytes, words = 4 bytes, and so on).
                       Variadic procedures are those with a variable number of parameters, such
                  as the C printf() function. Apple passes all variadic parameters on the stack
                  and allocates 8 bytes for each parameter, regardless of type. This is the
                  purpose behind the vparm2, vparm3, . . . , macros in aoaa​.inc: calls to printf()
                  under macOS must pass the arguments on the stack, while the same calls
                  on Linux pass the first eight parameters in registers.
                       The vparm2, vparm3, and so on, macros automatically generate the appro-
                  priate code based on the OS (either putting the parameters in the stack or
                  passing them in registers).

                  5.4.4 Standard Entry Sequence
                  The caller of a procedure is responsible for allocating storage for parame-
                  ters on the stack and moving the parameter data to its appropriate location.
                  In the simplest case, this just involves moving the data onto the stack by
                  using str or stp instructions. It is the procedure’s responsibility to construct
                  the rest of the activation record. You can accomplish this by using the fol-
                  lowing assembly language standard entry sequence code:

                  stp fp, lr, [sp, #-16]!    // Save LR and FP values.
                  mov fp, sp                 // Get activation record ptr in FP.
                  sub sp, sp, #NumVars       // Allocate local storage.

                       The mov fp, sp instruction copies the current address held in SP into the
                  FP register. As SP is currently pointing at the old value of FP pushed on the
                  stack, FP will point at the original FP value after the execution of this instruc-
                  tion, as shown in Figure 5-4. When using the stp instruction in the standard
                  entry sequence, make sure to specify the FP register as the first argument
                  so that it is stored at location [SP] and LR is stored at location [SP, #8]. This
                  ensures that FP will point at the old FP value after the mov instruction.
                       In the third instruction, NumVars represents the number of bytes of local
                  variables needed by the procedure, a constant that should be a multiple
                  of 16 so that the SP register remains aligned on a 16-byte boundary. If the
                  number of bytes of local variables in the procedure is not a multiple of 16,
                  round up the value to the next higher multiple of 16 before subtracting
                  this constant from SP. Doing so will slightly increase the amount of stor-
                  age the procedure uses for local variables but will not otherwise affect the

operation of the procedure. If the procedure doesn’t have any local vari-
ables or call any other functions, the

sub sp, sp, #NumVars

instruction isn’t necessary.
     In theory, you could use any register to access the data in the stack
frame. However, the OS, and especially debugger applications, often depend
on the activation record being built with FP pointing at the old FP value in
the activation record.
     If an ARM ABI–compliant program calls your procedure, the stack will
be aligned on a 16-byte boundary immediately prior to the execution of the
bl instruction. Pushing LR and FP onto the stack (before copying SP into
FP) adds another 16 bytes to the stack so that SP remains 16-byte aligned.
Therefore, assuming the stack was 16-byte aligned prior to the call, and the
number you subtract from SP is a multiple of 16, the stack will be 16-byte
aligned after allocating storage for local variables.
     The ARDemo activation record from the previous section has only 12 bytes
of local storage. Therefore, subtracting 12 from SP for the local variables
will not leave the stack 16-byte aligned. The entry sequence in the ARDemo
program must subtract 16 (which will include 4 bytes of padding) to keep
the stack properly aligned (as shown in Figure 5-4).
     A possible alternate entry code sequence that is equivalent to the ear-
lier example takes this form:

sub sp, sp, #numVars + 16    // Space for locals and SP/LR
stp fp, lr, [sp, #numVars]
add fp, sp, #numVars

     The ARM ABI calling convention suggests saving the LR and FP values
below the local variables. However, it is often convenient to allocate parame-
ter space for additional procedure calls (from the current procedure) while
allocating local variables. If you save the LR and FP values at the bottom of
the activation record in memory, you will need an extra instruction to make
room for those parameters, and cleaning up the activation record will take
more effort when the procedure returns.
     Because you’ll so often use the standard entry sequence, the aoaa​.inc
include file provides a macro to generate this sequence for you:

enter numVars

     The single constant argument is the amount of stack space to allocate
(for local variables and other memory objects) in addition to the 16 bytes
set aside to preserve the LR and FP registers. This macro generates the fol-
lowing sequence of instructions for the entry sequence:

stp fp, lr, [sp, #-16]!
mov fp, sp
sub sp, sp, #(numVars + 15) & 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFF0

                      The final expression involving numVars ensures that the space allocated
                  on the stack is a multiple of 16 bytes, to keep the stack 16-byte aligned.

                  5.4.5 Standard Exit Sequence
                  The standard exit sequence for an assembly language program is the
                  following:

                  mov sp, fp              // Deallocates storage for all the local vars
                  ldp fp, lr, [sp], #16   // Pop FP and return address.
                  ret                     // Return to caller.

                      In the aoaa​.inc include file, the leave macro expands to the original
                  standard exit sequence.

          5.5 Local Variables
                  Procedures and functions in most HLLs let you declare local variables
                  (also known as automatic variables). The previous sections mentioned that
                  procedures maintain local variables in an activation record, but they didn’t
                  really define how to create and use them. This section (and the subsections
                  that follow) defines local variables and describes how to allocate storage for
                  them and use them.
                       Local variables possess two special attributes in HLLs: scope and life-
                  time. The scope of an identifier determines where that identifier is visible
                  (accessible) in the source file during compilation. In most HLLs, the scope
                  of a procedure’s local variable is the body of that procedure; the identifier
                  is inaccessible outside that procedure. Sadly, Gas does not support locally
                  scoped variables in a procedure, since Gas has no syntax to determine the
                  bounds of a procedure.
                       Whereas scope is a compile-time attribute of a symbol, lifetime is a run-
                  time attribute. The lifetime of a variable is a range of time, from that point
                  when storage is first bound to the variable until the point where the storage
                  is no longer available for that variable. Static objects (those you declare in
                  the .data, .rodata, .bss, and .text sections) have a lifetime equivalent to the
                  total runtime of the application. The program allocates storage for such
                  variables when the program first loads into memory, and those variables
                  maintain that storage until the program terminates.
                       Local variables, more properly known as automatic variables, have
                  their storage allocated upon entry into a procedure. That storage is then
                  returned for other use when the procedure returns to its caller. The name
                  automatic refers to the program automatically allocating and deallocating
                  storage for the variable on procedure invocation and return.
                       Under Linux, a procedure can access any global .data, .bss, or .rodata
                  object exactly the same way the main program accesses such variables:
                  by referencing the name, using the PC-relative addressing mode (sadly,
                  macOS’s PIE format doesn’t allow easy access to non-.text section objects).
                  Accessing global objects is convenient and easy. However, accessing global

objects makes your programs harder to read, understand, and maintain, so
you should avoid using global variables within procedures.
     Although accessing global variables within a procedure may sometimes
be the best solution to a given problem, you likely won’t be writing such
code at this point, so carefully consider your options before doing so. (An
example of a legitimate use of global variables might be when sharing data
between threads in a multithreaded application, a bit beyond the scope of
this chapter.)
     This argument against accessing global variables does not apply to
other global symbols, however. It is perfectly reasonable to access global
constants, types, procedures, and other objects in your programs.

5.5.1 Low-Level Implementation of Automatic Variables
Your program accesses local variables in a procedure by using negative
offsets from the activation record base address (FP). Consider the Gas pro-
cedure in Listing 5-5, which is intended primarily to demonstrate the use of
local variables.

// Listing5-5.S
//
// Accessing local variables

#include "aoaa​.inc"

               .text

// local_vars
//
// Word a is at offset -4 from FP.
// Word bb is at offset -8 from FP.
//
// On entry, W0 and W1 contain values to store
// into the local variables a & bb (respectively).

            proc       local_vars
            enter      8

            str        w0, [fp, #-4]   // a = W0
            str        w1, [fp, #-8]   // bb = W1

    // Additional code here that uses a & bb

            leave
            endp       local_vars

    This program isn’t runnable, so I won’t bother providing a build com-
mand for it. The enter macro will actually allocate 16 bytes of storage, rather
than the 8 specified by the argument (for locals a and bb), in order to keep
the stack 16-byte aligned.
    The activation record for local_vars appears in Figure 5-5.

                                                   Offset from FP

                                  Previous
                                   stack
                                  contents               +16

                               Return address            +8

                               Old FP value              +0          FP

                   a                                     –4

                  bb                                     –8

                                                         –12
                          Space reserved to keep
                           stack 16-byte aligned
                                                         –16         SP

                  Figure 5-5: The activation record for the local_vars
                  procedure

                       Of course, having to refer to the local variables by the numeric offset
                  from the FP register is truly horrible. This code is not only difficult to
                  read (Is [FP, #-4] the a or the bb variable?) but also hard to maintain. For
                  example, if you decide you no longer need the a variable, you’d have to go
                  find every occurrence of [FP, #-8] (accessing the bb variable) and change it
                  to [FP, #-4].
                       A slightly better solution is to create equates for your local variable
                  names. Consider the modification to Listing 5-5 shown in Listing 5-6.

                  // Listing5-6.S
                  //
                  // Accessing local variables #2

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                                .code

                  // local_vars
                  //
                  // Demonstrates local variable access
                  //
                  // Word a is at offset -4 from FP.
                  // Word bb is at offset -8 from FP.
                  //
                  // On entry, W0 and W1 contain values to store
                  // into the local variables a & bb (respectively).

                  #define a [fp, #-4]
                  #define bb [fp, #-8]

                                proc     local_vars
                                enter    8

            str      w0, a
            str      w1, bb

    Additional code here that uses a & bb.

            leave
            endp     local_vars

     In Listing 5-6, the CPP replaces a and bb with the appropriate indirect-
plus-offset addressing mode to access those local variables on the stack.
This is considerably easier to read and maintain than the program in
Listing 5-5. However, this approach still requires some manual work to set
the local variable offsets in the #define statements, and modifying the code
(when adding or removing local variables) can create maintenance issues.
I’ll provide a better solution in the next section.
     One big advantage to automatic storage allocation is that it efficiently
shares a fixed pool of memory among several procedures. For example, say
you call three procedures in a row, like this:

bl ProcA
bl ProcB
bl ProcC

     In this example, ProcA allocates its local variables on the stack. Upon
return, ProcA deallocates that stack storage. Upon entry into ProcB, the pro-
gram allocates storage for ProcB’s local variables by using the same memory
locations just freed by ProcA. Likewise, when ProcB returns and the program
calls ProcC, ProcC uses the same stack space for its local variables that ProcB
recently freed up. This memory reuse makes efficient use of the system
resources and is probably the greatest advantage to using automatic variables.
     Now that you’ve seen how assembly language allocates and deallocates
storage for local variables, it’s easy to understand why automatic variables
do not maintain their values between two calls to the same procedure.
Once the procedure returns to its caller, the storage for the automatic vari-
able is lost, and, therefore, the value is lost as well. Thus, you must always
assume that a local variable object is uninitialized upon entry into a procedure. If
you need to maintain the value of a variable between calls to a procedure,
you should use one of the static variable declaration types.

5.5.2 The locals Macro
Using equates to maintain local variable references is a lot of work.
Granted, it’s better than using magic numbers in all your local variable
references, but even when using equates, inserting and deleting local vari-
ables in a procedure takes time and effort. What would be really nice is a
declaration section that lets you declare your local variables in an HLL-like
fashion and leave it up to the assembler to maintain all the offsets into
the activation record. The aoaa​.inc header file provides a set of macros you

                   can use to automate the creation of local variables. This section describes
                   those macros.
                        The activation record is a record (structure). In theory, you could use
                   the struct macro from Chapter 4 to define an activation record. However,
                  it’s easy enough to modify the struct/ends macros to create something even
                  ­better for local variables. To achieve that, the aoaa​.inc include file includes
                   two additional macros for declaring local variables: locals and endl. Use
                  these in a manner almost identical to the struct/ends macros

                  locals procName
                    declarations (same as for struct)
                  endl   procName

                  where procName is an identifier (usually the name of the procedure that the
                  local variables are associated with).
                       Like the ends macro, endl generates a symbol with the name procName.size
                  that is an equate set to the size of the local variable space. You can supply
                  this value to the enter macro to specify the amount of space to reserve for
                  the local variables:

                      proc    myProc

                      locals myProc
                      dword mp.ptrVar
                      word   mp​.counter
                      byte   mp​.inputChar
                      salign 4
                      word   mp.endIndex
                      endl   myProc

                      enter   myProc.size

                  Insert procedure's body here.

                      leave
                      endp    myProc

                       The locals/endl declarations create a set of equates whose values cor-
                  respond to the offsets of the symbols within an activation record. For exam-
                  ple, the symbols in the previous example have the following values:
                      mp.ptrVar ​  ​– 8
                      mp​.counter ​  ​–12
                      mp​.inputChar ​  ​–13
                      mp.endIndex ​  ​–20

                      You can use these offsets with the [FP, #offset] addressing mode to ref-
                  erence these local variables in the activation record. For example:

    ldr w0, [fp, #mp​.counter]
    ldr x1, [fp, #mp.ptrVar]
    str w0, [x1]

    This is a whole lot easier than accessing global variables in the .data section!
         When allocating offsets for variables between the locals and endl mac-
    ros, the declaration macros first decrease the offset counter by the size of
    the variable’s declaration and then assign the decremented offset value to
    the symbol. Specifying the salign directive will then adjust the offset to the
    specified boundary (2n , where n is the salign operand’s value). The next
    declaration will not use this offset, but rather it will first decrement the run-
    ning offset counter by the size of the declaration and assign that offset to
    the variable. In the earlier example, the salign directive set the running off-
    set to –16 (because 13 bytes of variables were allocated at that point). The
    following variable’s offset is –20, because mp.endIndex consumes 4 bytes.
         As I mentioned earlier, Gas does not support the concept of lexically
    scoped local variable names, which are private to a procedure. Therefore,
    all symbols you declare within the locals/endl block are visible throughout
    the source file. This can lead to namespace pollution, where you wind up
    ­creating names in one procedure and cannot reuse those names in a differ-
     ent procedure.
         In the examples of this section, I use a convention that I continue
     throughout this book to alleviate namespace pollution: I use local variable
     names of the form proc.local, where proc is the procedure’s name (or an
    abbreviation of the procedure’s name) and local is the specific local vari-
    able name I want to use. For example, mp.ptrVar is the ptrVar local variable
    within the myProc (mp) procedure.

5.6 Parameters
    Although many procedures are totally self-contained, most procedures
    require input data and return data to the caller (parameters).
         The first aspect to consider when discussing parameters is how we
    pass them to a procedure. If you are familiar with Pascal or C/C++, you’ve
    probably seen two ways to pass parameters: pass by value and pass by refer-
    ence. Anything you can do with an HLL can be done in assembly language
    ­(obviously, as HLL code compiles into machine code), but you have to pro-
     vide the instruction sequence to access those parameters in an appropriate
     fashion.
         Another concern when dealing with parameters is where you pass them.
     There are many places to pass parameters: in registers, on the stack, in the
     code stream, in global variables, or a combination of these. The following
     subsections cover several of the possibilities.

    5.6.1 Passing by Value
    A parameter passed by value is just that—the caller passes a value to the
    procedure. Pass-by-value parameters are input-only parameters. You can

                  pass them to a procedure, but the procedure cannot return values through
                  them. Consider this C/C++ function call:

                  CallProc(I);

                       If you pass I by value, CallProc() does not change the value of I, regard-
                  less of what happens to the parameter inside CallProc().
                       Because you must pass a copy of the data to the procedure, you should
                  use this method only for passing small objects like bytes, words, double
                  words, and quad words. Passing large arrays and records by value is ineffi-
                  cient, because you must create and pass a copy of the object to the procedure.

                  5.6.2 Passing by Reference
                  To pass a parameter by reference, you must pass the address of a variable
                  rather than its value. In other words, you must pass a pointer to the data.
                  The procedure must dereference this pointer to access the data. Passing
                  parameters by reference is useful when you must modify the actual param-
                  eter or when you pass large data structures between procedures. Because
                  pointers on the ARM are 64 bits wide, a parameter that you pass by refer-
                  ence will consist of a double-word value, typically in one of the general-
                  purpose registers.
                      You can use the lea macro to take the address of any static variable
                  you’ve declared in your .data, .bss, .rodata, or .text sections. Listing 5-7
                  demonstrates how to obtain the address of a static variable (staticVar) and
                  pass that address to a procedure (someFunc) in the X0 register.

                  // Listing5-7.S
                  //
                  // Demonstrate obtaining the address
                  // of a variable by using the lea instruction.

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                               .data
                  staticVar:   .word     .-.

                               .code
                               .extern someFunc

                               proc      get_address
                               enter     0
                               lea       x0, staticVar
                               bl        someFunc
                               leave
                               endp      get_address

                      Calculating the address of a nonstatic variable is a bit more work.
                  Unfortunately, the adr and adrp instructions compute only the address of a
                  PC-relative memory access. If your variable is referenced by one of the other

                  ARM addressing modes, you’ll have to manually compute the effective
                  address yourself.
                      Table 5-1 describes the process for effective address calculation. In the
                  table, the [Xn, #const] (scaled form) addressing mode describes a machine
                  encoding, not an assembler syntax. In source code, the scaled and unscaled
                  variants share the same syntax: [Xn, #const]. The assembler will pick the
                  correct machine encoding based on the value of the constant.

Table 5-1: Effective Address Calculations
 Addressing mode     Effective address      Description
 [Xn]                Xn                     For the register-indirect addressing mode, the effective address
                                            is just the value held in the register.
 [Xn, #const]        Xn + const             For the indirect-plus-offset addressing mode, the sum of the Xn
                                            register and the constant is the effective address. This assumes
                                            the constant is –256 to +255 and the shift is 0.
 [Xn, #const]        Xn + const (scaled)    For the scaled-indirect-plus-offset mode (where the scaling
                                            factor is determined by the size of the data being loaded or
                                            stored), the constant has to be multiplied by the size of the
                                            memory operand prior to adding with the Xn register. For
                                            strb/ldrb, the multiplier is 1; for strh/ldrh, the multiplier is 2;
                                            for str/ldr (word register), the multiplier is 4; and for str/ldr
                                            (dword register), the multiplier is 8. For strb/ldrb, the constant
                                            must be in the range 0–4,096. For strh/ldrh, the constant must
                                            be in the range 0–8,191 and must be an even number. For ldr/
                                            str with a word-sized register operand, the constant must be in
                                            the range 0–16,383 and must be a multiple of 4. For ldr/str
                                            with a dword-sized register operand, the constant must be in
                                            the range 0–32,767 and must be a multiple of 8.
 [Xn, #const]!       Xn + const             For the pre-indexed addressing mode, the effective address is
                                            the sum of the Xn register and the constant.
 [Xn], #const        Xn                     For the post-indexed addressing mode, the effective address is
                                            just the value in the Xn register.
 [Xn, Xm]            Xn + Xm                For the scaled-indexed addressing mode, with a scaling factor
                                            of 1, the effective address is the sum of the two registers (sign-
                                            or zero-extend Xm, if specified).
 [Xn, Xm,            Xn + (Xm << s)         For the scaled-indexed addressing mode with a shift exten-
 extend #s]                                 sion, the effective address is the sum of Xn plus the value in Xm
                                            shifted to the left s positions (with Xm zero- or sign-extended, if
                                            specified).

                      Suppose that a procedure has a local variable and you want to pass that
                  on to a second procedure by reference. Because you access local variables by
                  using the [FP, #offset] addressing mode, the effective address is FP + offset.
                  You would have to use the following instruction to compute the address of
                  that variable (leaving the address in X0):

                  add x0, fp, #offset

                      Listing 5-8 demonstrates passing a local variable as a reference param-
                  eter to a procedure.

                  // Listing5-8.S
                  //
                  // Demonstrate passing a local variable
                  // by reference to another procedure.

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                               .data
                  staticVar:   .word     .-.

                               .code
                               .extern aSecondFunction

                               proc      demoPassLclByRef

                               locals    ga
                               word      ga.aLocalVariable
                               endl      ga

                               enter     ga.size
                               add       x0, fp, #ga.aLocalVariable // Pass parameter in X0.
                               bl        aSecondFunction

                               leave
                               endp      demoPassLclByRef

                      Pass by reference is usually less efficient than pass by value. You must
                  dereference all pass-by-reference parameters on each access; this is slower
                  than simply using a value because it typically requires at least two instruc-
                  tions: one to fetch the address into a register and one to fetch the value
                  indirectly through that register.
                      However, when passing a large data structure, pass by reference is faster
                  because you do not have to copy the large data structure before calling the
                  procedure. Of course, you’d probably need to access elements of that large
                  data structure (such as an array) by using a pointer, so little efficiency is lost
                  when you pass large arrays by reference.

                  5.6.3 Using Low-Level Parameter Implementation
                  A parameter-passing mechanism is a contract between the caller and the
                  callee (the procedure). Both parties have to agree on where the parameter
                  data will appear and what form it will take (for example, value or address).
                      If your assembly language procedures are being called only by other
                  assembly language code that you’ve written, you control both sides of the
                  contract negotiation and get to decide where and how you’re going to pass
                  parameters. However, if external code is calling your procedure, or your
                  procedure is calling external code, your procedure will have to adhere to
                  whatever calling convention that external code uses.
                      Before discussing the particular calling conventions, this section con-
                  siders the situation of calling code that you’ve written (and, therefore,

have complete control over its calling conventions). The following sections
describe the various ways you can pass parameters in pure assembly language
code (without the overhead associated with the ARM or macOS ABIs).

5.6.3.1   Passing Parameters in Registers
Having touched on how to pass parameters to a procedure, the next topic
to discuss is where to pass parameters. This depends on the size and num-
ber of those parameters. If you are passing a small number of parameters
to a procedure, the registers are an excellent place to pass them. If you
are passing a single parameter to a procedure, pass that data in X0, as
described in Table 5-2.

Table 5-2: Parameter Size and Location
 Parameter size     Location
 Byte               Pass a byte parameter in the LO byte of W0.
 Half word          Pass a halfword parameter in the LO half-word of W0.
 Word               Pass a word in W0.
 Dword              Pass a dword in X0.
 > 8 bytes          I suggest passing a pointer to the data structure in X0, or the value
                    in X0/X1 if 16 bytes or fewer.

     When passing fewer than 32 bits in X0, the macOS ABI requires that
the value be zero- or sign-extended throughout the X0 register. The ARM
ABI does not require this. Of course, when passing data to a procedure
you’ve written in assembly language, it is up to you to define what must be
done with the HO bits. The safest course of action, portable everywhere,
is to zero-extend or sign-extend the value into the HO bits (depending on
whether the value is unsigned or signed).
     If you need to pass more than 8 bytes as a parameter, you could also
pass that data in multiple registers (for example, under macOS and Linux,
the C/C++ compiler will pass a 16-byte structure in two registers). Whether
you pass the argument as a pointer or in multiple registers is up to you.
     For passing parameters to a procedure in registers, the ARM ABI
reserves X0 to X7. Of course, in pure assembly language code (that won’t
call, or be called by, ARM ABI–compliant code), you can use whichever
registers you choose. However, X0 through X7 should probably be your first
choice unless you can provide a good reason for using other registers.
     Eight parameters probably cover 95 percent of the procedures ever
written. If you are passing more than eight parameters to a pure assembly
procedure, nothing is stopping you from using additional registers (for
example, X8 through X15). Likewise, nothing is stopping you from passing
large objects in multiple registers, if you really want to do that.

                  5.6.3.2   Passing Parameters in the Code Stream
                  You can also pass parameters in the code stream immediately after the bl
                  instruction. Consider the following print routine that prints a literal string
                  constant to the standard output device:

                  bl      print
                  .asciz "This parameter is in the code stream..."

                       Normally, a subroutine returns control to the first instruction imme-
                  diately following the bl instruction. Were that to happen here, the ARM
                  would attempt to interpret the ASCII codes for "This..." as an instruction.
                  This would produce undesirable results. Fortunately, you can skip over this
                  string before returning from the subroutine.
                       One big issue arises with the design of the ARM CPU, however: all
                  instructions must be word-aligned in memory. Therefore, the parameter
                  data appearing in the code stream must be a multiple of 4 bytes long (I
                  chose the string in this example to contain 39 characters so that the zero-
                  terminating byte made the whole sequence 40 bytes).
                       So how do you gain access to these parameters? Easy: the return address
                  in LR points at them. Consider the implementation of print in Listing 5-9.

                  // Listing5-9.S
                  //
                  // Demonstrate passing parameters in the code stream

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                               .text
                               .pool
                  ttlStr:      .asciz        "Listing 5-9"
                               .align        2

                  // getTitle
                  //
                  // Return program title to C++ program:

                               proc      getTitle, public
                               lea       x0, ttlStr
                               ret
                               endp      getTitle

                  // print
                  //
                  // Here's the print procedure.
                  // It expects a zero-terminated string
                  // to follow the call to print:

                  rtnAdrs      =         8           // Offset to rtn adrs from FP.

                               proc      print

          1 locals   print
            qword    print.x0X1Save   // Register save area.
            qword    print.x2X3Save
            qword    print.x4X5Save
            qword    print.x6X7Save
            qword    print.x8X9Save
            qword    print.x10X11Save
            qword    print.x12X13Save
            qword    print.x14X15Save
            endl     print

             enter   print.size

// Assembly language convention--save all the registers
// whose values we change. Spares caller from having to
// preserve volatile registers.
// Note: this code calls ABI function write, so you must
// preserve all the volatile registers.

             stp     x0, x1, [fp, #print.x0X1Save]
             stp     x2, x3, [fp, #print.x2X3Save]
             stp     x4, x5, [fp, #print.x4X5Save]
             stp     x6, x7, [fp, #print.x6X7Save]
             stp     x8, x9, [fp, #print.x8X9Save]
             stp     x10, x11, [fp, #print.x10X11Save]
             stp     x12, x13, [fp, #print.x12X13Save]
             stp     x14, x15, [fp, #print.x14X15Save]

// Compute the length of the string immediately following
// the call to this procedure:

          2 mov      x1, lr               // Get pointer to string.
search4_0:  ldrb     w2, [x1], #1         // Get next char.
            cmp      w2, #0               // At end of string?
            bne      search4_0            // If not, keep searching.
            sub      x2, x1, lr           // Compute string length.

// LR now points just beyond the 0 byte. We need to
// make sure this address is 4-byte aligned:

          3 add      x1, x1, #3
            and      x1, x1, #-4          // 0xfff...fff0

// X1 points just beyond the 0 byte and padding.
// Save it as the new return address:

          4 str      x1, [fp, #rtnAdrs]

// Call write to print the string to the console.
//
// write( fd, bufAdrs, len );
//
// fd in X0 (this will be 1 for stdout)
// bufAdrs in X1

                  // len in X2

                            5 mov      x0, #1         // stdout = 1
                              mov      x1, lr         // Pointer to string
                              bl       write

                  // Restore the registers we used:

                            6 ldp      x0, x1, [fp, #print.x0X1Save]
                              ldp      x2, x3, [fp, #print.x2X3Save]
                              ldp      x4, x5, [fp, #print.x4X5Save]
                              ldp      x6, x7, [fp, #print.x6X7Save]
                              ldp      x8, x9, [fp, #print.x8X9Save]
                              ldp      x10, x11, [fp, #print.x10X11Save]
                              ldp      x12, x13, [fp, #print.x12X13Save]
                              ldp      x14, x15, [fp, #print.x14X15Save]
                              leave                   // Return to caller.
                              endp     print

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                              proc     asmMain, public
                              enter    64

                  // Demonstrate passing parameters in code stream
                  // by calling the print procedure:

                              bl       print
                            7 .asciz   "Hello, world!!\n"

                              leave    // Returns to caller
                              endp     asmMain

                       The print procedure 1 saves all the registers it modifies (even the vola-
                  tile registers, because the call to write() might overwrite them). This is a
                  normal assembly language convention, but it’s especially important for print
                  because you want to be able to print (debug) messages without saving regis-
                  ter values across your calls.
                       LR points at the string to print upon entry into the print procedure 2.
                  This code scans through that string to find the zero-terminating byte; this
                  scan produces both the length and the (approximate) return address.
                       Because code must be aligned on a 4-byte boundary, the return address
                  isn’t necessarily the byte after the zero-terminating byte. Instead, the code
                  may need to pad the end of string pointer by 1 to 3 bytes to advance to the
                  next word boundary in the .text section 3. Adding 3 and then ANDing
                  the result with 0xFFFFFFFFFFFFFFFC (-4) pads the return address up
                  to the appropriate boundary. The code then stores the return address over
                  the original on the stack 4.
                       Once you have the string length, you can call the C stdlib write function
                  to print it 5 (if the first argument is 0, this prints the string to the standard
                  output device). On exit, the code restores the registers you saved earlier 6.

     For this listing, I included two exclamation marks 7 so that the length
of the string (including the zero-terminating byte) is a multiple of four
characters. This ensures that the following instruction is aligned on a
4-byte boundary.
     To avoid a bus fault, the length of the data following the call to print
must be a multiple of 4 bytes so that the next instruction is properly aligned
on a 4-byte boundary. The length of the string itself doesn’t have to be a
multiple of 4 bytes; arbitrary padding after the zero-terminating byte is
fine. Rather than counting the number of characters in the string, you
could use the Gas .p2align directive. This directive will pad the location
counter to a boundary that is a multiple of 2n bytes, where n is the (first)
value in the .p2align operand field. For example

.p2align 2

pads the location counter to the next word boundary.
    Using the .p2align 2 directive, you can call the print procedure with an
arbitrary-length string as follows:

bl          print
.asciz      "Hello, world!\n"
.p2align    2

     Remembering to put the .p2align 2 directive in the code can be dif-
ficult, not to mention that having to type it is a pain, and it clutters up your
code. To resolve this, the aoaa​.inc include file includes a wastr (word-aligned
string) macro that automatically adds the padding for you:

bl         print
wastr      "Hello, world!\n"

      Besides showing how to pass parameters in the code stream, the print
routine also exhibits another concept: variable-length parameters (the length
of the string can be arbitrarily long). The string following the bl can be any
practical length. The zero-terminating byte marks the end of the parameter
list. You can handle variable-length parameters in two easy ways: either use
a special terminating value (like 0) or pass a special length value that tells
the subroutine the number of parameters you are passing. Both methods
have advantages and disadvantages.
      Using a special value to terminate a parameter list requires that you
choose a value that never appears in the list. For example, print uses 0 as
the terminating value, so it cannot print the NUL character (whose ASCII
code is 0). Sometimes this isn’t a limitation. Specifying a length parameter
is another mechanism you can use to pass a variable-length parameter list.
While this doesn’t require any special codes or limit the range of possible
values that can be passed to a subroutine, setting up the length parameter
and maintaining the resulting code can be a real nightmare; this is espe-
cially true if the parameter list changes frequently.

                       Despite the convenience afforded by passing parameters in the code
                  stream, this method also has disadvantages. First, if you fail to provide the
                  exact number of parameters the procedure requires, the subroutine will
                  get confused. Consider the print example. It prints a string of characters up
                  to a zero-terminating byte and then returns control to the first instruction
                  following that byte. If you leave off the zero-terminating byte, the print rou-
                  tine happily prints the following opcode bytes as ASCII characters until it
                  finds a 0 byte. Because 0 bytes often appear in the middle of an instruction,
                  the print routine might return control into the middle of another instruc-
                  tion, which will probably crash the machine.
                       On the ARM, you must ensure that the parameters you pass in the code
                  stream are a multiple of 4 bytes long. The instructions following the param-
                  eters must lie on a word boundary. Problems notwithstanding, however,
                  the code stream is an efficient place to pass parameters whose values do
                  not change.

                  5.6.3.3   Passing Parameters on the Stack
                  Most HLLs use the stack to pass a large number of parameters because
                  this method is fairly efficient. Although passing parameters on the stack
                  is slightly less efficient than doing so in registers, the register set is limited
                  (especially if you’re limiting yourself to the eight registers the ARM ABI sets
                  aside for this purpose). The stack, on the other hand, allows you to pass a
                  large amount of parameter data without difficulty. This is the reason that
                  most programs pass their parameters on the stack (at least, when passing
                  more than eight parameters).
                        To manually pass parameters on the stack, push them immediately
                  before calling the subroutine (just remember to keep the stack 16-byte
                  aligned). The subroutine then reads this data from the stack memory and
                  operates on it appropriately. Consider the following HLL function call:

                  CallProc(i,j,k);

                      Because keeping SP aligned on a 16-byte boundary is crucial, you
                  can’t simply push one argument at a time with a str instruction, nor can
                  you push values smaller than 32 bits. Assuming that i, j, and k are 32-bit
                  integers, you would need to somehow marshal them together into a 128-bit
                  package (including an extra 32 bits of unused data) and push 16 bytes onto
                  the stack. This is so inconvenient that ARM code almost never pushes indi-
                  vidual (or even pairs of) register values onto the stack.
                      The common solution in ARM assembly language is first to drop the
                  stack down by however many bytes you need (plus any padding, to make
                  sure the stack is aligned properly), and then to simply store your parameters
                  into the stack space so allocated. For example, to call CallProc, you might
                  use code like the following:

                  sub sp, sp, #16     // Allocate space for parameters.
                  str w0, [sp]        // Assume i is in W0,

str w1, [sp, #4]     // j is in W1, and
str w2, [sp, #8]     // k is in W2.
bl CallProc
add sp, sp, #16      // Caller must clean up stack.

    The sub instruction allocates 16 bytes on the stack; you need only
12 for the three 32-bit parameters, but you must allocate 16 to keep the
stack aligned.
    The three str instructions store the parameter data (which is pre-
sumed to be in W0, W1, and W2 by this code) into the 12 bytes from SP + 0
through SP + 11. The CallProc will simply ignore the extra 4 bytes allocated
on the stack.
    In this example, the three 32-bit integers are packed into memory, each
consuming 4 bytes on the stack. So the i parameter is found at SP + 0, the
j parameter is found at SP + 4, and the k parameter is found at SP + 8 upon
entry into CallProc (see Figure 5-6).

SP + 16            Previous stack contents

   + 12                Garbage bits

    +8               k‘s current value

    +4                j‘s current value

    +0               i‘s current value                SP

Figure 5-6: Stack layout upon entry into CallProc

    If your procedure includes the standard entry and exit sequences, you
may directly access the parameter values in the activation record by index-
ing off the FP register. Consider the layout of the activation record for
CallProc that uses the following declaration:

proc CallProc
enter 0           // No local variables
  .
  .
  .
leave
endp CallProc

     At this point, i’s value can be found at [FP, #16], j’s value can be found
at [FP, #20], and k’s value can be found at [FP, #24] (see Figure 5-7).

                  FP + 32           Previous stack contents

                    + 28                  Garbage bits

                    + 24                 k‘s current value

                    + 20                 j‘s current value

                    + 16                 i‘s current value

                      +8                 Return address

                      +0                  FP’s old value                    SP, FP

                  Figure 5-7: CallProc activation record after standard entry
                  sequence

                      Within the CallProc procedure, you can access the parameter values
                  with these instructions:

                  ldr w0, [fp, #16]
                  ldr w1, [fp, #20]
                  ldr w2, [fp, #24]

                      Of course, using magic numbers such as these to reference the param-
                  eter offsets is still a bad idea. It would be far better to use equates or, even
                  better, create a declaration macro similar to struct and locals to define the
                  parameters for a procedure. The aoaa​.inc file contains just such a macro: args
                  (and enda). Listing 5-10 demonstrates the use of this macro.

                  // Listing5-10.S
                  //
                  // Accessing a parameter on the stack

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                                .data
                  value1:       .word      20
                  value2:       .word      30
                  pVar:         .word      .-.

                  ttlStr:       .asciz     "Listing 5-10"
                  fmtStr1:      .asciz     "Value of parameter: %d\n"

                                .code
                                .extern printf

                  // getTitle
                  //
                  // Return program title to C++ program.

                                proc       getTitle, public
                                lea        x0, ttlStr

            ret
            endp     getTitle

// valueParm
//
// Passed a single parameter (vp.theParm) by value

            proc     valueParm

            args     vp           // Declare the
            word     vp.theParm   // parameter.
            enda     vp

            enter    64           // Alloc space for printf.

// vparms macro accepts only global variables.
// Must copy parameter to that global to print it:

            lea      x0, fmtStr1
            ldr      w1, [fp, #vp.theParm]
            lea      x2, pVar
            str      w1, [x2]
            vparm2   pVar
            bl       printf

            leave
            ret
            endp     valueParm

// Here is the asmMain function:

            proc     asmMain, public
            enter    64

            lea      x0, value1
            ldr      w1, [x0]
            str      w1, [sp]          // Store parameter on stack.
            bl       valueParm

            lea      x0, value2
            ldr      w1, [x0]
            str      w1, [sp]          // Store parameter on stack.
            bl       valueParm

            leave
            endp     asmMain

    The args macro requires an argument list name, which can be the
procedure name or an abbreviation of it, and an optional second argu-
ment with a starting offset. The second argument defaults to 16, which is
an appropriate value if the procedure uses the standard entry sequence
(pushing the LR and FP registers on the stack). Offsets associated with the
parameters you declare are offsets from FP in the procedure.

                      Here’s the build command and sample output for Listing 5-10:

                  % ./build Listing5-10
                  % ./Listing5-10
                  Calling Listing5-10:
                  Value of parameter: 20
                  Value of parameter: 30
                  Listing5-10 terminated

                      If your procedure does not use the standard entry sequence, you can
                  specify an explicit offset as the second argument. For example:

                  args procName, 0

                      If you aren’t pushing anything on the stack in the procedure (or allo-
                  cating local variables), 0 is a good value to use; then the offsets are SP based
                  rather than FP based.

                  5.6.3.4   Removing Parameters in Callee vs. Caller Stack Cleanup
                  When passing parameters on the stack, ultimately those parameters must
                  be removed from the stack. The ARM ABI specifies that the caller is respon-
                  sible for removing all parameters it pushes onto the stack. Most of the
                  example programs in this book thus far have (implicitly) done this.
                       Removing the parameters after every procedure call is slow and inef-
                  ficient. Fortunately, an easy optimization eliminates the need to allocate
                  and deallocate parameter storage for each function call. Upon entry into a
                  procedure, when allocating storage for local variables, include additional
                  storage to be used for parameters the procedure passes to other functions.
                  This, in fact, has been the whole purpose of the “magic stack allocation”
                  instructions at the beginning of most procedures in this book up to this
                  point. The examples thus far have typically reserved 64 or 256 bytes of stor-
                  age on the stack (enough for between eight and thirty-two 64-bit param-
                  eters, respectively).
                       Functions that pass parameters on the stack, such as printf() running
                  on macOS, can store data into this area prior to calling the function. Upon
                  return from the function, your code does not have to worry about cleaning
                  up the parameters. That stack space is now available for the next function
                  you want to call that requires stack parameters.
                       Ultimately, of course, the parameters must be deallocated from the
                  stack. That happens when the procedure executes the leave macro (or man-
                  ually copies FP into SP, which is part of leave’s expansion). When using enter
                  and leave to allocate this stack space for the parameters, along with any
                  local variables a procedure might need, you need to allocate and de­allocate
                  the stack space only once, not for each individual procedure call.
                       If your procedure doesn’t have any local variables, you can easily allo-
                  cate stack space for parameters by using code like the following:

proc myProc
enter 64    // Allocate 64 bytes for parameter usage.
  .
  .
  .
leave       // Deallocate storage and returns.
endp myProc

    If your procedure requires local variable storage, just specify the extra
stack space as a dummy local variable at the end of your locals declaration:

proc      myProc

locals mp
word   mp.local1
dword mp.local2
byte   mp.local3
byte   mp.stack, 64 // Allocate 64 bytes for parms.
endl   mp

enter     mp.size      // Allocate locals and stack space.
  .
  .
  .
leave                  // Deallocate storage and returns.
endp      myProc

    Remember that enter always allocates a multiple of 16 bytes, so we know
that the stack storage will be aligned on a 16-byte boundary.

5.6.3.5    Passing Parameters to the C/C++ printf() Function
Under Linux, you pass the first eight printf() parameters in registers, just
as you would any other nonvariadic function. On macOS, those param-
eters are always passed on the stack, each occupying a dword. Until now,
this book has used the vparmsn macros to handle the difference in the way
parameters are passed (and, of course, to avoid dealing with the stack,
which the book hadn’t covered in the earlier chapters).
     In this book, I strived to write code that is portable between Linux and
macOS, resorting to OS-specific code only as necessary; this was part of
the motivation for using the vparmsn macros when calling printf(). Now that
you’ve learned how these two OSes expect you to pass variadic parameters,
you’ll probably want to pass parameters in a more flexible manner than
using the vparmsn macros. Nevertheless, there is great benefit (at least for the
source code in this book) to writing portable code. Fortunately, with a little
sleight of hand, it is possible to directly pass the parameters to printf() with-
out using vparmsn and still have the code assemble and run on both OSes.
     The first rule is to load each printf() argument into X0 through X7.
This puts the arguments into the locations where Linux expects them.
Once the arguments are in these registers, you’ll also store them into the

                  stack storage area at SP + 0, SP + 8, SP + 16, . . . , SP + 56 (which is where
                  macOS expects them). Here’s a typical call to printf() printing the values in
                  X0, X5, and X7:

                  locals mp
                  Byte   mp.stack, 24
                  endl   mp
                   .
                   .
                   .
                  enter mp.size
                   .
                   .
                   .
                  mov x1, x0          // Put data in appropriate registers first.
                  mov x2, x5
                  mov x3, x7
                  lea x0, fmtStr
                  str x1, [sp]        // For macOS, store the arguments
                  str x2, [sp, #8]    // onto the stack in their
                  str x3, [sp, #16] // appropriate locations.
                  bl   printf         // Then call printf.

                      Strictly speaking, the str instructions aren’t necessary when running
                  under Linux. To allow the creation of slightly more efficient code, I’ve pro-
                  vided the following mstr macro in the aoaa​.inc include file:

                  mstr register, memory

                      This macro assembles to nothing under Linux and to the correspond-
                  ing str instruction under macOS. If you rewrite the former code by using
                  mstr, it will not generate any excess code under Linux:

                  locals mp
                  Byte   mp.stack, 24
                  endl   mp
                   .
                   .
                   .
                  enter mp.size
                   .
                   .
                   .
                  mov x1, x0          // Put data in appropriate registers first.
                  mov x2, x5
                  mov x3, x7
                  lea x0, fmtStr
                  mstr x1, [sp]       // For macOS, store the arguments
                  mstr x2, [sp, #8]   // onto the stack in their
                  mstr x3, [sp, #16] // appropriate locations.
                  bl   printf         // Then call printf.

   Of course, if you’re writing code only for Linux and don’t care at all
about macOS portability, you can drop the mstr instructions altogether to
remove some clutter.

5.6.4 Accessing Reference Parameters on the Stack
Because you pass the addresses of objects as reference parameters, access-
ing the reference parameters within a procedure is slightly more difficult
than accessing value parameters, as you must dereference the pointers to
the reference parameters.
    Consider Listing 5-11, which demonstrates a single pass-by-reference
parameter.

// Listing5-11.S
//
// Accessing a reference parameter on the stack

#include "aoaa​.inc"

             .data
value1:      .word     20
value2:      .word     30

ttlStr:      .asciz    "Listing 5-11"
fmtStr1:     .asciz    "Value of reference parameter: %d\n"

             .code
             .extern printf

// getTitle
//
// Return program title to C++ program.

             proc      getTitle, public
             lea       x0, ttlStr
             ret
             endp      getTitle

// refParm
//
// Expects a pass-by-reference parameter on the stack

             proc      refParm

             args      rp
             dword     rp.theParm
             enda      rp

             enter     64              // Alloc space for printf.

             lea       x0, fmtStr1
           1 ldr       x1, [fp, #rp.theParm]
             ldr       w1, [x1]

                            2 mstr    x1, [sp]
                              bl      printf

                              leave
                              endp    refParm

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                              proc    asmMain, public
                              enter   64

                  // Pass the address of the arguments on the
                  // stack to the refParm procedure:

                            3 lea     x0, value1
                              str     x0, [sp]          // Store address on stack.
                              bl      refParm

                              lea     x0, value2
                              str     x0, [sp]          // Store address on stack.
                              bl      refParm

                              leave

                              endp    asmMain

                       The refParm procedure fetches the reference parameter (a 64-bit
                  pointer) into X1 1 and then immediately dereferences this pointer by
                  fetching the 32-bit word at the address in X1. The mstr macro 2 stores the
                  second parameter onto the stack (under macOS). To pass a variable by ref-
                  erence to refParm 3, you must compute its effective address and pass that.
                       Here is the build command and sample output for the program in
                  Listing 5-11:

                  $ ./build Listing5-11
                  $ ./Listing5-11
                  Calling Listing5-11:
                  Value of reference parameter: 20
                  Value of reference parameter: 30
                  Listing5-11 terminated

                       As you can see, accessing (small) pass-by-reference parameters is a little
                  less efficient than accessing value parameters, because you need an extra
                  instruction to load the address into a 64-bit pointer register (not to mention
                  that you have to reserve a 64-bit register for this purpose). If you access ref-
                  erence parameters frequently, these extra instructions can really begin to
                  add up, reducing the efficiency of your program.
                       Furthermore, it’s easy to forget to dereference a reference parameter
                  and use the address of the value in your calculations. Therefore, unless you
                  really need to affect the value of the actual parameter, you should use pass
                  by value to pass small objects to a procedure.

    Passing large objects, like arrays and records, is where using reference
parameters becomes efficient. When passing these objects by value, the call-
ing code has to make a copy of the actual parameter; if it is a large object,
the copy process can be inefficient. Because computing the address of a
large object is just as efficient as computing the address of a small scalar
object, no efficiency is lost when passing large objects by reference. Within
the procedure, you must still dereference the pointer to access the object,
but the efficiency loss due to indirection is minimal when you contrast this
with the cost of copying that large object.
    Listing 5-12 demonstrates how to use pass by reference to initialize an
array of structures.

// Listing5-12.S
//
// Passing a large object by reference

#include "aoaa​.inc"

NumElements =          24

// Here's the structure type:

            struct     Pt
            byte       pt.x
            byte       pt.y
            ends       Pt

            .data

ttlStr:     .asciz     "Listing 5-12"
fmtStr1:    .asciz     "refArrayParm[%d].x=%d"
fmtStr2:    .asciz     "refArrayParm[%d].y=%d\n"

            .code
            .extern printf

// getTitle
//
// Return program title to C++ program.

            proc       getTitle, public
            lea        x0, ttlStr
            ret
            endp       getTitle

// refAryParm
//
// Passed the address of an array of Pt structures
// Initializes each element of that array

            proc       refAryParm

                                args     rap
                                dword    rap.ptArray       // Reference parameter
                                enda     rap

                                enter    0                 // No stack space needed!

                  // Get the base address of the array into X1:

                              1 ldr      x1, [fp, #rap.ptArray]

                  // While X0 < NumElements, initialize each
                  // array element. x = X0/8, y = X0 % 8:

                                mov      x0, xzr               // Index into array.
                  ForEachEl:    cmp      x0, #NumElements      // While we're not done
                                bhs      LoopDone

                  // Compute address of ptArray[X0].
                  // Element adrs = base address (X1) + index (X19) * size (2):

                              2 add      x3, x1, x0, lsl #1    // X3 = X1 + X0 * 2

                  // Store index / 8 into x field:

                                lsr      x2, x0, #3            // X2 = X0 / 8
                                strb     w2, [x3, #pt.x]       // ptArray[X0].x = X0/8

                  // Store index % 8 (mod) into y field:

                                and      x2, x0, #0b111        // X2 = X0 % 8
                                strb     w2, [x3, #pt.y]       // ptArray[X0].y = X0 % 8

                  // Increment index and repeat:

                                add      x0, x0, #1
                                b.al     ForEachEl

                  LoopDone:     leave
                                endp     refAryParm

                  // Here is the asmMain function:

                                proc     asmMain, public

                  // Easier to access local variables than globals, so let's
                  // make everything a local variable:

                                locals   am
                                word     saveX19
                                byte     Pts, NumElements * (Pt.size)
                                byte     stackSpace, 64
                                endl     am

                                enter    am.size               // Reserve space.

              str     x19, [fp, #saveX19] // Save nonvolatile reg.

// Initialize the array of points:

            3 add     x0, fp, #Pts    // Compute address of Pts.
              str     x0, [sp]        // Pass address on stack.
              bl      refAryParm

// Display the array:

              mov     x19, xzr        // X19 is loop counter.
dispLp:       cmp     x19, #NumElements
              bhs     dispDone

// Print the x field:

              lea     x0, fmtStr1
              mov     x1, x19
              mstr    x1, [sp]
              add     x3, fp, #Pts          // Get array base address.
              add     x3, x3, x19, lsl #1   // Index into array.
              ldrb    w2, [x3, #pt.x]       // Get ptArray[X0].x.
              mstr    x2, [sp, #8]
              bl      printf

// Print the y field:

              lea     x0, fmtStr2
              mov     x1, x19
              mstr    x1, [sp]
              add     x3, fp, #Pts          // Get array base address.
              add     x3, x3, x19, lsl #1   // Index into array.
              ldrb    w2, [x3, #pt.y]       // Get ptArray[X0].x.
              mstr    x2, [sp, #8]
              bl      printf

// Increment index and repeat:

              add     x19, x19, #1
              b.al    dispLp

dispDone:
              ldr     x19, [fp, #saveX19]   // Restore X19.
              leave
              endp    asmMain

    The code computes the address of the Pts array and passes this array
(by reference) to the refAryParm procedure 3. It loads this address into X1 1
and uses this pointer value as the base address of the array that refAryParm
processes 2.
    Here’s the build command and sample output:

$ ./build Listing5-12
$ ./Listing5-12

                  Calling Listing5-12:
                  refArrayParm[0].x=0 refArrayParm[0].y=0
                  refArrayParm[1].x=0 refArrayParm[1].y=1
                  refArrayParm[2].x=0 refArrayParm[2].y=2
                  refArrayParm[3].x=0 refArrayParm[3].y=3
                  refArrayParm[4].x=0 refArrayParm[4].y=4
                  refArrayParm[5].x=0 refArrayParm[5].y=5
                  refArrayParm[6].x=0 refArrayParm[6].y=6
                  refArrayParm[7].x=0 refArrayParm[7].y=7
                  refArrayParm[8].x=1 refArrayParm[8].y=0
                  refArrayParm[9].x=1 refArrayParm[9].y=1
                  refArrayParm[10].x=1 refArrayParm[10].y=2
                  refArrayParm[11].x=1 refArrayParm[11].y=3
                  refArrayParm[12].x=1 refArrayParm[12].y=4
                  refArrayParm[13].x=1 refArrayParm[13].y=5
                  refArrayParm[14].x=1 refArrayParm[14].y=6
                  refArrayParm[15].x=1 refArrayParm[15].y=7
                  refArrayParm[16].x=2 refArrayParm[16].y=0
                  refArrayParm[17].x=2 refArrayParm[17].y=1
                  refArrayParm[18].x=2 refArrayParm[18].y=2
                  refArrayParm[19].x=2 refArrayParm[19].y=3
                  refArrayParm[20].x=2 refArrayParm[20].y=4
                  refArrayParm[21].x=2 refArrayParm[21].y=5
                  refArrayParm[22].x=2 refArrayParm[22].y=6
                  rRefArrayParm[23].x=2 refArrayParm[23].y=7
                  Listing5-12 terminated

                      This output shows how the refAryParm procedure initialized the array.

          5.7 Functions and Function Return Results
                  Functions are procedures that return a result to the caller. In assembly lan-
                  guage, few syntactical differences exist between a procedure and a func-
                  tion. This is why aoaa​.inc doesn’t provide a specific macro declaration for a
                  function. Nevertheless, semantic differences exist; although you can declare
                  them the same way in Gas, you use them differently.
                       Procedures are a sequence of machine instructions that fulfill a task.
                  The end result of the execution of a procedure is the accomplishment of
                  that activity. Functions, on the other hand, execute a sequence of machine
                  instructions specifically to compute a value to return to the caller. Of course,
                  a function can perform an activity as well, and procedures can undoubtedly
                  compute values, but the main difference is that the purpose of a function is
                  to return a computed result; procedures don’t have this requirement.
                       In assembly language, you don’t specifically define a function by using
                  special syntax. In Gas, everything is a procedure. A section of code becomes
                  a function when the programmer explicitly decides to return a function
                  result via the procedure’s execution.
                       The registers are the most common place to return function results.
                  The strlen() routine in the C stdlib is a good example of a function that
                  returns a value in one of the CPU’s registers. It returns the length of the
                  string (whose address you pass as a parameter) in the X0 register.

           By convention, programmers try to return 8-, 16-, and 32-bit results
      in the W0 register and 64-bit values in the X0 register. This is where most
      HLLs return these types of results, and it’s where the ARM ABI states that
      you should return function results. The exception is floating-point values;
      I discuss floating-point function results in Chapter 6.
           There is nothing particularly sacred about the W0/X0 register. You can
      return function results in any register if it’s more convenient to do so. Of
      course, if you’re calling an ARM ABI–compliant function, such as strlen(),
      you have no choice but to expect the function’s return result in the X0 reg-
      ister. The strlen() function returns an integer in X0, for example.
           If you need to return a function result that is larger than 64 bits, you
      obviously must return it somewhere other than in X0 (which can hold only
      64-bit values). For values slightly larger than 64 bits (for example, 128 bits
      or maybe even as many as 256 bits), you can split the result into pieces and
      return those parts in two or more registers. It is not uncommon to see func-
      tions returning 128-bit values in the X1:X0 register pair. Just keep in mind
      that these schemes are not ARM ABI compliant, so they’re practical only
      when calling code you’ve written.
           If you need to return a large object as a function result (say, an array of
      1,000 elements), you obviously are not going to be able to return the function
      result in the registers. When returning function results greater than 64 bits,
      the ARM ABI specifies that the caller allocate storage for the result and pass
      a pointer to that storage in X8. The function places the result in that storage,
      and the caller retrieves the data from that location upon return.

5.8   Recursion
      Recursion occurs when a procedure calls itself. The following, for example,
      is a recursive procedure:

      proc Recursive
      enter 0
      bl    Recursive
      leave
      endp Recursive

           Of course, the CPU will never return from this procedure. Upon entry
      into Recursive, this procedure will immediately call itself again, and control
      will never pass to the end of the procedure. In this case, runaway recursion
      results in a logical infinite loop that produces stack overflow, at which point
      the OS will raise an exception and stop the program.
           Like a looping structure, recursion requires a termination condition in
      order to stop infinite recursion. Recursive could be rewritten with a termina-
      tion condition as follows:

                proc Recursive
                enter 0

                              subs   x0, x0, #1
                              beq    allDone
                              bl     Recursive
                  allDone:
                              leave
                              endp Recursive

                       This modification to the routine causes Recursive to call itself the num-
                  ber of times appearing in the X0 register. On each call, Recursive decre-
                  ments the X0 register by 1 and then calls itself again. Eventually, Recursive
                  decrements X0 to 0 and returns from each call until it returns to the origi-
                  nal caller.
                       So far in this section, there hasn’t been a real need for recursion. After
                  all, you could efficiently code this procedure as follows:

                              proc Recursive
                              enter 0
                  iterLp:
                              subs x0, x0, #1
                              bne   iterLp
                              leave
                              endp Recursive

                       Both of these last two examples would repeat the body of the proce-
                  dure the number of times passed in the X0 register. (The latter version will
                  do it considerably faster because it doesn’t have the overhead of the bl/ret
                  instructions.) As it turns out, you cannot implement only a few recursive
                  algorithms in an iterative fashion. However, many recursively implemented
                  algorithms are more efficient than their iterative counterparts, and most of
                  the time the recursive form of the algorithm is much easier to understand.
                       The quicksort algorithm is probably the most famous algorithm that usu-
                  ally appears in recursive form. Listing 5-13 shows a Gas implementation of
                  this algorithm.

                  // Listing5-13.S
                  //
                  // Recursive quicksort

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                  numElements =          10

                                .data
                  ttlStr:       .asciz   "Listing 5-13"
                  fmtStr1:      .asciz   "Data before sorting: \n"
                  fmtStr2:      .ascii   "%d"   // Use nl and 0 from fmtStr3
                  fmtStr3:      .asciz   "\n"
                  fmtStr4:      .asciz   "Data after sorting: \n"
                  fmtStr5:      .asciz   "ary=%p, low=%d, high=%d\n"

                  theArray:     .word    1,10,2,9,3,8,4,7,5,6

            .code
            .extern printf

// getTitle
//
// Return program title to C++ program.

            proc    getTitle, public
            lea     x0, ttlStr
            ret
            endp    getTitle

// quicksort
//
// Sorts an array using the quicksort algorithm
//
// Here's the algorithm in C, so you can follow along:
//
// void quicksort(int a[], int low, int high)
// {
//     int i,j,Middle;
//     if( low < high )
//     {
//         Middle = a[(low + high)/2];
//         i = low;
//         j = high;
//         do
//         {
//              while( a[i] <= Middle ) i++;
//              while( a[j] > Middle ) j--;
//              if( i <= j )
//              {
//                  swap( a[i],a[j] );
//                  i++;
//                  j--;
//              }
//         } while( i <= j );
//
//         // Recursively sort the two subarrays:
//
//         if( low < j ) quicksort( a,low,j );
//         if( i < high ) quicksort( a,i,high );
//     }
// }
//
// Args:
//    X19 (_a):        Pointer to array to sort
//    X20 (_lowBnd): Index to low bound of array to sort
//    X21 (_highBnd): Index to high bound of array to sort
//
// Within the procedure body, these registers
// have the following meanings:
//
// X19: Pointer to base address of array to sort

                  // X20: Lower bound of array (32-bit index)
                  // X21: Higher bound of array (32-bit index)
                  //
                  // X22: index (i) into array
                  // X23: index (j) into array
                  // X24: Middle element to compare against
                  //
                  // Create definitions for variable names as registers
                  // to make the code more readable:

                  #define array x19
                  #define lowBnd x20
                  #define highBnd x21
                  #define i x22
                  #define j x23
                  #define middle w24

                              proc      quicksort

                              locals    qsl
                              dword     qsl.saveX19
                              dword     qsl.saveX20
                              dword     qsl.saveX21
                              dword     qsl.saveX22
                              dword     qsl.saveX23
                              dword     qsl.saveX24
                              dword     qsl.saveX0
                              byte      qsl.stackSpace, 32
                              endl      qsl

                              enter     qsl.size

                  // Preserve the registers this code uses:

                              str       x0, [fp, #qsl.saveX0]
                              str       x19, [fp, #qsl.saveX19]
                              str       x22, [fp, #qsl.saveX22]
                              str       x23, [fp, #qsl.saveX23]
                              str       x24, [fp, #qsl.saveX24]

                              cmp       lowBnd, highBnd
                              bge       endif3

                              mov       i, lowBnd         // i = low
                              mov       j, highBnd        // j = high

                  // Compute a pivotal element by selecting the
                  // physical middle element of the array:
                  //
                  // Element address = ((i + j) / 2) * 4 (4 is element size)
                  //                 = ((i + j) * 2)

                              add       x0, i, j
                              lsr       x0, x0, #1

// Middle = ary[(i + j) / 2]:

            ldr     middle, [array, x0, lsl #2]

// Repeat until the i and j indices cross each
// other (i works from the start toward the end
// of the array, j works from the end toward the
// start of the array):

rptUntil:

// Scan from the start of the array forward,
// looking for the first element greater or equal
// to the middle element:

            sub     i, i, #1        // To counteract add, below
while1:     add     i, i, #1        // i = i + 1
            ldr     w1, [array, i, lsl #2]
            cmp     middle, w1      // While middle <= ary[i]
            bgt     while1

// Scan from the end of the array backward, looking
// for the first element that is less than or equal
// to the middle element:

            add     j, j, #1     // To counteract sub, below
while2:     sub     j, j, #1     // j = j - 1
            ldr     w1, [array, j, lsl #2]
            cmp     middle, w1   // while middle >= a[j]
            blt     while2

// If you've stopped before the two pointers have
// passed over each other, you have two
// elements that are out of order with respect
// to the middle element, so swap these two elements:

            cmp     i, j        // If i <= j
            bgt     endif1

            ldr     w0, [array, i, lsl #2]
            ldr     w1, [array, j, lsl #2]
            str     w0, [array, j, lsl #2]
            str     w1, [array, i, lsl #2]

            add     i, i, #1
            sub     j, j, #1

endif1:     cmp     i, j        // Until i > j
            ble     rptUntil

// The code has just placed all elements in the array in
// their correct positions with respect to the middle
// element of the array. Unfortunately, the
// two halves of the array on either side of the pivotal

                  // element are not yet sorted. Call quicksort recursively
                  // to sort these two halves if they have more than one
                  // element in them (if they have zero or one elements,
                  // they are already sorted).

                              cmp      lowBnd, j    // If lowBnd < j
                              bge      endif2

                              // Note: a is still in X19,
                              // Low is still in X20.

                              str      highBnd, [fp, #qsl.saveX21]
                              mov      highBnd, j
                              bl       quicksort   // ( a, low, j )
                              ldr      highBnd, [fp, #qsl.saveX21]

                  endif2:     cmp      i, highBnd   // If i < high
                              bge      endif3

                              // Note: a is still in X19,
                              // High is still in X21.

                              str      lowBnd, [fp, #qsl.saveX20]
                              mov      lowBnd, i
                              bl       quicksort   // ( a, i + 1, high )
                              ldr      lowBnd, [fp, #qsl.saveX20]

                  // Restore registers and leave:

                  endif3:
                              ldr      x0, [fp, #qsl.saveX0]
                              ldr      x19, [fp, #qsl.saveX19]
                              ldr      x22, [fp, #qsl.saveX22]
                              ldr      x23, [fp, #qsl.saveX23]
                              ldr      x24, [fp, #qsl.saveX24]
                              leave
                              endp     quicksort

                  // printArray
                  //
                  // Little utility to print the array elements

                              proc     printArray

                              locals   pa
                              dword    pa.saveX19
                              dword    pa.saveX20
                              endl     pa

                              enter    pa.size
                              str      x19, [fp, #pa.saveX19]
                              str      x20, [fp, #pa.saveX20]

                              lea      x19, theArray
                              mov      x20, xzr

whileLT10:   cmp      x20, #numElements
             bge      endwhile1

             lea      x0, fmtStr2
             ldr      w1, [x19, x20, lsl #2]
             mstr     w1, [sp]
             bl       printf

             add      x20, x20, #1
             b.al     whileLT10

endwhile1:   lea      x0, fmtStr3
             bl       printf

             ldr      x19, [fp, #pa.saveX19]
             ldr      x20, [fp, #pa.saveX20]
             leave
             endp     printArray

// Here is the asmMain function:

             proc     asmMain, public

             locals   am
             dword    am.savex19
             dword    am.savex20
             dword    am.savex21
             byte     am.stackSpace, 64
             endl     am

             enter    am.size

             str      array, [fp, #am.saveX19]
             str      lowBnd, [fp, #am.saveX20]
             str      highBnd, [fp, #am.saveX21]

// Display unsorted array:

             lea      x0, fmtStr1
             bl       printf
             bl       printArray

// Sort the array:

             lea      array, theArray
             mov      lowBnd, xzr               // low = 0
             mov      highBnd, #numElements - 1 // high = 9
             bl       quicksort                 // (theArray, 0, 9)

// Display sorted results:

             lea      x0, fmtStr4
             bl       printf
             bl       printArray

                               ldr      array, [fp, #am.saveX19]
                               ldr      lowBnd, [fp, #am.saveX20]
                               ldr      highBnd, [fp, #am.saveX21]
                               leave
                               endp     asmMain

                      Here’s the build command and output for Listing 5-13:

                  $ ./build Listing5-13
                  $ ./Listing5-13
                  Calling Listing5-13:
                  Data before sorting:
                  1
                  10
                  2
                  9
                  3
                  8
                  4
                  7
                  5
                  6

                  Data after sorting:
                  1
                  2
                  3
                  4
                  5
                  6
                  7
                  8
                  9
                  10

                  Listing5-13 terminated

                      This output shows the contents of the array prior to sorting and after
                  the quicksort procedure has sorted the array.

          5.9 Procedure Pointers and Procedural Parameters
                  The ARM bl instruction supports an indirect form: blr. This instruction has
                  the following syntax:

                  blr reg64   // Indirect call through reg64

                       This instruction fetches the address of a procedure’s first instruction from
                  this specified register. It is equivalent to the following pseudo-instructions:

                  add lr, pc, #4 // Set LR to return address (PC is pointing at mov).
                  mov pc, reg64  // Transfer control to specified procedure.

    Gas treats procedure names like static objects. Therefore, you can com-
pute the address of a procedure by using the lea macro along with the pro-
cedure’s name. For example

lea x0, procName

loads the address of the very first instruction of the procName procedure into
X0. The following code sequence winds up calling the procName procedure:

lea x0, procName
blr x0

     Because the address of a procedure fits in a 64-bit object, you can store
such an address into a double-word variable; in fact, you can initialize a
double-word variable with the address of a procedure by using code like the
following:

       proc p
        .
        .
        .
       endp p
        .
        .
        .
       .data
ptrToP:
       .dword p
        .
        .
        .
       lea x0, ptrToP
       ldr x0, [x0]
       blr x0    // Calls p if ptrToP has not changed

     Note that although macOS does not allow you to initialize a dword vari-
able in the .text section with the address of an object outside the .text sec-
tion, it will allow you to initialize a pointer (in any section) with the address
of some code within the .text section.
     As with all pointer objects, you should not attempt to indirectly call a
procedure through a pointer variable unless you’ve initialized that variable
with an appropriate address. You can initialize a procedure pointer variable
in two ways: you can create dword variables with initializers in the .data,
.text, and .rodata sections, or you can compute the address of a routine
(as a 64-bit value) and store that 64-bit address directly into the procedure
pointer at runtime. The following code fragment demonstrates both ways to
initialize a procedure pointer:

             .data
ProcPointer: .dword   p   // Initialize ProcPointer with
                          // the address of p.

                                .
                                .
                                .
                               lea   x0, ProcPointer
                               ldr   x0, [x0]
                               blr   x0 // First invocation calls p.

                  // Reload ProcPointer with the address of q:

                               lea   x0, q
                               lea   x1, ProcPointer
                               str   x0, [x1]
                                .
                                .
                                .
                               lea   x0, ProcPointer
                               ldr   x0, [x0]
                               blr   x0 // This invocation calls q.

                       Although all the examples in this section use static variable declarations
                  (.data, .text, .bss, and .rodata), you aren’t limited to declaring simple proce-
                  dure pointers in the static variable declaration sections. You can also declare
                  procedure pointers (which are just dword variables) as local variables, pass
                  them as parameters, or declare them as fields of a record or a union.
                       Procedure pointers are also invaluable in parameter lists. Selecting
                  one of several procedures to call by passing the address of a procedure is a
                  common operation. A procedural parameter is just a double-word parameter
                  containing the address of a procedure, so passing a procedural parameter
                  is really no different from using a local variable to hold a procedure pointer
                  (except, of course, that the caller initializes the parameter with the address
                  of the procedure to call indirectly).

        5.10 A Program-Defined Stack
                  Using the pre- and post-indexed addressing modes, along with one of the
                  ARM’s 64-bit registers, it is possible to create software-controlled stacks that
                  don’t use the SP register. Since the ARM CPU provides a hardware stack
                  pointer register, it may not be obvious why you’d consider using another
                  stack. As you’ve learned, one limitation of the ARM’s hardware stack is that
                  it must be 16-byte aligned at all times. Return addresses and other values
                  you might want to preserve on the stack are generally 8 bytes or smaller. For
                  example, you cannot push the LR register onto the stack by itself without
                  causing a bus error fault. However, if you create your own stack, you won’t
                  have this issue.
                      Perhaps you’re wondering why anyone would ever want to use a second
                  stack in their programs. If the normal hardware stack works fine, why add the
                  complexity of a second stack? Having two stacks is useful in several situations.
                  Particularly, coroutines, generators, and iterators can make use of an extra
                  stack pointer. See section 5.12, “For More Information,” on page 290 for a
                  Wikipedia link on this subject. Of course, as just pointed out, not having to

16-byte align the stack pointer is another good reason for using a program-
defined stack.
    Creating your own stack has two drawbacks: you must dedicate one of
the ARM’s registers for this purpose, and you must explicitly allocate stor-
age for that stack yourself (the OS automatically allocates the hardware
stack when it runs your program).
    You can easily allocate storage in the .data segment. A typical stack will
have at least 128 to 256 bytes of storage. The following is a simple example
that allocates a 256-byte stack:

             .data
smallStk:    .fill    256
endSmallStk:

     You may need more than 256 bytes of storage if you use automatic
variables in your procedures; see section 5.4.1, “Activation Records,” on
page 244 and section 5.5, “Local Variables,” on page 250.
     Normally, stacks start at the end of their allocated space in memory and
grow downward toward smaller memory addresses. Having the endSmallStk
label at the end of the stack in this example gives you a handle with which
to initialize your stack pointer.
     Because the ARM uses SP for its hardware stack pointer, you must use
a different register for your program-defined stack pointer. This needs to
be a nonvolatile register—you don’t want a function call like printf() to
mess with your stack. As X30 is already used for LR and X29 is reserved for
FP (see Chapter 1), X28 is a good choice for a user-defined stack pointer
(USP). You can initialize it to point at the end of smallStk as follows:

#define usp x28    // Use a reasonable name for the user SP.
         .
         .
         .
        lea usp, endSmallStk

    This leaves USP pointing just beyond the end of the stack, which is
exactly what you want; the stack pointer should point at the current top of
the stack, and when the stack is empty, as it is after initialization, the stack
pointer isn’t pointing at a valid stack address.
    To push and pop data on the stack, use the same str and ldr instruc-
tions, along with the pre-indexed and post-indexed addressing modes, just
as you would with the hardware stack. The only differences are that you
specify the USP register (X28) and you don’t have to keep the stack aligned
to 16 bytes (in fact, you technically don’t have to keep it aligned to any-
thing, but it will be faster if you keep it word or dword aligned). Here’s how
you can push the LR register into the user stack and pop it off:

str lr, [usp, #-8]!    // Pre-decrement addressing mode
 .
 .
 .

                  ldr lr, [usp], #8        // Post-increment addressing mode
                  ret

                      Listing 5-14 is a rewrite of Listing 5-4 using a software stack.

                  // Listing5-14.S
                  //
                  // Demonstrating a software stack

                  #include "aoaa​.inc"

                  #define usp x28         // Program-defined stack pointer

                  stackSpace    =             64   // Space on the HW stack
                  saveLRUSP     =             48   // 16 bytes to hold LR and USP

                                .section      .rodata, ""
                  ttlStr:       .asciz        "Listing 5-14"
                  space:        .asciz        " "
                  asterisk:     .asciz        "*, %ld\n"

                                .data
                  loopIndex:    .dword         .-.       // Used to print loop index value

                  // Here's the software-based stack this program will use
                  // to store return addresses and the like:

                               .align         3
                  smallStk:    .fill          256, .-.
                  endSmallStk:

                                .code
                                .extern       printf

                  // getTitle
                  //
                  // Return program title to C++ program.

                                proc      getTitle, public
                                lea       x0, ttlStr
                                ret
                                endp      getTitle

                  // print40Spaces
                  //
                  // Prints out a sequence of 40 spaces
                  // to the console display

                                proc      print40Spaces
                              1 stp       lr, x19, [usp, #-16]! // Preserve LR and X19.

                                mov       w19, #40
                  printLoop:    lea       x0, space
                                bl        printf

            subs     w19, w19, #1
            bne      printLoop // Until w19 == 0

          2 ldp      lr, x19, [usp], #16 // Restore LR and X19.
            ret
            endp     print40Spaces

// Here is the asmMain function:

            proc     asmMain, public
          3 sub      sp, sp, #stackSpace       // HW stack space
            stp      lr, usp, [sp, #saveLRUSP] // Save on HW stack.

          4 lea      usp, endSmallStk    // Initialize USP.
          5 str      x19, [usp, #-16]!   // Save X19 on SW stk.

            mov      x19, #20
astLp:      bl       print40Spaces
            lea      x0, loopIndex
            str      x19, [x0]
            lea      x0, asterisk
            vparm2   loopIndex
            bl       printf
            subs     x19, x19, #1
            bne      astLp

          6 ldr      x19, [usp], #16 // Restore from SW stack.
          7 ldp      lr, usp, [sp, #saveLRUSP]
            add      sp, sp, #stackSpace
            ret      // Returns to caller
            endp     asmMain

    Upon entry into print40Spaces, the code pushes LR and X19 onto the
software stack 1, using an stp instruction to save both registers at the same
time. The pre-indexed addressing mode decrements USP by 16; then this
instruction stores the two 8-bit registers on the software stack. Just before
returning, print40Spaces restores the LR and X19 registers from the software
stack 2, using an lpd instruction and the post-indexed addressing mode.
    Although this program demonstrates using a software-controlled stack,
it must still use the hardware stack for a couple of purposes. In particular,
the printf() function will push its return address (and parameters, as it
turns out) onto the hardware stack. Therefore, the main program sets up
storage space on the hardware stack for this purpose 3. The program must
also preserve the USP register (X28) before initializing it to point at the
end of the smallStack data area. The space just allocated on the hardware
stack is the perfect place for this. As long as the code is saving USP there, it
may as well save LR at the same time, since you must always write 16 bytes to
the hardware stack.
    Once the code has preserved USP’s value (because it is a nonvolatile
register), the next step is to initialize USP with the address of the end of
the smallStack memory buffer 4. Loading the address of endSmallStk into

                  USP accomplishes this. Once the stack is initialized, the code can use it; for
                  example, this statement pushes nonvolatile register X19 onto the software
                  stack 5 (to preserve it for the C++ program).
                      Before leaving, the code pops the X19 nonvolatile register off the soft-
                  ware stack to restore its value 6. Finally, the main program restores USP
                  and LR from the hardware stack (and cleans up allocated storage) before
                  returning to the C++ code 7.
                      Just to prove it really works, here’s the build command and sample out-
                  put for the program in Listing 5-14:

                  $ ./build Listing5-14
                  $ ./Listing5-14
                  Calling Listing5-14:
                                                          *, 20
                                                          *, 19
                                                          *, 18
                                                          *, 17
                                                          *, 16
                                                          *, 15
                                                          *, 14
                                                          *, 13
                                                          *, 12
                                                          *, 11
                                                          *, 10
                                                          *, 9
                                                          *, 8
                                                          *, 7
                                                          *, 6
                                                          *, 5
                                                          *, 4
                                                          *, 3
                                                          *, 2
                                                          *, 1
                  Listing5-14 terminated

                      As you can see, Listing 5-14 produces the same output as Listing 5-4.

        5.11      Moving On
                  This chapter covered considerable material, including an introduction to
                  assembly language programming style, basic Gas procedure syntax, local
                  labels, calling and returning from procedures, register preservation, acti-
                  vation records, function results, and more. Armed with this information,
                  you’re ready to learn how to write functions that calculate arithmetic results
                  in the next chapter.

        5.12      For More Information
                  •   For more details on the Creative Commons 4.0 Attribution license, see
                      https://creativecommons​.org​/licenses​/by​/4​.0​/.

•   The ARM developer site has more on the AARCH64 (ARM64) calling
    convention and ABI at https://github.com/ARM-software/abi-aa/releases.
•   Wikipedia provides a useful entry on coroutines, generators, and itera-
    tors at https://en​.wikipedia​.org​/wiki​/Coroutine.

                                 TES T YOURSELF

     1.	 Explain, step by step, how the bl instruction works.
     2.	 Explain, step by step, how the ret instruction works.
     3.	 What is the main disadvantage of caller preservation?
     4.	 What is the main problem with callee preservation?
     5.	 What is an activation record?
     6.	 What register usually points at an activation record, providing access to
         the data in that record?
     7.	 What is the standard entry sequence for a procedure (the instructions)?
     8.	 What is the standard exit sequence for a procedure (the instructions)?
     9.	 What is an automatic variable?
    10.	 When does the system allocate storage for an automatic variable?
    11.	 What value does a pass-by-value parameter pass to a function?
    12.	 What value does a pass-by-reference parameter pass to a function?
    13.	 When passing four integer parameters to a function, where does the ARM
         ABI state those parameters are to be passed?
    14.	 When passing more than eight parameters to a function, where does the
         ARM ABI state the parameters will be passed?
    15.	 What is the difference between a volatile and nonvolatile register in the
         ARM ABI?
    16.	 Which registers are volatile in the ARM ABI?
    17.	 Which registers are nonvolatile in the ARM ABI?
    18.	 When passing parameters in the code stream, how does a function access
         the parameter data?
    19.	 What is the best way to pass a large array to a procedure?
    20.	 Where is the most common place to return a function result?
    21.	 What is a procedural parameter?
    22.	 How would you call a procedure passed as a parameter to a function/
         procedure?
    23.	 If a procedure has local variables, what is the best way to preserve regis-
         ters within that procedure?

