                                 B
                           GLOSSARY

A
AARCH64
The 64-bit variant of the ARM architecture. Also known as ARM64.

address
The numeric index associated with a memory location.

address bus
A set of electronic signals that hold a binary address of a memory element.

address space layout randomization (ASLR)
The use of random load addresses for program modules (to reduce the pos-
sibility of hacks and exploits in the code).

alternate half-precision control bit (AHP)
A bit in the floating-point control register that selects an alternative half-
precision format (different from the IEEE half-precision format).

application binary interface (ABI)
A set of rules that allows interaction between programming languages
and systems. Includes rules for passing parameters, data types, and other
features.
                   ARM
                   Advanced RISC machines (originally an acronym for Acorn RISC machine).

                   ASCII
                   American Standard Code for Information Interchange (a standardized
                   character set).

                   assembler
                   A compiler for an assembly language.

                   B
                   .bss
                   A block started by a symbol; a data area in the program containing unini-
                   tialized data (that usually doesn’t consume space in the executable file).

                   C
                   cache
                   The high-speed memory sitting between the CPU and main memory to
                   improve system performance.

                   control bus
                   A set of electronic signals from the CPU that control activities such as read-
                   ing, writing, and generating wait states.

                   D
                   data bus
                   A set of electronic signals from the CPU that transfer data between CPU
                   and external devices (such as memory or I/O).

                   default NaN enable (DN)
                   When default NaN is enabled (FPSCR[25]), any operation that generates a
                   NaN result returns the default NaN value.

                   denormalized numbers
                   Floating-point numbers with an exponent of 0 and no implied HO mantissa
                   bit. Denormalized numbers offer less precision than normalized numbers,
                   but the alternative is setting the value to 0 upon underflow.

                   E
                   effective address (EA)
                   The final memory address computed for an addressing mode (generally
                   involving addition, subtraction, and shifting).

                   equate
                   An assembler directive that associates a value with a symbolic name.

940   Appendix B
F
facade code
The code around a call to a function to modify the behavior of that func-
tion (such as adjusting input and output values, checking for range limits,
and other such operations).

flags
Boolean variables that indicate the state of a system. Generally, this term is
associated with the condition code flags in the PSTATE register.

floating-point status and control register
The FPSCR contains the status flags that are set by floating-point opera-
tions, and it contains the status flags that control the operation of various
floating-point instructions.

floating-point unit (FPU)
The (optional on some CPUs) hardware that is responsible for computing
floating-point arithmetic operations.

frame pointer
A special register used to access parameters, local variables, and other items
in an activation record.

G
Gas
GNU assembler.

general-purpose registers
Special memory cells accessible to user applications, used for most integer
and address calculations on ARM CPUs.

H
high-level language (HLL)
Programming language that allows developers to create software that is
independent of the underlying machine architecture.

high-order (HO)
Most significant.

I
idiom
A peculiarity of an instruction or operation. For example, shifting a
binary number one bit position to the left is the same as multiplying by 2.

                                                                   Glossary   941
                   input/output (I/O)
                   Data provided to a CPU from outside sources (inputs) or presented to the
                   outside world by the CPU (outputs).

                   integrated development environment (IDE)
                   Generally consists of two or more programs combined into a single tool. At
                   the very least, an IDE will include a text editor and a compiler. Most IDEs also
                   include a debugger, build (make) system, and other file management tools.

                   L
                   last in, first out (LIFO)
                   An access mechanism whereby the last object inserted into a list will be the
                   first object removed from the list. CPU stacks use this mechanism to pre-
                   serve and restore data and return addresses.

                   ld
                   A linker program (loader).

                   lexically scoped symbols
                   Symbols that are visible only within a particular block where they are defined.
                   For example, in an HLL, symbols defined within a function or procedure are
                   local to that function/procedure and are not visible outside it.

                   link register (LR)
                   Holds the return address after a bl instruction so the target (of bl) function
                   or procedure can return to the caller.

                   low-order (LO)
                   Least significant.

                   M
                   machine code
                   The binary instruction encoding for each assembly language instruction.

                   manifest constant
                   A symbolic name in a program that is textually replaced by its associated
                   value.

                   memory management unit (MMU)
                   The hardware in the CPU that controls access to memory (protection) and
                   remaps memory addresses (typically to allow safe multitasking).

                   N
                   natural boundary
                   An object’s address that is a multiple of that object’s size.

942   Appendix B
nonvolatile registers
Registers that must be preserved across a function call.

not a number (NaN)
A special floating-point value that represents an illegal result (other than
infinity) from a floating-point operation.

O
operating system (OS)
The software that controls computer operations, such as scheduling tasks,
executing applications, and providing access to I/O devices.

operation code (opcode)
A numeric value that encodes a machine instruction.

P
position-independent executables (PIE)
Code that can execute at any address in memory without modification
(relocation).

processor state register (PSTATE)
A special register that holds the condition code flags, interrupt masks, and
other miscellaneous processor control bits.

program counter
A special register that holds the memory address of the currently executing
instruction.

program-counter relative (PC-relative) addressing
Memory addresses based on an offset from the current instruction.

R
reduced instruction set computer (RISC)
Read as “reduced-instruction set computer” (not “reduced instruction-set
computer”). In a RISC machine, the CPU designer creates instructions that
do as little as possible in order to simplify the hardware needed to imple-
ment those instructions. In theory, this allows the designer to create faster
CPUs at a lower cost (though the Intel x86 series demonstrates that non-
RISC CPUs can have these attributes).

registers
Specialized memory components built directly into the CPU and accessible
by most machine instructions.

                                                                   Glossary   943
                   S
                   single instruction, multiple data (SIMD)
                   A SIMD instruction operates on multiple pieces of data concurrently. For
                   example, a SIMD add instruction may perform as many as 16 different addi-
                   tion operations in parallel. Though SIMD instructions are more difficult to
                   use than single-instruction, single-data instructions (for example, typical
                   ARM assembly instructions), they have the potential for executing applica-
                   tion much faster.

                   stack pointer register (SP)
                   A special register that references a hardware stack in memory.

                   subnormal
                   See denormalized numbers.

                   system bus
                   A collection of electronic signals comprising the address, data, and control
                   buses.

                   T
                   token
                   A string of characters that has special meaning to a compiler. Examples
                   include operators, reserved words, identifiers, literal constants, and other
                   punctuation.

                   trampoline
                   See veneer.

                   V
                   veneer
                   A special code sequence to extend the range of a control-transfer instruc-
                   tion beyond the normal displacement allowed by an instruction; also known
                   as a trampoline.

                   volatile registers
                   Registers that don’t have to be preserved across a function call.

                   W
                   WZR
                   32-bit zero register.

                   X
                   XZR
                   64-bit zero register.

944   Appendix B
