                                C
      I N S TA L L I N G A N D U S I N G G A S

            To compile ARM assembly language source
            files (including those in this book) on your
           computer, you will need the Gas assembler
        and other tools installed. The assembler is part of
the GNU C compiler suite, so if you install that package
on your system, you’ll get the assembler as well. Since
the installation instructions differ by OS, this appendix
will help you locate and install the files you need on
your machine.
    Before attempting to install any software, check to see whether that
software is already installed by issuing the following commands:

as --version
gcc --help
                       If these commands print a help message for Gas and GCC, the assem-
                   bler (and GCC) are already installed on your system, and you’re good to
                   go. However, if either command complains that the file is not found (or
                   otherwise does not print the help screen), skip to the section for your OS to
                   install GCC and Gas.

          C.1 macOS
                   To write assembly code on an Apple Silicon machine (such as an Mx class
                   machine or even an iPad or iPhone), you must install Apple’s Xcode devel-
                   opment platform on your Mac. Go to the Apple App Store and then locate,
                   download, and install Xcode. This is a very large file (many gigabytes) and
                   will take a while to download. After you run the installer, you should be
                   able to compile the assembly code in this book.
                        Technically, when installing Xcode, you’re installing Apple’s LLVM
                   Clang compiler and Clang assembler, not GCC and Gas. However, these
                   tools are mostly compatible with GCC and Gas (and can certainly handle
                   all the source code appearing in this book). The two assemblers have occa-
                   sional syntax differences, and the aoaa​.inc file was created to help smooth
                   over those differences (review the aoaa​.inc source code if you are interested
                   in seeing some of them). Various comments throughout this book also
                   point out the differences between Gas and the Clang assembler (for exam-
                   ple, see the discussion of the lea macro in section 3.8, “Getting the Address
                   of a Memory Object,” on page 153).

          C.2      Linux
                   Many Linux installations come with GCC and Gas already installed. If you
                   are running Debian/Ubuntu Linux or Raspberry Pi OS, enter gcc --version
                   at the command line; if the shell doesn’t respond with an error but instead
                   prints information on GCC, you’re all set.
                        If you do need to install GCC and Gas, the first step, as with any Linux
                   installation (this book assumes a Debian/Ubuntu installation), is to update
                   your system:

                   sudo apt update

                   Note that this requires an account with sudo privileges.
                      Next, install the build-essential package with the following command:

                   sudo apt install build-essential

                   This installs several programs, including gcc, Gas, make, and ld. Verify that the
                   system has properly installed these tools by using the following command:

                   gcc --version

946   Appendix C
This should print the version information for GCC if it has been properly
installed.
    Optionally, you can install the man pages for GCC and the other tools
by using the following command:

sudo apt-get install manpages-dev

    If you are using a different variant of Linux, please consult the docu-
mentation for your distribution or search for installation instructions
online to install GCC.

                                                        Installing and Using Gas   947
