  THE BASH SHELL INTERPRE TER
                               D
          The Bourne-again shell, otherwise known as
          the Bourne shell or bash, is a Unix shell inter-
         preter. Bash is an upgraded version of the ven-
      erable Unix sh (shell) program, the default shell
program in Unix System 7.
    Bash is the typical shell used in Linux systems (though other shells
are available, such as zsh and csh). Most Linux and macOS shell pro-
grams are roughly compatible with one another for simple command line
activities, but they differ in their support for sophisticated shell program-
ming purposes.
    All the programming examples throughout this text run GCC and
the Gas assembler via shell commands given by a bash command line.
Therefore, you should have at least a small amount of bash knowledge in
order to understand the basic commands in this book. This appendix gives
instructions for using bash, including descriptions of its more common
commands, but this discussion largely applies to other shell interpreters
as well.
                       To avoid having to refer to specific OS or distribution names, I’ll use
                   the name Unix in this appendix to refer to the underlying system (at the
                   time of this writing, Unix is a registered trademark of The Open Group).

          D.1      Running Bash
                   The bash shell interpreter is an application similar to other Unix applica-
                   tions. To use it, you must first execute the bash application. On text-based
                   Unix systems, some sort of shell application will run after you log in to the
                   system. You can set up your system to automatically run bash (or any other
                   shell program).
                        On GUI-based Linux systems or on macOS systems, you usually have to
                   run a terminal program to start a shell interpreter. In either case, you’ll typ-
                   ically be presented with a command prompt when the shell application runs.
                   This should be $ or #, depending on whether you’re logged in as a normal
                   user or root, respectively; some shells display a % prompt. After printing the
                   command prompt, the shell will wait for you to type a command.
                        At this point, you’re running a shell interpreter, though it might not
                   be bash; it could be the standard sh shell or another shell (for example,
                   the macOS terminal application runs zsh). Though most shells will behave
                   approximately the same, to ensure you’re running bash, type the following
                   line (followed by ENTER) after the command prompt:

                   $ bash

                       This will ensure that you’re running the bash application so that all the
                   comments in this appendix will apply. You can terminate this instance of
                   bash and return to the original shell by executing the exit command from
                   the command line.

          D.2 Command Lines
                   The previous example (bash) is an instance of a command given to a shell
                   interpreter. Commands consist of a line of text entered after a command
                   prompt (typically via the keyboard) and take the following form:

                   commandName optionalCommandLineArguments optionalRedirection

                        This whole line of code is known as a command line, which consists of
                   three components: a command (usually a single word, such as bash in the
                   previous example), followed by optional command line arguments, and,
                   finally, optional redirection or piping operands.
                        The command is the name of a built-in bash command or the name
                   of an executable application (or shell script). For example, the command
                   could be the name of an assembled assembly language source file you’ve
                   just created.

D.2.1 Command Line Arguments
Command line arguments are strings of characters separated by spaces or tabs
that bash will pass along to the application. The exact syntax of these com-
mand line arguments is application dependent. Some simple applications
(including the assembly language examples in this book) may completely
ignore any command line arguments; others may require very specific argu-
ments and report an error if they are not syntactically correct.
     Some applications define two types of command line arguments: options
and arguments. Historically, command line options consist of a dash (-) pre-
fix followed by a single character, or a double dash (--) prefix followed by
a sequence of characters. For example, the bash command supports
the option

bash --help

which displays help information and then terminates without running the
bash interpreter.
    In contrast, an actual command line argument is typically a filename
or other word (or string) that the application will use as an input value.
Consider the following command line:

bash script

     In this example, bash will start a second instance of itself and read a set
of commands (one per line of text) from the script file and execute those
commands as though they had been typed from the keyboard. The build
script file that appeared on page 38 is a good example of a shell script.
     Because bash uses spaces or tabs to separate command line arguments,
problems arise if you want to specify a single argument that contains such
delimiters, characters that separate items on the command line. Fortunately,
bash provides a syntax that allows you to include such delimiters on the
command line: if you surround a command line argument with quotation
marks, bash will pass everything within the quotes to the application as a
single command line argument.
     For example, if a command requires a filename and the filename you
wish to use contains spaces, you can pass that filename to the command
as follows:

command "filename with spaces"

    Bash will not include the quotes as part of the argument it passes to the
command. If you need to pass a quote character as part of a command line
argument, precede the quote with a backslash character (\). For example,
consider the following command:

command "argument containing \"quotes\""

                       This passes argument containing "quotes" as a single argument to command.
                       As you will see later in this appendix, you can also surround a com-
                   mand line argument with single quotes (apostrophe characters). The differ-
                   ence has to do with variable expansion.

                   D.2.2 Redirection and Piping Arguments
                   Bash programs (and Unix-like OSes in general) provide a standard input
                   device, a standard output device, and a standard error device.
                       The standard input device is usually the console keyboard. If a program
                   reads data from the standard input device, the program will halt until the
                   user types a line of text from the keyboard.
                       The standard output device is the console display. If an application writes
                   data to the standard output device, the system will display it on the display
                   screen. The standard error device also defaults to the console display, so
                   data written to the standard error device is also written to the display.
                       The bash shell provides the ability to redirect input and output by using
                   special arguments on the command line. I/O redirection typically allows
                   you to specify a filename. When redirecting the standard input device, the
                   application will read lines of text from a file (rather than from the key-
                   board). When redirecting the standard output, the application will write
                   data to a text file rather than to the console display.
                       To redirect the standard input from a file, use a command line argu-
                   ment of the form

                   command <InputFile

                   where InputFile is the name of a file containing text to be read by the appli-
                   cation. Whenever the application command would normally read a line of
                   text from the keyboard, it will instead read that line of text from the speci-
                   fied file.
                       To redirect the standard output to a file, use the following command
                   line syntax:

                   command >OutputFile

                        Any output normally written to the standard output device (the display)
                   will be written to the specified file (OutputFile). This syntax will delete the
                   contents of any existing file named OutputFile and replace its contents with
                   the output of the command application.
                        A variation of output redirection will append a program’s output to the
                   end of an existing file rather than replacing its contents. To use output redi-
                   rection this way, use this syntax:

                   command >>OutputFile

                       Note that redirecting the standard output device does not change the
                   standard error output device. If you’ve redirected the standard output to a

    file and an application writes data to the standard error device, that output
    still appears on the console display. You can redirect the standard error
    device by using the following syntax:

    command 2>ErrorOutput

        The 2> tells bash to redirect the output sent to file handle 2. Under
    Unix-style systems, handle 0 is reserved for the standard input, handle 1 is
    reserved for the standard output, and handle 2 is reserved for the standard
    error output device. Sticking the handle number in front of the > specifies
    which output to redirect.
        If you like, you can also redirect the standard output by using this
    syntax:

    command 1>OutputFile

        The final form of I/O redirection is the pipe, which connects the stan-
    dard output from one application to the standard input of a second applica-
    tion. This allows the second application to read, as input, the output from
    the first application. Here’s the syntax for a pipe redirection:

    command1 OptionalCommand1Arguments | command2 OptionalCommand2Arguments

    This tells bash to redirect the output from command1 as the input to command2.

D.3 Directories, Pathnames, and Filenames
    When you run bash, it will default to a current directory in the OS’s file
    structure. Unix calls this the current working directory. Whenever you run
    bash (for example, when you first log in), the current working directory is
    typically your home directory (as determined by the OS). For example, on
    my Debian system, this is /home/rhyde (under macOS, it’s /Users/rhyde).
         When you specify a filename on the command line that does not con-
    tain any slash characters, bash or the application will assume that file exists
    in the executable path supplied to the system. A pathname consists of a
    sequence of one or more directory names, separated by slashes, ending with
    a filename. A relative pathname begins with a directory name; the system
    looks for that directory within the current working directory. For example,
    dir1/dir2/filename specifies a file (filename) appearing in dir1 in the current
    working directory and within dir2, which is itself within dir1. An absolute
    pathname begins with a slash followed by the outermost root directory. For
    example, /home/rhyde/x.txt specifies the file x.txt appearing in the /home/rhyde
    directory (my home directory under Debian).
         The tilde special character (~) is shorthand for the current user’s home
    directory. Therefore, ~/x.txt is another way for me to specify /home/rhyde/x.txt
    on my Debian system. This scheme also works in macOS, so it’s a useful way
    to specify user directory paths in a system-independent fashion.

                       The special character period (.), by itself, is shorthand for the current
                   working directory. The double-period sequence (..) is shorthand for the
                   directory that contains the current working directory (the parent directory).
                   For example, ../x.txt refers to the file named x.txt in the parent directory. On
                   Linux-based systems, to execute an application from the current working
                   directory, you must specify ./filename rather than just filename (unless you’ve
                   placed ./ in your execution path).
                       Some Unix commands allow you to specify multiple filenames on the
                   command line. Such commands often allow the use of wildcard characters
                   to specify multiple names. Unix supports a rich set of regular expressions
                   when specifying wildcards, one of which you’ll commonly use: the asterisk (*).
                   Bash will match any number of characters (zero or more) in place of the
                   asterisk. Therefore, the filename *.txt will match any file ending with the
                   four-character sequence .txt (this includes .txt by itself).

         D.4       Built-in and External Bash Commands
                   Bash supports two types of commands: built-in and external. Built-in commands
                   exist as part of the bash application itself; a function inside the bash source
                   code handles the given built-in command. External commands correspond
                   to executable programs separate from bash that bash will load and execute
                   (then take control back from those programs when they terminate). Built-in
                   commands are always available when you run bash, but external commands
                   may or may not be available, depending on the presence of the executable
                   code for those commands. You can assume that the commands appearing in
                   the following subsections are all external, unless otherwise noted.
                        The assembly language example programs in this book are examples of
                   external commands. When you enter something like

                   ./Listing1-5

                   at the command line, bash will locate the Listing1-5 executable in the cur-
                   rent working directory (./) and attempt to execute that code.
                        For security reasons, bash will not automatically execute a program in
                   the current working directory unless you explicitly prepend the characters
                   ./ to the executable’s name. Bash assumes that program names without
                   explicit path information can be found in the execution path. The execution
                   path (see section D.6.1, “Defining Shell Script Variables and Values,” on
                   page 961) is a list of directories where bash will search for an executable
                   program you specify without explicit path information. Usually, bash will
                   look in places such as /bin, /usr/bin, and /sbin for executable programs.
                        To enable bash to execute programs from your current working direc-
                   tory without having to prefix the executable filename with the ./ charac-
                   ters, you can add ./ to your execution path. However, there are some very
                   good security reasons for not doing this. For more on this, see section D.8,
                   “For More Information,” on page 968.

D.5 Basic Unix Commands
    It would be impossible to describe all Unix commands in this appendix.
    That would take a large book by itself. This section describes several com-
    mands useful to those developing assembly language programs, along with
    some of their options and parameters. For information on additional bash
    commands, check out section D.8, “For More Information,” on page 968.

    D.5.1 man
    If you know the name of the command but are unsure about the syntax for
    its command line parameters and options, you can use the man command to
    learn about it. This command brings up the manual page for a (supported)
    command, with the syntax

    man CommandName

    where CommandName is the name of the command whose manual page you
    would like to read. For example, the following brings up the manual page
    for the man command itself:

    man man

        You can use man, with the command names listed in the following sub-
    sections, to learn additional information about each.

    D.5.2 cd or chdir
    You can set the current working directory by using the cd (change direc-
    tory) command (chdir is an alias of this command). The standard syntax is

    cd DirectoryPath

    where DirectoryPath is a relative or absolute path to a directory in the file­
    system. Unix will report an error if the directory does not exist or if this is
    the name of a file rather than a directory.
         If you specify the cd command without any arguments, it will switch to
    the current user’s home directory. This is equivalent to entering the follow-
    ing on the command line:

    cd ~

    The cd and chdir commands are built into bash.

    D.5.3 pwd
    The pwd (print working directory) command prints the path to the current
    working directory. Bash is generally set up to print the current working
    directory as part of the command line prompt; if this is the case for your

                   system, you probably won’t need to use pwd. This is also an internal bash
                   command.

                   D.5.4 ls
                   The ls (list directory) command prints a directory listing to the standard
                   output. When used with no options, it displays the contents of the current
                   directory.
                       When printing the directory listing to the display, ls defaults to a
                   multicolumn format. If you direct the output to a file, by redirecting the
                   standard output or by using a pipe, the command prints the listing in a
                   single-column format.
                       If you supply a directory path as an argument, the ls command will
                   display the contents of the specified directory (assuming it exists). If you
                   specify a pathname to a file as an argument, the ls command will display
                   only that filename (again, assuming that file exists in the specified path).
                       By default, the ls command will not display filenames that begin with
                   a period. Unix treats such files as hidden. If you want to display such file-
                   names, use the -a command line option:

                   ls -a

                      By default, the ls command lists only the filenames and directory
                   names in the specified directory. If you specify the -l (long) option, the ls
                   command will display additional information about each file:

                   $ ls -l
                   total 3256
                   -rw-r--r--@ 1 rhyde   staff    168089 Dec 29   20xx encoder.pdf
                   -rw-r--r--@ 1 rhyde   staff   1492096 Dec 27   20xx mcp23017.png

                       The first column in the listing specifies the file permissions. The next
                   three provide a link count and ownership information, followed by file size
                   and modification date and time, followed by the filename.

                   D.5.5 file
                   Unlike macOS and Windows, Unix does not associate a specific data type
                   with a file. You can use the Unix file command to determine a file type for
                   a particular file:

                   file pathname

                        The file command will respond with its best guess as to the type of the
                   file specified by pathname.

                   D.5.6 cat, less, more, and tail
                   To view the contents of a text file, you can display that file in its entirety
                   using the cat (catenate) command

cat pathname

where pathname is the path to the name of the file you wish to display.
     The problem with cat is that it tries to write the entire file to the dis-
play, all at once. Many files are larger than can be displayed on the screen at
one time, so cat ends up displaying only the last few lines of the file; more-
over, very large files may take a while to display their contents. If you would
like to be able to page through a file one screenful at a time, you can use
the more and less commands:

more pathname
less pathname

     The more command is now obsolete but is still available to handle older
script files that contain it. It displays a pageful of text and allows you to scroll
through the file a line at a time (by pressing ENTER) or a page at a time (by
pressing the spacebar). The big drawback to more is that you can view only
forward in a file; after information scrolls off the screen, it is lost.
     The less command (whose name comes from the phrase less is more) is
an upgraded version of more that allows you to scroll forward and backward
in a page. Most people use the less command rather than more because of
the additional features (such as being able to use the arrow keys to consis-
tently scroll up and down a line at a time).
     If you want to view only the last few lines of a large file, use the tail
command:

tail pathname

    By default, tail prints the last 10 lines of the file. You can use the -n xxxx
command line option, where xxxx is a decimal numeric value, to specify a
different line count. For example

tail -n 20 x.txt

displays the last 20 lines of the file x.txt.

D.5.7 mv
The mv (move) command has the following syntax:

mv SourcePath DestinationPath

SourcePath is the pathname of the file you want to move or rename, and
DestinationPath is the final destination path where you want the file moved
(or the new name you want to use for the file).
     To rename a file in the current directory, mv takes the form

mv OldName NewName

                   where OldName is the existing filename you want to change and NewName is the
                   new filename you want to rename the file. These are both simple filenames
                   (no directory path components). Note that NewName must be different from
                   OldName.
                        To move a file from one directory to another, either the SourcePath
                   or DestinationPath (or both) must contain a directory component. The
                   SourcePath must contain a filename component at the end of the pathname
                   (the name of the file to move). For the DestinationPath, a filename at the end
                   is optional. If the DestinationPath is the name of a directory (rather than a
                   file), mv will move the source file into the destination directory and use the
                   same filename as the original source file. If there is a filename at the end of
                   DestinationPath, then mv will change the filename while it is moving it.
                        You can use wildcard characters with mv, subject to the following restric-
                   tions: wildcard characters may appear only in the source pathname, and
                   the destination path must be a directory, not an actual filename.

                   D.5.8 cp
                   The cp command has the following syntax:

                   cp SourcePath DestinationPath

                   This command will make a copy of the file specified by SourcePath, using the
                   name DestinationPath for the copy. If both pathnames are simple filenames
                   (that is, you’re making a copy of a file in the current directory), the two file-
                   names must be different.
                        The cp command accepts wildcard characters in the source operand. If
                   wildcard characters are present, the destination must be a directory path.
                   The cp command will copy all files matching the wildcard designation to
                   the specified directory.
                        If both source and destination operands specify a directory, use the
                   -R (recursive) command line option. This will copy all the files from the
                   source directory to a directory by the same name in the destination direc-
                   tory (creating the new directory in the destination if it is not already pres-
                   ent); it will also recursively copy any subdirectories in the source directory
                   into similarly named subdirectories in the destination.

                   D.5.9 rm
                   The rm command removes (deletes) a file from a directory, using the follow-
                   ing syntax:

                   rm pathname

                       The pathname argument must be a path to an individual file, not a direc-
                   tory. To delete a directory and all the files in it, use the following command:

                   rm -R DirectoryPath

     This will recursively delete all files and subdirectories in DirectoryPath,
then delete the directory specified by DirectoryPath.
     To delete all the files in a directory without removing the directory
itself, use the following command:

rm -R DirectoryPath/*

    Be very careful when using wildcard characters in an rm command.
Depending on the current working directory, the following command could
delete everything on your storage devices:

rm -R *

     There is also an rmdir command you can use to remove empty directo-
ries. However, the rm -R directory command is easier to use for this purpose.

D.5.10 mkdir
The mkdir command creates a new (empty) directory, using the syntax

mkdir DirectoryPath

where DirectoryPath specifies the pathname to a directory that does not
already exist. If DirectoryPath is an actual pathname, all subdirectory names
up to the final name in the path must exist; the final directory name (after
the last /) must not exist. If you specify a simple directory name (no path),
bash will create the directory in the current working directory.
     The mkdir command supports a -p command line option that will create
all nonexistent directories in the path.

D.5.11 date
The date command displays the current date and time. You can also use this
command to set the Unix real-time clock. Run man date for the details.

D.5.12 echo
The echo command prints the text on the remainder of the command line
(subject to some expansions by bash) to the standard output device. For
example

echo hello, world!

will write hello, world! to the standard output. You’ll use this command
most often in scripts or to display the value of various shell variables.

D.5.13 chmod
Although Unix files do not have a specific type, the directory does maintain
whether a file is readable, writable, or executable by the owner of the file, a

                   group associated with the file, or anyone (standard Unix permissions). The
                   chmod command allows you to set (or clear) permission mode bits for a par-
                   ticular file.
                       The basic syntax for chmod is

                   chmod options pathname

                   where pathname is the path to the file whose mode you want to change, and
                   the options parameter(s) specifies the new permissions.
                       The options argument is either an octal (base-8) number (typically
                   three digits) or a special string to set the permissions. Unix has three
                   permission categories: owner/user, group, and other. The owner category
                   applies to the user who created the file in the first place. The group category
                   covers any groups that the user belongs to (and other users may belong to).
                   The other category covers everyone else.
                       In addition to the three categories, Unix has three main types of
                   permissions: permission to read a file, permission to write data to a file (or
                   delete it), and permission to execute a file (this generally applies to object
                   code or shell scripts).
                       A typical chmod option consists of a string of one to three characters
                   from the set {ugo} followed by a plus or minus character (+ or -, not ±), fol-
                   lowed by a single character from the set {rwx}. For example, u+r enables user
                   read access, u+x enables execution permission, and ugo-x removes execution
                   privileges for all categories. Note that the ls -l command will list the user,
                   group, and other permissions for a given file.
                       You can also specify the permissions for the three categories as a three-
                   digit octal number, where each digit represents the three rwx bits for users
                   (HO digit), groups (middle digit), and other (LO digit). For example, 755
                   specifies read/write/execute permissions for the user (1112 = 78), read and
                   execute permissions for the group, and other (1012 = 58). Note that 755 is a
                   typical set of permissions you would assign to a publicly usable script file.

         D.6 Shell Scripts
                   A shell script is a text file that bash will interpret as a sequence of com-
                   mands to execute, exactly as though each line in the text file were entered
                   from the keyboard while running bash. For those with Microsoft Windows
                   experience, this is similar to a batch file. This section discusses using shell
                   variables and values, using special built-in shell variables, and creating your
                   own bash shell scripts.
                        The bash interpreter is a full-fledged programming language that sup-
                   ports conditional and looping constructs as well as the sequential execution
                   of commands on the command line. It supports if...elif...else statements,
                   a case statement (similar to C’s switch statement), and various loops (while,
                   for, and so on). It also supports functions, local variables, and other fea-
                   tures typically found in HLLs. Going into detail on these topics is beyond
                   the scope of this book. See Ryan’s Tutorials in section D.8, “For More
                   Information,” on page 968 for details beyond what this section covers.

D.6.1 Defining Shell Script Variables and Values
Bash allows you to define shell variables. A shell variable is a name (think:
programming language identifier) to which you can assign some text. For
example, the following bash command assigns the text ls to list:

list=ls

    You can tell bash to expand a shell variable name to its associated text
by prefixing the name with a $ character. For example

$list

expands to

ls

which will display the current directory listing.
    Normally, you would not use shell variables to create aliases of existing
commands, as the alias command is better suited to the job. Instead, you
would use shell variables to keep track of paths, options, and other informa-
tion commonly used on the command line.
    Bash supplies several predefined shell variables, including the following:
     $HOME ​  ​Contains the path to the current user’s home directory
     $HOSTNAME ​  ​Contains the machine’s name
     $PATH ​  ​Contains a list of directory paths, separated by colons (:), that
     bash will search through when searching for an external command’s
     executable file
     $PS1 ​  ​Contains a string that bash will print as the command line prompt
     $PWD ​  ​Contains the current working directory

     For a complete list of predefined shell variables, and for more details on
the $PS1 variable in particular, see section D.8, “For More Information,” on
page 968.
     Shell variables to which you assign values will retain those values during
the execution of the current bash shell. Often, when executing shell scripts,
a second bash shell begins execution, and any variable values created or
modified in that execution will be lost when that shell terminates. To avoid
this problem, use the built-in export command:

export variable name=value

This command will make the variable assignment visible to parent shells.
Typically, you must use export when assigning values in a shell script that
you want to retain after the shell script completes.
     You can define shell variables in a script file, just as you can when inter-
actively typing commands at the command line. As noted earlier, however,

                   any variable values defined in a shell script are lost when the shell termi-
                   nates. This is because bash will make a copy of the execution environment
                   (including all the shell variable values) when it starts a shell script. Any
                   changes or additions you make, such as creating new variables or modify-
                   ing existing ones, affect only the copy of the environment. When the shell
                   script terminates, it deletes the copy of the environment and reverts to the
                   original environment. The export command tells bash to export the variable
                   assignment to the parent environment (as well as applying to the current
                   local environment).
                       Values assigned to a shell variable are generally treated as text. Because
                   the bash interpreter breaks up command lines by using spaces or other
                   delimiters, the string of text you assign to a script variable must consist of a
                   single word (that is, a sequence of characters surrounded by delimiters). If
                   you want to include delimiter (and other) characters within the value, you
                   must surround the text value with quotes or apostrophes, as in the follow-
                   ing example:

                   value1="Value containing delimiters (spaces)"
                   value2='Another value with delimiters'

                       Bash will expand the text inside double quotes (") and will maintain
                   the text as is inside single quotes ('). Consider the following example:

                   aVariable="Some text"
                   value3="aVariable=$aVariable"
                   value4='aVariable=$aVariable'
                   echo $value3
                   echo $value4

                       Executing this sequence will produce the following output:

                   aVariable=Some Text
                   aVariable=$aVariable

                        Bash expands $aVariable inside the string enclosed in double quotes but
                   will not expand it inside the string enclosed in single quotes.
                        You might see strings surrounded by grave accent characters (`), com-
                   monly called backticks in Unix. Originally, such strings surrounded a com-
                   mand that the shell would execute, then substitute the textual output of the
                   program in place of the backticked string. This syntax has been deprecated
                   in modern shells. To capture the output of a command and assign it to a
                   variable, use $(command), as in the following example:

                   dirListing=$(ls)

                       This creates a string consisting of the listing of the current working
                   directory and assigns that string to the dirListing variable.

D.6.2 Defining Special Shell Variables
In addition to the shell variables a script inherits from the parent environ-
ment, bash also defines certain shell variables that might prove useful in
shell scripts you write. These special variables begin with $ and typically
deal with command line parameters passed to the script (see Table D-1).

Table D-1: Special Shell Variables
 Variable           Description
 $0                 Expands to the pathname of the shell script file.
 $1 through $n      Expands to the first, second, . . . , nth command line argument.
 $#                 Expands to a decimal number specifying the parameter count.
 $*                 Expands to a string containing all the command line parameters.
                    Generally used to pass the parameters on to another command. To
                    assign this command line parameter-list string to a shell variable,
                    use $* to capture the text as a single string.
 $@                 Similar to $*, except this variant puts quotes around each argument.
                    Useful if the original arguments may have been quoted and could
                    contain spaces or other delimiter characters. It’s best to invoke this
                    as $@ as well.

    See the references in section D.8, “For More Information,” on page 968
for more details on these features.

D.6.3 Writing Your Own Shell Scripts
Consider the following text, from a file named lsPix:

cd $HOME/Pictures
ls

    If you were to execute this shell script via the following command, bash
would switch to the Pictures subdirectory in the user’s home directory, dis-
play the directory listing, and the return control to bash:

bash lsPix

    Entering bash in front of a shell script to execute it can become annoy-
ing if you commonly execute certain shell scripts. Fortunately, Unix (via
shells such as sh, bash, or zsh) provides a mechanism to specify the shell
script directly as a command: make the script file executable. You can use
the chmod command to accomplish this:

chmod 755 lsPix

     This sets the permissions to RWX (readable, writable, and executable)
for the owner and R-X (readable and executable) for members of the group
and other users.

                        Note that the build script (used throughout this book) has been made
                   executable via a chmod 777 build command (this allows everyone to modify
                   the file). That is why you need to enter only ./build at the beginning of the
                   command line rather than bash build.
                        When making a bash shell script executable, also add the following
                   statement to the beginning of the shell script file:

                   #! /bin/bash

                       The shebang (#!) sequence tells bash that this is a shell script and pro-
                   vides the path to the shell interpreter to execute for this command. (The
                   interpreter would be bash in this case, but you could specify a different
                   shell interpreter, such as /bin/sh, if you really wanted.) If you don’t know the
                   path to the bash interpreter, execute the Unix command which bash to print
                   the path you need. The inclusion of the shebang on the first line also allows
                   the file lspix command to identify the file as a shell script rather than a
                   simple ASCII text file.
                       Once you’ve added this line to lsPix and made the file executable, you
                   need to enter only the following at the command line to execute the script:

                   ./lsPix

                        The # character is normally used to create comments in a shell script.
                   With the exception of the shebang in the first line, the bash interpreter will
                   ignore all the text from a # symbol to the end of the line.
                        It’s important to understand that shell scripts execute in their own copy
                   of bash. Therefore, any changes they make to the bash environment—such
                   as setting the current working directory with the cd command or chang-
                   ing shell variable values—are lost when the script terminates. For example,
                   when this lsPix script terminates, the current working directory will return
                   to its original directory; it will not be $HOME/Pictures (unless it happened
                   to be $HOME/Pictures prior to executing lsPix).

          D.7 The build Script
                   Shell scripts are useful for automating manual activities. For example, this
                   book uses the build script to assemble/compile most of the example pro-
                   grams. The following listing presents the build script and describes how it
                   works; I’ll explain the full script section by section.
                       As with any good shell script, the build script begins with the shebang
                   that defines the shell interpreter to use (bash in this case):

                   #!/bin/bash
                   #
                   # build
                   #
                   # Automatically builds an Art of ARM Assembly
                   # example program from the command line.

  #
  # Usage:
  #
  #   build {options} fileName
  #
  # (no suffix on the filename.)
  #
  # options:
  #
  #   -c: Assemble .S file to object code only.
  #   -pie: On Linux, generate a PIE executable.

  fileName=""
  compileOnly=" "
  pie="-no-pie"
  cFile="c.cpp"
  lib=" "

      The script also defines several variables (filename, compileOnly, pie, cFile,
  and lib) that it will use to specify GCC command line options when assem-
  bling and compiling the source files.
      The next section of the script processes command line parameters
  found on the build command line:

1 while [[ $# -gt 0 ]]
  do

      key="$1"
      case $key in

           -c)
           compileOnly='-c'
         2 shift
           ;;

           -pie)
           pie='-pie'
           shift
           ;;

           -math)
           math='-lm'
           shift
           ;;

           *)
           fileName="$1"
           shift
           ;;
      esac
  done

                        The while loop processes each command line argument individually 1.
                   The Boolean expression $# -gt 0 returns true as long as there are one or
                   more command line arguments ($# is the number of arguments).
                        The body of the loop sets the key local variable equal to the value of
                   the first command line parameter ($1). It then executes a case statement
                   that compares this argument against the options -c, -pie, and -math. If the
                   argument matches one of these, the script sets appropriate local variables
                   to values that note the presence of these options. If the case expression
                   doesn’t match any of these, the default case (*) sets the filename variable to
                   the value of the command line argument.
                        At the end of each case, you’ll notice a shift statement 2. This state-
                   ment shifts all the command line parameters to the left one position (delet-
                   ing the original $1 argument), setting $1 = $2, $2 = $3, . . . and decrementing
                   the parameter count ($#) by one. This sets up the while loop for the next
                   iteration to process the remaining command line parameters.
                        The next section sets up the objectFile variable that the script expands
                   as part of the gcc command line:

                   # If -c option was provided, assemble only the .S
                   # file and produce a .o output file.
                   #
                   # If -c not specified, compile both c.cpp and the .S
                   # file and produce an executable:

                   if [ "$compileOnly" = '-c' ]; then
                        objectFile="-o $fileName".o
                        cFile=" "
                   else
                        objectFile="-o $fileName"
                   fi

                        This code sets objectFile to a string that will specify an object filename
                   on the gcc command line. If -c is not present, this code will set cFile to
                   expand to an empty string so that the gcc command does not also compile
                   c.cpp (the default case).
                        The following section of the build script deletes any existing object files
                   or executable files that this command would create:

                   # If the executable already exists, delete it:

                   if test -e "$fileName"; then
                       rm "$fileName"
                   fi

                   # If the object file already exists, delete it:

                   if test -e "$fileName".o; then
                       rm "$fileName".o
                   fi

                     The test built-in function returns true if the specified file exists.
                Therefore, these if statements will delete the object and executable files
                if they already exist.
                     Next, the aoaa​.inc header file requires the definition of either the
                isLinux or isMacOS symbols in order to determine the OS. The definition of
                these symbols allows aoaa​.inc to select OS-specific code so that the example
                code will compile (portably) across the two OSes. Rather than force the
                user to manually define this symbol, the build script automatically defines
                one of these symbols when invoking GCC. To accomplish this, build uses the
                uname command, which returns the name of the OS kernel:

                # Determine what OS you're running under (Linux or Darwin [macOS]) and
                # issue the appropriate GCC command to compile/assemble the files:

                unamestr=$(uname)

                    Under Linux, uname returns the string Linux; under macOS, it returns
                the string Darwin.
                    Finally, the build script invokes the GCC compiler with command line
                arguments appropriate to the OS:

if [ "$unamestr" = 'Linux' ]; then
    gcc -D isLinux=1 $pie $compileOnly $objectFile $cFile $fileName.S $math
elif [ "$unamestr" = 'Darwin' ]; then
    gcc -D isMacOS=1 $compileOnly $objectFile $cFile $fileName.S -lSystem $math
fi

                    Note the -D name=1 command line option that defines the isLinux or
                isMacOS symbols as appropriate. Also note that the pie (position-independent
                code) option appears only when compiling under Linux, as macOS code is
                always position-independent.
                     It’s easy to modify the build script to add more features, should you
                desire. For example, one limitation to this script is that it allows you to spec-
                ify only a single assembly language source file (if you specify two or more
                names, it will use only the last name you specify). You can change this with
                three modifications to the file, in the case statement.
                     The first change is to append the filename and add a .S suffix to the
                fileName variable rather than replacing its value. You must also set the
                executable output filename to the first assembly file specified on the com-
                mand line:

                *)
                     if[ fileName = "" ]
                     then
                          objectFile = "$1"
                     fi
                     fileName="$filename $1.S"
                     shift
                     ;;

                      The next change is to set objectFile to the empty string if specifying
                   compile-only mode:

                   if [ "$compileOnly" = '-c' ]; then
                   cFile=" "
                   else
                        objectFile="-o $fileName"
                   fi

                        The original code set this to the specified filename; however, that is the
                   default for compile-only mode, and specifying a single object name when
                   assembling multiple source files is problematic.
                        The final change is to modify the two gcc command lines to remove
                   the .S suffix from the assembly filenames (since this was added in the case
                   statement):

                   if [ "$unamestr" = 'Linux' ]; then
                       gcc -D isLinux=1 $pie $compileOnly $objectFile $cFile $fileName $math
                   elif [ "$unamestr" = 'Darwin' ]; then
                       gcc -D isMacOS=1 $compileOnly $objectFile $cFile $fileName -lSystem $math
                   fi

                       However, if you’re going to do a complex assembly using multiple
                   source files, you’re probably better off using makefiles rather than shell
                   scripts to do the job.

         D.8 For More Information
                   •   For details on Unix regular expressions and wildcards, see the Bash
                       Reference Manual at https://www.gnu.org/savannah-checkouts/gnu/bash/
                       manual/bash.html.
                   •   For more information on bash shell scripts, check out The Linux
                       Command Line, 2nd edition, by William Shotts (No Starch Press, 2019).
                   •   For an explanation of the risks of including ./ in your execution path,
                       see the Unix & Linux Stack Exchange question at https://unix.stack​
                       exchange.com/questions/65700/is-it-safe-to-add-to-my-path-how-come.
                   •   A complete list of bash shell script variables appears at the Advanced Bash
                       Scripting Guide site, https://tldp.org/LDP/abs/html/internalvariables​.html.
                   •   For details on changing the command line prompt, see the phoe-
                       nixNap site at https://phoenixnap.com/kb/change-bash-prompt-linux.

Here are some websites that describe how to write bash scripts:
•   freeCodeCamp: https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/shell-scripting-crash​
    -course-how-to-write-bash-scripts-in-linux
•   Ryan’s Tutorials: https://ryanstutorials.net/bash-scripting-tutorial/bash​
    -script.php
•   Linux Hint: https://linuxhint.com
•   Bash scripting cheat sheet: https://devhints.io/bash

