USEF UL C L ANGUAGE F UNC TIONS
                                 E
             This appendix contains a list of several C
             functions from the C stdlib (and Unix system
           library) that may be useful to assembly lan-
         guage programmers.
    The macOS variants of these functions use an external name that
begins with an underscore. For example, under macOS, strlen() becomes
the _strlen() function. The aoaa​.inc header file contains #define statements
for many of these function names that add the underscore prefix in front of
the unadorned names: #define strlen _strlen.
           E.1 String Functions
                   Various chapters in this book have introduced many of the C stdlib string
                   functions (declared in the strings.h header file). This section describes most
                   of the available functions, including those this book has not used:
                   char *strcat( char *dest, const char *src );
                       Concatenates the zero-terminated string at which X1 (src) points to
                       the end of the string at which X0 (dest) points. Returns a pointer to the
                       dest string in X0.

                   char *strchr( const char *str, int c );
                       Searches for the first occurrence of the character specified by c (X1) in
                       the string at which str (X0) points. Returns a pointer into the string (in
                       X0) where the character was found, or a NULL (0) pointer if c does not
                       exist in str.
                   char *strcpy( char *dest, const char *src );
                       Copies the string pointed at by src (X1) to dest (X0), including the
                       zero-terminating byte. Returns a pointer to dest in X0.
                   char *strdup( char *str );
                       Duplicates a string on the heap. On entry, X0 contains a pointer to
                       the string to duplicate. On return, X0 contains a pointer to a copy of the
                       string allocated on the heap. When the application is done using the
                       string, the application should call the C stdlib free() function to return
                       the storage to the heap. Though strdup() is not defined in the C stdlib,
                       most systems include it in their libraries.
                   char *strncat( char *dest, const char *src, size_t n );
                       Concatenates at most n characters from the zero-terminated string at
                       which X1 (src) points to the end of the string at which X0 (dest) points,
                       plus a zero-terminating byte. Returns a pointer to the dest string in X0.
                       If the length of src is less than n, this string copies only the first n char-
                       acters from src to dest (plus a zero-terminating byte).
                   char *strpbrk( const char *str1, const char *str2 );
                       Finds the first character in the string str1 (passed in X0) that matches
                       any character specified in str2 (passed in X1). Returns a pointer to the
                       matching character in str1 in the X0 register (or NULL if no match).
                   char *strrchr( const char *str, int c );
                       Searches for the last occurrence of the character c (a char passed
                       in X1) in the string pointed to by the argument str (passed in X0).
                       Returns a pointer into str where the character was found in X0. If the
                       character was not found in str, this function returns NULL (0) in X0.
                   char *strstr( const char *inStr, const char *search4 );
                       Searches for the first occurrence of the string search4 (passed in X1)
                       within inStr (passed in X0). It returns a pointer to the matching

972   Appendix E
    position in the X0 register, returning NULL (0) if the search4 string is
    not present within inStr.
char *strtok( char *str, char *delim );
    Breaks string str (passed in X0) into a series of tokens (words) separated
    by characters found in the delim (passed in X1) string. On a first call,
    the function expects a C string as an argument for str, whose first char-
    acter is used as the starting location to scan for tokens. In subsequent
    calls, the function expects a NULL (0) pointer and uses the position
    right after the end of the last token as the new starting location for
    scanning (skipping any leading delimiter characters). Each call returns
    a pointer (in X0) to the next token within the string. This function
    returns NULL when it exhausts all the tokens in the string.
         This function modifies the contents of the string at which str
    (X0) points. If your program cannot tolerate this, make a copy of str
    before calling strtok(). The strtok() function maintains internal
    state in a static variable and therefore is not safe to use in multi-
    threaded applications.
int memcmp( void *mem1, void *mem2, size_t n );
    Compares the first n bytes of mem1 and mem2 (mem1 is passed in X0, mem2 is
    passed in X1, and n is passed in X2). Similar in operation to strcmp(),
    except that this function doesn’t end the comparison upon encounter-
    ing a 0 byte; strcmp(), on the other hand, returns a negative value, 0, or
    a positive value to indicate the comparison status.
int strcasecmp( const char *str1, const char *str2 );
    Compares the string at which str1 (X0) points against the string at
    which str2 (X1) points using a case-insensitive comparison. Returns
    (in X0) a negative number if str1 < str2, 0 if str1 == str2, or a positive
    number if str1 > str2. Though strcasecmp() is not defined in the C stdlib,
    many systems include it in their libraries; some use the function name
    strcmpi() or stricmp() instead.

int strcmp( const char *str1, const char *str2 );
    Compares the string at which str1 (X0) points against the string at which
    str2 (X1) points and returns (in X0) a negative number if str1 < str2,
    0 if str1 == str2, or a positive number if str1 > str2.
int strncmp( char *str1, char *str2, size_t n );
    Compares two strings up to the first n characters, or until encounter-
    ing the first zero-terminating byte (in either string). Pointer to str1
    is passed in X0, pointer to str2 is passed in X1, and n is passed in X2.
    Returns 0 if the strings were equal (through n characters, or less if both
    strings are equal and their length is less than n). Returns a negative
    value if str1 is less than str2. Returns a positive value if str1 is greater
    than str2. You can use this function to see if str1 is a prefix of str2 by
    setting n equal to the length of str1.

                                                        Useful C Language Functions   973
                   size_t strcspn( const char *str1, const char *str2 );
                       Calculates the length of the initial segment of str1 (passed in X0),
                       which consists entirely of characters not in str2 (passed in X1). Returns
                       this count in X0.
                   size_t strlen( char *str );
                       Computes the length of a zero-terminated string. X0 contains a pointer
                       to the string upon entry, and this function returns the string length in
                       X0 (not including the zero-terminating byte).
                   size_t strspn( const char *str1, const char *str2 );
                       Calculates the length of the initial segment of str1 (passed in X0),
                       which consists entirely of characters in str2 (passed in X1). Returns the
                       count in X0.
                   strlwr( str );
                       Converts all the characters in a string to lowercase. On entry, X0 con-
                       tains a pointer to the string to convert; on return, X0 points at this
                       same string with the uppercase characters converted to lowercase.
                       Though strlwr() is not defined in the C stdlib, many systems include it
                       in their libraries.
                   strncpy( char *dest, const char *src, size_t n );
                       Copies, at most, n (passed in X2) characters from src (passed in X1)
                       to dest (passed in X0). If n is less than or equal to the length of src,
                       this function will not copy the zero-terminating byte, and the caller is
                       responsible for adding this extra byte. This function has two primary
                       uses. First, it prevents overwriting data beyond the end of dest (when n
                       contains the size of the dest buffer, plus 1, at which X0 points). Second,
                       it serves as a substring function, allowing you to extract n characters
                       from a particular position within a string.
                   strupr( str );
                       Converts all lowercase characters in a string to uppercase. On entry,
                       X0 contains a pointer to the string to convert; on return, X0 points at
                       this same string with the lowercase characters converted to uppercase.
                       Though strupr() is not defined in the C stdlib, many systems include it
                       in their libraries.
                   void *memchr( void *mem, int c, size_t n );
                       Searches for the first occurrence of the character c (an unsigned char
                       passed in X1) in the first n (passed in X2) bytes of the memory block at
                       which the argument mem (passed in X0) points. Very similar to strchr(),
                       except this function will not stop scanning when it finds a 0 byte in
                       str. Returns, in X0, a pointer into mem where it found the character, or
                       NULL (0) if character c does not exist in mem.

974   Appendix E
      void *memcpy( void *dest, const void *src, size_t n );
          Copies n bytes from src to dest (passed in X2, X1, and X0, respectively).
          Returns a pointer to dest in X0. If the memory block defined by dest
          overlaps the memory block defined by src, the results are undefined.
      void *memmove( void *dest, const void *src, size_t n );
          Copies n bytes from src to dest (passed in X2, X1, and X0, respectively).
          Returns a pointer to dest in X0.
               The memmove() function correctly handles situations in which the
          source and destination blocks overlap. However, this function may run
          a little bit slower than memcpy(), so you should use it only when you can-
          not guarantee that the blocks do not overlap.
      void *memset( void *mem, int c, size_t n );
          Copies the LO byte of c (passed in X1) to the first n (passed in X2)
          bytes of the memory block at which the argument mem (passed in X0)
          points. Returns a pointer to the memory block in X0.

E.2   Other C Stdlib and Unix Functions
      The string functions covered in this appendix are but a small sampling of the
      many functions available in the C stdlib. Other useful functions include the
      POSIX file I/O functions (declared in the fcntl.h and unistd.h header files),
      the math libraries (found in math.h), and many others. For more informa-
      tion on these header files, see the following:
      fcntl.h
           https://pubs​.opengroup​.org​/onlinepubs​/000095399​/basedefs​/fcntl​.h​.html
      math.h
         https://pubs​.opengroup​.org​/onlinepubs​/9699919799​/basedefs​/math​.h​.html
      unistd.h
          https://pubs​.opengroup​.org​/onlinepubs​/007908775​/xsh​/unistd​.h​.html
          You can easily call each of these functions by specifying its name (don’t
      forget to prepend an underscore when calling functions in macOS). You
      always pass parameters and retrieve function results by using the ARM ABI
      for Linux and the macOS ABI under macOS (remember that macOS differs
      when passing variable argument lists to a function, such as printf()).

                                                                    Useful C Language Functions   975
