
 Assembly language is one of the most misunderstood programming languages in use. When the term
 assembly language is used, it often invokes the idea of low-level bit shuffling and poring over thousand-
 page instruction manuals looking for the proper instruction format. With the proliferation of fancy high-
 level language development tools, it is not uncommon to see the phrase “assembly language
 programming is dead” pop up among various programming newsgroups.

 However, assembly language programming is far from dead. Every high-level language program must
 be compiled into assembly language before it can be linked into an executable program. For the high-
 level language programmer, understanding how the compiler generates the assembly language code can
 be a great benefit, both for directly writing routines in assembly language and for understanding how
 the high-level language routines are converted to assembly language by the compiler.

Who This Book Is For
 The primary purpose of this book is to teach high-level language programmers how their programs are
 converted to assembly language, and how the generated assembly language code can be tweaked. That
 said, the main audience for this book is programmers already familiar with a high-level language, such
 as C, C++, or even Java. This book does not spend much time teaching basic programming principles. It
 assumes that you are already familiar with the basics of computer programming, and are interested in
 learning assembly language to understand what is happening underneath the hood.

 However, if you are new to programming and are looking at assembly language programming as a place
 to start, this book does not totally ignore you. It is possible to follow along in the chapters from the start
 to the finish and obtain a basic knowledge of how assembly language programming (and programming
 in general) works. Each of the topics presented includes example code that demonstrates how the assem-
 bly language instructions work. If you are completely new to programming, I recommend that you also
 obtain a good introductory text to programming to round out your education on the topic.

What This Book Covers
 The main purpose of this book is to familiarize C and C++ programmers with assembly language, show
 how compilers create assembly language routines from C and C++ programs, and show how the gener-
 ated assembly language routines can be spruced up to increase the performance of an application.

 All high-level language programs (such as C and C++) are converted to assembly language by the com-
 piler before being linked into an executable program. The compiler uses specific rules defined by the cre-
 ator of the compiler to determine exactly how the high-level language statements are converted. Many
 programmers just write their high-level language programs and assume the compiler is creating the
 proper executable code to implement the program.
   However, this is not always the case. When the compiler converts the high-level language code state-
   ments into assembly language code, quirks and oddities often pop up. In addition, the compiler is often
   written to follow the conversion rules so specifically that it does not recognize time-saving shortcuts that
   can be made in the final assembly language code, or it is unable to compensate for poorly written high-
   level routines. This is where knowledge of assembly language code can come in handy.

   This book shows that by examining the assembly language code generated by the compiler before link-
   ing it into an executable program, you can often find places where the code can be modified to increase
   performance or provide additional functionality. The book also helps you understand how your high-
   level language routines are affected by the compiler’s conversion process.

How This Book Is Structured
   The book is divided into three sections. The first section covers the basics of the assembly language
   programming environment. Because assembly language programming differs among processors and
   assemblers, a common platform had to be chosen. This book uses the popular Linux operating system,
   running on the Intel family of processors. The Linux environment provides a wealth of program devel-
   oper tools, such as an optimizing compiler, an assembler, a linker, and a debugger, all at little or no
   charge. This wealth of development tools in the Linux environment makes it the perfect setting for
   dissecting C programs into assembly language code.

   The chapters in the first section are as follows:

   Chapter 1, “What Is Assembly Language?” starts the section off by ensuring that you understand exactly
   what assembly language is and how it fits into the programming model. It debunks some of the myths
   of assembly language, and provides a basis for understanding how to use assembly language with high-
   level languages.

   Chapter 2, “The IA-32 Platform,” provides a brief introduction to the Intel Pentium family of processors.
   When working with assembly language, it is important that you understand the underlying processor
   and how it handles programs. While this chapter is not intended to be an in-depth analysis of the opera-
   tion of the IA-32 platform, it does present the hardware and operations involved with programming for
   that platform.

   Chapter 3, “The Tools of the Trade,” presents the Linux open-source development tools that are used
   throughout the book. The GNU compiler, assembler, linker, and debugger are used in the book for com-
   piling, assembling, linking, and debugging the programs.

   Chapter 4, “A Sample Assembly Language Program,” demonstrates how to use the GNU tools on a
   Linux system to create, assemble, link, and debug a simple assembly language program. It also shows
   how to use C library functions within assembly language programs on Linux systems to add extra fea-
   tures to your assembly language applications.

   The second section of the book dives into the basics of assembly language programming. Before you can
   start to analyze the assembly language code generated by the compiler, you must understand the assem-
   bly language instructions. The chapters in this section are as follows:

Chapter 5, “Moving Data,” shows how data elements are moved in assembly language programs. The
concepts of registers, memory locations, and the stack are presented, and examples are shown for mov-
ing data between them.

Chapter 6, “Controlling Execution Flow,” describes the branching instructions used in assembly lan-
guage programs. Possibly one of the most important features of programs, the ability to recognize
branches and optimize branches is crucial to increasing the performance of an application.

Chapter 7, “Using Numbers,” discusses how different number data types are used in assembly lan-
guage. Being able to properly handle integers and floating-point values is important within the assembly
language program.

Chapter 8, “Basic Math Functions,” shows how assembly language instructions are used to perform the
basic math functions such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. While these are gener-
ally straightforward functions, subtle tricks can often be used to increase performance in this area.

Chapter 9, “Advanced Math Functions,” discusses the IA-32 Floating Point Unit (FPU), and how it is used
to handle complex floating-point arithmetic. Floating-point arithmetic is often a crucial element to data
processing programs, and knowing how it works greatly benefits high-level language programmers.

Chapter 10, “Working with Strings,” presents the various assembly language string-handling instruc-
tions. Character data is another important facet of high-level language programming. Understanding
how the assembly language level handles strings can provide insights when working with strings in
high-level languages.

Chapter 11, “Using Functions,” begins the journey into the depths of assembly language programming.
Creating assembly language functions to perform routines is at the core of assembly language optimiza-
tion. It is good to know the basics of assembly language functions, as they are often used by the compiler
when generating the assembly language code from high-level language code.

Chapter 12, “Using Linux System Calls,” completes this section by showing how many high-level func-
tions can be performed in assembly language using already created functions. The Linux system pro-
vides many high-level functions, such as writing to the display. Often, you can utilize these functions
within your assembly language program.

The last section of the book presents more advanced assembly language topics. Because the main topic of
this book is how to incorporate assembly language routines in your C or C++ code, the first few chapters
show just how this is done. The remaining chapters present some more advanced topics to round out
your education on assembly language programming. The chapters in this section include the following:

Chapter 13, “Using Inline Assembly,” shows how to incorporate assembly language routines directly in
your C or C++ language programs. Inline assembly language is often used for “hard-coding” quick rou-
tines in the C program to ensure that the compiler generates the appropriate assembly language code for
the routine.

Chapter 14, “Calling Assembly Libraries,” demonstrates how assembly language functions can be com-
bined into libraries that can be used in multiple applications (both assembly language and high-level
language). It is a great time-saving feature to be able to combine frequently used functions into a single
library that can be called by C or C++ programs.

   Chapter 15, “Optimizing Routines,” discusses the heart of this book: modifying compiler-generated
   assembly language code to your taste. This chapter shows exactly how different types of C routines
   (such as if-then statements and for-next loops) are produced in assembly language code. Once you
   understand what the assembly language code is doing, you can add your own touches to it to customize
   the code for your specific environment.

   Chapter 16, “Using Files,” covers one of the most overlooked functions of assembly language program-
   ming. Almost every application requires some type of file access on the system. Assembly language pro-
   grams are no different. This chapter shows how to use the Linux file-handling system calls to read,
   write, and modify data in files on the system.

   Chapter 17, “Using Advanced IA-32 Features,” completes the book with a look at the advanced Intel
   Single Instruction Multiple Data (SIMD) technology. This technology provides a platform for program-
   mers to perform multiple arithmetic operations in a single instruction. This technology has become cru-
   cial in the world of audio and video data processing.

What You Need to Use This Book
   All of the examples in this book are coded to be assembled and run on the Linux operating system, run-
   ning on an Intel processor platform. The Open Source GNU compiler (gcc), assembler (gas), linker (ld),
   and debugger (gdb) are used extensively throughout the book to demonstrate the assembly language
   features. Chapter 4, “A Sample Assembly Language Program,” discusses specifically how to use these
   tools on a Linux platform to create, assemble, link, and debug an assembly language program. If you do
   not have an installed Linux platform available, Chapter 4 demonstrates how to use a Linux distribution
   that can be booted directly from CD, without modifying the workstation hard drive. All of the GNU
   development tools used in this book are available without installing Linux on the workstation.

Conventions
   To help you get the most from the text and keep track of what’s happening, we’ve used a number of con-
   ventions throughout the book.

       Tips, hints, tricks, and asides to the current discussion are offset and placed in italics like this.

   As for styles in the text:

       ❑    We highlight important words when we introduce them.
       ❑    We show filenames, URLs, and code within the text like so: persistence.properties.
       ❑    We present code in two different ways:

       In code examples we highlight new and important code with a gray background.

       The gray highlighting is not used for code that’s less important in the present
       context, or has been shown before.

Source Code
 As you work through the examples in this book, you may choose either to type in all the code manually
 or to use the source code files that accompany the book. All of the source code used in this book is avail-
 able for download at www.wrox.com. Once at the site, simply locate the book’s title (either by using the
 Search box or by using one of the title lists) and click the Download Code link on the book’s detail page
 to obtain all the source code for the book.

     Because many books have similar titles, you may find it easiest to search by ISBN; this book’s ISBN is
     0-764-57901-0.

 Once you download the code, just decompress it with your favorite compression tool. Alternately, you
 can go to the main Wrox code download page at www.wrox.com/dynamic/books/download.aspx
 to see the code available for this book and all other Wrox books.

Errata
 We make every effort to ensure that there are no errors in the text or in the code. However, no one is per-
 fect, and mistakes do occur. If you find an error in one of our books, such as a spelling mistake or faulty
 piece of code, we would be very grateful for your feedback. By sending in errata, you may save another
 reader hours of frustration, and at the same time you will be helping us provide even higher quality
 information.

 To find the errata page for this book, go to www.wrox.com and locate the title using the Search box or one
 of the title lists. Then, on the book details page, click the Book Errata link. On this page, you can view all
 errata that has been submitted for this book and posted by Wrox editors. A complete book list, including
 links to each book’s errata, is also available at www.wrox.com/misc-pages/booklist.shtml.

 If you don’t spot “your” error on the Book Errata page, go to www.wrox.com/contact/techsupport.
 shtml and complete the form there to send us the error you have found. We’ll check the information,
 and, if appropriate, post a message to the book’s errata page and fix the problem in subsequent editions
 of the book.

p2p.wrox.com
 For author and peer discussion, join the P2P forums at p2p.wrox.com. The forums are a Web-based
 system for you to post messages relating to Wrox books and related technologies and interact with other
 readers and technology users. The forums offer a subscription feature to e-mail you topics of interest of
 your choosing when new posts are made to the forums. Wrox authors, editors, other industry experts,
 and your fellow readers are present on these forums.

   At http://p2p.wrox.com you will find a number of different forums that will help you not only as
   you read this book, but also as you develop your own applications. To join the forums, just follow
   these steps:

     1.      Go to p2p.wrox.com and click the Register link.
     2.      Read the terms of use and click Agree.
     3.      Complete the required information to join as well as any optional information you wish to pro-
             vide and click Submit.
     4.      You will receive an e-mail with information describing how to verify your account and com-
             plete the joining process.

         You can read messages in the forums without joining P2P, but in order to post your own messages you
         must join.

   Once you join, you can post new messages and respond to messages other users post. You can read mes-
   sages at any time on the Web. If you would like to have new messages from a particular forum e-mailed
   to you, click the Subscribe to this Forum icon by the forum name in the forum listing.

   For more information about how to use the Wrox P2P, be sure to read the P2P FAQs for answers to ques-
   tions about how the forum software works as well as many common questions specific to P2P and Wrox
   books. To read the FAQs, click the FAQ link on any P2P page.

