                                      What Is
                          Assembly Language?

 One of the first hurdles to learning assembly language programming is understanding just what
 assembly language is. Unlike other programming languages, there is no one standard format that
 all assemblers use. Different assemblers use different syntax for writing program statements.
 Many beginning assembly language programmers get caught up in trying to figure out the myriad
 of different possibilities in assembly language programming.

 The first step in learning assembly language programming is defining just what type of assembly
 language programming you want to (or need to) use in your environment. Once you define your
 flavor of assembly language, it is easy to get started learning and using assembly language in both
 standalone and high-level language programs.

 This chapter begins the journey by showing where assembly language comes from, and defining
 why assembly language programming is used. To understand assembly language programming,
 you must first understand the basics of its underlying purpose — programming in processor
 instruction code. Next, the chapter shows how high-level languages are converted to raw instruc-
 tion code by compilers and linkers. After having that information, it will be easier for you to
 understand how assembly language programs and high-level language programs differ, and how
 they can both be used to complement one another.

Processor Instructions
 At the lowest layer of operation, all computer processors (microcomputers, minicomputers, and
 mainframe computers) manipulate data based on binary codes defined internally in the processor
 chip by the manufacturer. These codes define what functions the processor should perform, utiliz-
 ing the data provided by the programmer. These preset codes are referred to as instruction codes.
 Different types of processors contain different types of instruction codes. Processor chips are often
 categorized by the quantity and type of instruction codes they support.
Chapter 1
    While the different types of processors can contain different types of instruction codes, they all handle
    instruction code programs similarly. This section describes how processors handle instructions and what
    the instruction codes look like for a sample processor chip.

Instruction code handling
    As a computer processor chip runs, it reads instruction codes that are stored in memory. Each instruction
    code set can contain one or more bytes of information that instruct the processor to perform a specific
    task. As each instruction code is read from memory, any data required for the instruction code is also
    stored and read in memory. The memory bytes that contain the instruction codes are no different than
    the bytes that contain the data used by the processor.

    To differentiate between data and instruction codes, special pointers are used to help the processor keep
    track of where in memory the data and instruction codes are stored. This is shown in Figure 1-1.

                                       68
                                       54
                                       40
                                       49
                                       OF
                                       DO                          Data Pointer

                                       08
                                       EC
                                       83                      instructions move
                                                              upwards in memory
                                       ES
                                       89
                                       55                          Instruction Pointer
                              Figure 1-1

    The instruction pointer is used to help the processor keep track of which instruction codes have already
    been processed and what code is next in line to be processed. Of course, there are special instruction
    codes that can change the location of the instruction pointer, such as jumping to a specific location in the
    program.

    Similarly, a data pointer is used to help the processor keep track of where the data area in memory starts.
    This area is called the stack. As new data elements are placed in the stack, the pointer moves “down” in
    memory. As data is read from the stack, the pointer moves “up” in memory.

 Each instruction code can contain one or more bytes of information for the processor to handle. For
 example, the instruction code bytes (in hexadecimal format)

     C7 45 FC 01 00 00 00

 tell an Intel IA-32 series processor to load the decimal value 1 into a memory offset location defined by
 a processor register. The instruction code contains several pieces of information (defined later in the
 “Opcode” section) that clearly define what function is to be performed by the processor. After the pro-
 cessor completes processing one instruction code set, it reads the next one in memory (as pointed to by
 the instruction pointer). The instructions must be placed in memory in the proper format and order for
 the processor to properly step through the program code.

 Every instruction must contain at least 1 byte called the operation code (or opcode for short). The opcode
 defines what function the processor should perform. Each processor family has its own predefined
 opcodes that define all of the functions available. The next section shows how the opcodes used in the
 Intel IA-32 family of microprocessors are structured. These are the types of processor opcodes that are
 used in all of the examples in this book.

Instruction code format
 The Intel IA-32 family of microprocessors includes all of the current types of microprocessors used in
 modern IBM-platform microcomputers (see Chapter 2, “The IA-32 Platform”), including the popular
 Pentium line of microprocessors. A specific format for instruction codes is used in the IA-32 family of
 microprocessors, and understanding the format of these instructions will help you in your assembly lan-
 guage programming. The IA-32 instruction code format consists of four main parts:

    ❑     Optional instruction prefix
    ❑     Operational code (opcode)
    ❑     Optional modifier
    ❑     Optional data element

 Figure 1-2 shows the layout of the IA-32 instruction code format.

                                                        Modifiers

        Instruction                                                                          Data
                         Opcode          ModR/M            SIB       Displacement
          Prefixes                                                                         Elements

         0–4              1–3              0–1            0–1             0–4                0–4
         bytes            bytes            bytes          bytes           bytes              bytes
    Figure 1-2

Chapter 1
    Each of the parts is used to completely define a specific instruction for the processor to perform. The fol-
    lowing sections describe each of the four parts of the instruction code and how they define the instruc-
    tion performed by the processor.

        The Intel Pentium processor family is not the only set of processor chips to utilize the IA-32 instruction
        code format. The AMD corporation also produces a line of chips that are fully compatible with the Intel
        IA-32 instruction code format.

Opcode
    As shown in Figure 1-2, the only required part of the IA-32 instruction code format is the opcode. Each
    instruction code must include an opcode that defines the basic function or task to be performed by the
    processor.

    The opcode is between 1 and 3 bytes in length, and uniquely defines the function that is performed. For
    example, the 2-byte opcode OF A2 defines the IA-32 CPUID instruction. When the processor executes
    this instruction code, it returns specific information about the microprocessor in different registers. The
    programmer can then use additional instruction codes to extract the information from the processor reg-
    isters to determine the type and model of microprocessor on which the program is running.

        Registers are components within the processor chip that are used to temporarily store data while being
        handled by the processor. They are covered in more detail in Chapter 2, “The IA-32 Platform.”

Instruction prefix
    The instruction prefix can contain between one and four 1-byte prefixes that modify the opcode behav-
    ior. These prefixes are categorized into four different groups, based on the prefix function. Only one pre-
    fix from each group can be used at one time to modify the opcode (thus the maximum of four prefix
    bytes). The four prefix groups are as follows:

       ❑    Lock and repeat prefixes
       ❑    Segment override and branch hint prefixes
       ❑    Operand size override prefix
       ❑    Address size override prefix

    The lock prefix indicates that any shared memory areas will be used exclusively by the instruction. This
    is important for multiprocessor and hyperthreaded systems. The repeat prefixes are used to indicate a
    repeating function (usually used when handling strings).

    The segment override prefixes define instructions that can override the defined segment register value
    (described in more detail in Chapter 2). The branch hint prefixes attempt to give the processor a clue as
    to the most likely path the program will take in a conditional jump statement (this is used with predic-
    tive branching hardware).

    The operand size override prefix informs the processor that the program will switch between 16-bit and
    32-bit operand sizes within the instruction code. This enables the program to warn the processor when it
    uses larger-sized operands, helping to speed up the assignment of data to registers.

  The address size override prefix informs the processor that the program will switch between 16-bit and
  32-bit memory addresses. Either size can be declared as the default size for the program, and this prefix
  informs the processor that the program is switching to the other.

Modifiers
  Some opcodes require additional modifiers to define what registers or memory locations are involved in
  the function. The modifiers are contained in three separate values:

     ❑    addressing-form specifier (ModR/M) byte
     ❑    Scale-Index-Base (SIB) byte
     ❑    One, two, or four address displacement bytes

The ModR/M byte
  The ModR/M byte consists of three fields of information, as shown in Figure 1-3.

                         7           6 5                     3 2                       0

                             Mod             reg/opcode                  r/m

                            2 bits              3 bits                  3 bits
                        Figure 1-3

  The mod field is used with the r/m field to define the register or addressing mode used in the instruc-
  tion. There are 24 possible addressing modes, along with eight possible general-purpose registers that
  can be used in the instruction, making 32 possible values.

  The reg/opcode field is used to enable three more bits to further define the opcode function (such as
  opcode subfunctions), or it can be used to define a register value.

  The r/m field is used to define another register to use as the operand of the function, or it can be com-
  bined with the mod field to define the addressing mode for the instruction.

The SIB byte
  The SIB byte also consists of three fields of information, as shown in Figure 1-4.

                         7           6 5                     3 2                       0

                             scale              index                   base

                            2 bits              3 bits                  3 bits
                        Figure 1-4

Chapter 1
    The scale field specifies the scale factor for the operation. The index field specifies the register that is
    used as the index register for memory access. The base field specifies the register that is used as the base
    register for memory access.

    The combination of the ModR/M and SIB bytes creates a table that can define many possible combina-
    tions of registers and memory modes for accessing data. The Intel specification sheets for the Pentium
    processor define all of the possible combinations that are used with the ModR/M and SIB bytes.

The address displacement byte
    The address displacement byte is used to indicate an offset to the memory location defined in the
    ModR/M and SIB bytes. This can be used as an index to a base memory location to either store or access
    data within memory.

Data element
    The final part of the instruction code is the data element that is used by the function. While some instruc-
    tion codes read data from memory locations or processor registers, some include data within the instruc-
    tion code itself. Often this value is used to represent a static numeric value, such as a number to be added,
    or a memory location. This value can contain 1, 2, or 4 bytes of information, depending on the data size.

    For example, the following sample instruction code shown earlier:

        C7 45 FC 01 00 00 00

    defines the opcode C7, which is the instruction to move a value to a memory location. The memory loca-
    tion is defined by the 45 FC modifier (which defines –4 bytes (the FC value) from the memory location
    pointed to by the value in the EBP register (the 45 value). The final 4 bytes define the integer value that is
    placed in that memory location (in this case, the value 1).

        As you can see from this example, the value 1 was written as the 4-byte hexadecimal value 01 00 00 00.
        The order of the bytes in the data stream depends on the type of processor used. The IA-32 platform pro-
        cessors use “little-endian” notation, whereby the lower-value bytes appear first in order (when reading
        left to right). Other processors use “big-endian” order, whereby the higher-value bytes appear first in
        order. This concept is extremely important when specifying data and memory location values in your
        assembly language programs.

High-Level Languages
    If it looks like programming in pure processor instruction code is difficult, it is. Even the simplest of pro-
    grams require the programmer to specify a lot of opcodes and data bytes. Trying to manage a huge pro-
    gram full of just instruction codes would be a daunting task. To help save the sanity of programmers,
    high-level languages (HLLs) were created.

    HLLs enable programmers to create functions using simpler terms, rather than raw processor instruction
    codes. Special reserved keywords are used to define variables (memory locations for data), create
    loops (jump over instruction codes), and handle input and output from the program. However, the pro-
    cessor does not have any knowledge about how to handle the HLL code. The code must be converted by
    some mechanism to simple instruction code format for the processor to handle. This section defines the

  different types of HLLs and then shows how the HLL code is converted to the instruction code for the
  processor to execute.

Types of high-level languages
  While programmers can choose from many different HLLs available, they all can be classified into two
  different categories, based on how they are run on the computer:

     ❑      Compiled languages
     ❑      Interpreted languages

  While it is possible for different implementations of the same programming language to be either com-
  piled or interpreted, these categories are used to show how a particular HLL implementation defines
  how the programs are run on the processor. The following sections describe the methods used to run
  programs and show how they affect how the processor operates with them.

Compiled languages
  Most production applications are created using compiled HLLs. The programmer creates a program
  using common statements for the language which carry out the logic of the application. The text pro-
  gram statements are then converted into a set of instruction codes that can be run on the processor.
  Usually, what is commonly called compiling a program is actually a two-step process:

     ❑      Compiling the HLL statements into raw instruction codes
     ❑      Linking the raw instruction codes to produce an executable program

  Figure 1-5 demonstrates this process.

                              Compiler

         source code
         file
                                               object code
                                               file
                                                                      Linker

                                     other                                                executable
                                     object code                                          file
                                     files

                                     object code
                                     libraries

         Figure 1-5

Chapter 1
    The compiling step converts the text programming language statements into the instruction codes
    required to carry out the application function. Each of the HLL lines of code are matched up with one or
    more instruction codes pertaining to the specific processor on which the application will run. For exam-
    ple, the simple HLL code

        int main()
        {
            int i = 1;
            exit(0);
        }

    is compiled into the following IA-32 instruction codes:

        55
        89 E5
        83 EC 08
        C7 45 FC 01 00 00 00
        83 EC 0C
        6A 00
        E8 D1 FE FF FF

    This step produces an intermediate file, called an object code file. The object code file contains the instruc-
    tion codes that represent the core of the application functions, as shown above. The object code file itself
    cannot be run by the operating system. Often the host operating system requires special file formats for
    executable files (program files that can be run on the system), and the HLL program may require pro-
    gram functions from other object files. Another step is required to add these components.

    After the code is compiled into an object file, a linker is used to link the application object code file with
    any additional object files required by the application and to create the final executable output file. The
    output of the linker is an executable file that can only be run on the operating system for which the pro-
    gram is written. Unfortunately, each operating system uses a different format for executable files, so an
    application compiled on a Microsoft Windows workstation will not work as is on a Linux workstation,
    and vice versa.

        Object files that contain commonly used functions can be combined into a single file, called a library
        file. The library file can then be linked into multiple applications either at compile time (called static
        libraries), or at the time the application is run on the system (called dynamic libraries).

Interpreted languages
    As opposed to compiled programs, which run by themselves on a processor, an interpreted language
    program is read and run by a separate program. The separate program is a host for the application pro-
    gram, reading and interpreting the program as it is processed. It is the job of the host program to convert
    the interpreted program code into the proper instruction codes for the processor as the program is
    running.

    Obviously, the downside to using interpreted languages is speed. Instead of the program being com-
    piled directly to instruction codes that are run on the processor, an intermediary program reads each line
    of program code and processes the required functions. The amount of time the host program takes to
    read the code and execute it adds additional delays to the execution of the application.

  With the resulting reduction in speed when using interpreted languages, you may be wondering why
  anyone still uses them. One answer is convenience. With compiled programs, every time a change is
  made to the program, the program must be recompiled and relinked with the proper code libraries. With
  interpreted programs, changes can be quickly made to the source code file and the program rerun to
  check for errors. In addition, with interpreted languages, the interpreter application automatically deter-
  mines what functions need to be included with the core code to support functions.

      Today’s programming language environment muddies the waters between compiled and interpreted lan-
      guages. No one specific language can be classified in either category. Instead, individual implementa-
      tions of different HLLs are categorized. For example, while many BASIC programming
      implementations require interpreters to interpret the BASIC code into an executable program, there are
      many BASIC implementations that enable the programmer to compile the BASIC programs into exe-
      cutable instruction code.

Hybrid languages
  Hybrid languages are a recent trend in programming that combine the features of a compiled program
  with the versatility and ease of an interpreted program. A perfect example is the popular Java program-
  ming language.

  The Java programming language is compiled into what is called byte code. The byte code is similar to
  the instruction code you would see on a processor, but is itself not compatible with any current proces-
  sor family (although there have been plans to create a processor that can run Java byte code as instruc-
  tion sets).

  Instead, the Java byte code must be interpreted by a Java Virtual Machine (JVM), running separately on
  the host computer. The Java byte code is portable, in that it can be run by any JVM on any type of host
  computer. The advantage is that different platforms can have their own specific JVMs, which are used to
  interpret the same Java byte code without it having to be recompiled from the original source code.

High-level language features
  If you are a professional programmer, most likely you do most (if not all) of your coding using a high-
  level language. You may or may not have had the luxury of choosing which HLL you use for your pro-
  jects, but either way, there is no doubt that it makes your job easier. This section describes two of the
  most useful features of HLLs, portability and standardization, which help set HLLs apart from assembly
  language programming.

Portability
  As described earlier in the “Processor Instructions” section, instruction code programming is highly
  dependent on the processor used in the computer. Each of the different families of processors utilize
  different instruction code formats, as well as different methods for storing data (big endian vs. little
  endian). Instruction codes written for an IA-32 platform will not work on a MIPS processor platform.

  Imagine writing a 10,000-line instruction code program for your new application, which runs on a Sun
  Sparc workstation, and then being asked to port it to a Linux workstation running on a Pentium com-
  puter. Because the microprocessor used for the Sun Sparc workstation does not use the same instruction
  codes as the Pentium, all of your code would need to be redone for the new instruction codes — ouch.

Chapter 1
     HLLs have the capability to be ported to other operating systems and other processor platforms by sim-
     ply recompiling the program on the new platform. When the program is recompiled, it is automatically
     rewritten using the instruction codes for the destination processor.

         However, in practice, nontrivial programs use operating system APIs that make it difficult to simply
         recompile the source code for another platform. For example, a program directly using the MS Windows
         API will not compile under Linux.

Standardization
     Another useful feature of HLLs is the abundance of standards available for the languages. Both the
     Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the American National Standards Institute
     (ANSI) have created standard specifications for many different HLLs.

     This means that you are guaranteed to obtain the same results from source code compiled with a stan-
     dard compiler on one type of operating system and processor as you would compiling on a different
     type of operating system and processor. Each compiler is created to interpret the standard language con-
     structs into instruction code for the destination processor to produce the same functionality across the
     processor platforms.

Assembly Language
     While creating large applications using an HLL is often simpler than using raw instruction codes, it
     doesn’t necessarily mean that the resulting program will be efficient. Unfortunately, in order to increase
     portability and comply with standards, many compilers code to the “least common denominator.” This
     means that compilers creating instruction codes for advanced processor chips may not utilize special
     instruction codes unique to those processors to help create faster applications.

     One feature that many of the new processors on the market offer is advanced mathematics handling
     instruction codes. These instruction codes help speed up complex mathematical expression processing
     by using larger-than-normal byte sizes to represent numbers (either 64 or 128 bits). Unfortunately, many
     compilers don’t take advantage of these advanced instruction codes. Fortunately, there is a simple solu-
     tion for the programmer. In environments where execution speed is critical, assembly language pro-
     gramming can come to the rescue. Of course, the first step to improving execution speed is to ensure that
     the best algorithm is used in the first place. Optimizing a poor algorithm does not compensate for using
     a fast algorithm in the first place.

     Assembly language enables programmers to directly create instruction code programs without having to
     worry about the many different instruction code set combinations on the processor. Instead, an assembly
     language program uses mnemonics to represent instruction codes. The mnemonics enables the program-
     mer to use English-style words to represent individual instruction codes. The assembly language
     mnemonics are easily converted to the raw instruction codes by an assembler.

     This section describes the assembly language mnemonic system, and how it is used to create raw
     instruction code programs that can be run on the processor.

 An assembly language program consists of three components that are used to define the program
 operations:

    ❑    Opcode mnemonics
    ❑    Data sections
    ❑    Directives

 The following sections describe each of these components and show how they are used within the
 assembly language program to create the resulting instruction code program.

Opcode mnemonics
 The core of an assembly language program is the instruction codes used to create the program. To help
 facilitate writing the instruction codes, assemblers equate mnemonic words with instruction code func-
 tions, such as moving or adding data elements. For example, the instruction code sample

     55
     89 E5
     83 EC 08
     C7 45 FC 01 00 00 00
     83 EC 0C
     6A 00
     E8 D1 FE FF FF

 can be written in assembly language as follows:

     push %ebp
     mov %esp, %ebp
     sub $0x8, %esp
     movl $0x1, -4(%ebp)
     sub $0xc, %esp
     push $0x0
     call 8048348

 Instead of having to know what each byte of instruction code represents, the assembly language pro-
 grammer can use easier-to-remember mnemonic codes, such as push, mov, sub, and call, to represent
 the instruction codes.

 Different assemblers use different mnemonics to represent instruction codes. While trends have
 emerged to standardize assembler mnemonics, there is still quite a vast variety of mnemonic codes, not
 only between processor families but even between assemblers used for the same processor instruction
 code sets.

     Each processor manufacturer publishes developer manuals detailing all of the instruction codes imple-
     mented by a specific chip set. The Intel IA-32 developer manuals are freely available at the Intel Web
     site (www.intel.com). These developer manuals take over 1,000 pages just to enumerate and describe all
     of the instruction codes for the Pentium family of processors.

Chapter 1

Defining data
     Besides the instruction codes, most programs also require data elements to be used to hold variable and
     constant data values that are used throughout the program. HLLs use variables to define sections of
     memory to hold data. For example, it is not uncommon to see the following in an HLL program:

         long testvalue = 150;
         char message[22] = {“This is a test message”};
         float pi = 3.14159;

     Each of these statements is interpreted by the HLL compiler to reserve memory locations of a specific
     number of bytes to store values that may or may not change during the course of the program. Each time
     the program references the variable name (such as testvalue), the compiler knows to access the speci-
     fied location in memory to read or change the byte values.

     Assembly language also enables the programmer to define data items that will be stored in memory.
     One of the advantages of programming in assembly language is that it provides you with greater control
     over where and how your data is stored in memory. The following sections describe two methods used
     to store and retrieve data in assembly language.

Using memory locations
     Similar to the HLL method of defining data, assembly language enables you to declare a variable that
     points to a specific location in memory. Defining variables in assembly language consists of two parts:

       1.    A label that points to a memory location
       2.    A data type and default value for the memory bytes

     The data type determines how many bytes are reserved for the variable. In an assembly language pro-
     gram, this would look like the following:

         testvalue:
             .long 150
         message:
              .ascii “This is a test message”
         pi:
             .float 3.14159

     As you can see from the data types, assembly language allows you to declare the type of data stored in
     the memory location, along with the default values placed in the memory location, similar to most HLL
     methods. Each data type occupies a specific number of bytes, starting at the memory location reserved
     for the label. This is shown in Figure 1-6.

                                              40
                                              49
                                               OF
                                              DO             pi
                                              61

                                              73
                                              69
                                              68
                                              54             message
                                              00
                                              00
                                              00
                                              96             testvalue
                                      Figure 1-6

The first data element declared, testvalue, is placed in memory as a 4-byte hexadecimal value in little-
endian order (96 00 00 00). The next data element, message, is placed immediately after the last byte of
the testvalue data element. Because the message data element is a text value, it is placed in memory
in the order the text characters appear in the string. Finally, the last data element, pi, is placed in mem-
ory immediately after the last byte of the message data element (the floating point is discussed in great
detail in Chapter 7, “Using Numbers.”

The memory locations are referenced within the assembly language program based on the label used to
define the starting location. A sample assembly language program would look like the following:

    movl testvalue, %ebx
    addl $10, %ebx
    movl %ebx, testvalue

The first instruction loads the EBX register with the 4-byte value located at the memory location pointed
to by the testvalue label (which was defined with a value of 150). The next instruction adds 10 (in deci-
mal) to the value stored in the EBX register and puts the result back in the EBX register. Finally, the reg-
ister value is stored in the memory location referenced by the testvalue label. This new value can then
be referenced again in the program using the testvalue label, and it will have the value of 160 (this
process is explained in detail in Chapter 5, “Moving Data,” and Chapter 8, “Basic Math Functions”).

Chapter 1

Using the stack
     Another method used to store and retrieve data in assembly language is called the stack. The stack is a
     special memory area usually reserved for passing data elements between functions in the program. It
     can also be used for temporarily storing and retrieving data elements.

     The stack is a region of memory reserved at the end of the memory range that the computer reserves for
     the application. A pointer (called the stack pointer) is used to point to the next memory location in the
     stack to put or take data. Much like a stack of papers, when a data element is placed in the stack, it
     becomes the first item that can be removed from the stack (assuming you can only take papers off of the
     top of the paper stack).

     When calling functions in an assembly language program, you usually place any data elements that you
     want passed to the function on the top of the stack. When the function is called, it can retrieve the data
     elements from the stack.

         The different methods of storing and retrieving data are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5,
         “Moving Data.”

Directives
     Instructions and data are not the only elements that make up an assembly language program.
     Assemblers reserve special keywords for instructing the assembler how to perform special functions as
     the mnemonics are converted to instruction codes.

     You saw an example of directives in the previous section when the data elements were defined. The data
     types were declared using assembler directives used in the GNU assembler. The .long, .ascii, and
     .float directives are used to alert the assembler that a specific type of data is being declared. As shown
     in the example, directives are preceded by a period to set them apart from labels.

     Directives are another area in which the different assemblers vary. Many different directives are used to
     help make the programmer’s job of creating instruction codes easier. Some modern assemblers have lists
     of directives that can rival many HLL features, such as while loops, and if-then statements! The older,
     more traditional assemblers, however, keep the directives to a minimum, forcing the assembly language
     programmer to use the mnemonic codes to create the program logic.

     One of the most important directives used in the assembly language program is the .section directive.
     This directive defines the section of memory in which the assembly language program is defining ele-
     ments. All assembly language programs have at least three sections that must be declared:

        ❑    A data section
        ❑    A bss section
        ❑    A text section

     The data section is used to declare the memory region where data elements are stored for the program.
     This section cannot be expanded after the data elements are declared, and it remains static throughout
     the program.

 The bss section is also a static memory section. It contains buffers for data to be declared later in the pro-
 gram. What makes this section special is that the buffer memory area is zero-filled.

 The text section is the area in memory where the instruction code is stored. Again, this area is fixed, in
 that it contains only the instruction codes that are declared in the assembly language program.

     These directives used in an assembly language program are demonstrated in Chapter 4, “A Sample
     Assembly Language Program.”

Summar y
 While assembly language programming is often referred to as a single programming language category,
 in reality there are a wide variety of different types of assembly language assemblers. Each assembler
 uses slightly different formats to represent instruction codes, data, and special directives for assembling
 the final program. The first step to programming in assembly language is deciding which assembler you
 need to use, and what format it uses.

 The purpose of using assembly language is to code as closely to raw processor code as possible. The
 code recognized by the processor is called instruction code. Each processor family has its own set of
 instruction codes that define the functions the processor can perform. Each processor family also uses
 specific formats for the instruction code. The Intel IA-32 family of processors uses a format that consists
 of four parts. An opcode is used to define which processor instruction should be used. An optional pre-
 fix may be used to modify the behavior of the instruction. An optional modifier may also be used to
 define what registers or memory locations are used in the instruction. Finally, an optional data element
 may be included, which defines specific data values used in the instruction.

 Trying to create large-scale programs using raw instruction codes is not an easy task. Each instruction
 code must be programmed byte by byte in the proper order for the application to run. Instead of forcing
 programmers to learn all of the instruction codes, developers have created high-level languages, which
 enable programmers to create programs in a shorthand method, which is then converted into the proper
 instruction codes by a compiler. High-level languages use simple keywords and terms to define one or
 more instruction codes. This enables programmers to concentrate on the logic of the application pro-
 gram, rather than worry about the details of the underlying processor instruction codes.

 The downside of using high-level languages is that the programmer is dependant on the compiler cre-
 ator to convert programming logic to the instruction code run by the processor. There is no guarantee
 that the created instruction codes will be the most efficient method of programming the logic. For pro-
 grammers who want maximum efficiency, or the capability to have greater control over how the pro-
 gram is handled by the processor, assembly language programming offers an alternative.

 Assembly language programming enables the programmer to program with instruction codes, but by
 using simple mnemonic terms to refer to those instruction codes. This provides programmers with both
 the ease of a high-level language and the control offered by using instruction codes.

 Unfortunately, assembly language assemblers are not standardized, and there are many different forms
 of assembly language. All assemblers contain three elements: opcode mnemonics, data elements, and

Chapter 1
     directives. The opcode mnemonics are used to code the programming logic, and data elements are used
     to define memory locations to hold both constant and variable data elements. Directives are one of the
     most controversial elements of assemblers. Directives help the programmer define specific functions,
     such as declaring data types, and define memory regions within the program. Some assemblers take
     directives to a higher level, providing directives that support many high-level language functions, such
     as advanced data management and logic programming.

     The next chapter discusses the specific layout of the Intel IA-32 processor family. Before you can start
     programming for the Pentium family of processors, it is important to understand how the hardware is
     laid out. Knowing how the processor handles data will enable you to program more efficiently, increas-
     ing the speed of your applications.

