
 One key to successful assembly language programming is knowing the environment you are
 programming for. The biggest part of that environment is the processor. Knowing the hardware
 platform your program will run on is crucial to being able to exploit both basic and advanced
 functions of the processor. Often, the whole point of using assembly language is to exploit low-
 level features of the processor within your application program. Knowing what elements can be
 used to assist your programs in gaining the most speed possible can mean the difference between
 a fast application and a slow application.

 At the time of this writing, the most popular processor platform by far used in workstations and
 servers is the Intel Pentium family of processors. The hardware and instruction code set designed
 for the Pentium processors is commonly referred to as the IA-32 platform.

 This chapter describes the hardware elements that make up the Intel IA-32 platform. The first part
 of the chapter describes the basic components found in the IA-32 processor platforms. Then the
 chapter describes the advanced features found in the newer Pentium 4 processor chips in the IA-32
 family. Finally, the different processors that are contained within the IA-32 platform are discussed,
 showing what features to watch out for with the different types of processors, both from Intel and
 from other manufacturers.

Core Par ts of an IA-32 Processor
 While different processor families incorporate different instruction sets and capabilities, there is a
 core set of components that can be found on most processors. Most introductory computer science
 classes teach four basic components of a computer. Figure 2-1 shows a basic block diagram of
 these core components.
Chapter 2

            Processor                           System                    Input              Output
                                                Memory                   Devices             Devices

                              control bus

                              address bus

                                data bus
         Figure 2-1

     The processor contains the hardware and instruction codes that control the operation of the computer. It
     is connected to the other elements of the computer (the memory storage unit, input devices, and output
     devices) using three separate buses: a control bus, an address bus, and a data bus.

     The control bus is used to synchronize the functions between the processor and the individual system
     elements. The data bus is used to move data between the processor and the external system elements.
     An example of this would be reading data from a memory location. The processor places the memory
     address to read on the address bus, and the memory storage unit responds by placing the value stored
     in that memory location on the data bus for the processor to access.

     The processor itself consists of many components. Each component has a separate function in the pro-
     cessor’s ability to process data. Assembly language programs have the ability to access and control each
     of these elements, so it is important to know what they are. The main components in the processor are
     as follows:

        ❑    Control unit
        ❑    Execution unit
        ❑    Registers
        ❑    Flags

     Figure 2-2 shows these components and how they interact within the processor.

                                                                              Registers
                            Control                   Execution
                             Unit                       Unit
                                                                                Flags

                         Figure 2-2

  The following sections describe each of the core components, and how they are implemented in the
  IA-32 platform.

Control unit
  At the heart of the processor is the control unit. The main purpose of the control unit is to control what
  is happening at any time within the processor. While the processor is running, instructions must be
  retrieved from memory and loaded for the processor to handle. The job of the control unit is to perform
  four basic functions:

    1.    Retrieve instructions from memory.
    2.    Decode instructions for operation.
    3.    Retrieve data from memory as needed.
    4.    Store the results as necessary.

  The instruction counter retrieves the next instruction code from memory and prepares it to be processed.
  The instruction decoder is used to decode the retrieved instruction code into a micro-operation. The
  micro-operation is the code that controls the specific signals within the processor chip to perform the
  function of the instruction code.

  When the prepared micro-operation is ready, the control unit passes it along to the execution unit for
  processing, and retrieves any results to store in an appropriate location.

  The control unit is the most hotly researched part of the processor. Many advances in microprocessor
  technology fall within the control unit section. Intel has made numerous advancements in speeding up
  the operations within the control unit. One of the most beneficial advancements is the manner in which
  instructions are retrieved and processed by the control unit.

  At the time of this writing, the latest Intel processor (the Pentium 4) uses a control unit technology called
  NetBurst. The NetBurst technology incorporates four separate techniques to help speed up processing in
  the control unit. Knowing how these techniques operate can help you optimize your assembly language
  programs. The NetBurst features are as follows:

     ❑    Instruction prefetch and decoding
     ❑    Branch prediction
     ❑    Out-of-order execution
     ❑    Retirement

  These techniques work together to make the control unit of the Pentium 4 processor. Figure 2-3 shows
  how these elements interact.

Chapter 2

                      System
                      Memory
                                                                        Execution Unit

                                                              Out-of-Order
                        Instruction                                                   Retirement
                                                               Execution
                    Prefetch & Decoder                                                   Unit
                                                                Engine

                                          Branch Prediction

                                                     Control Unit

              Figure 2-3

     The following sections describe each of these techniques as implemented in the Pentium 4 processor.

Instruction prefetch and decoding pipeline
     Older processors in the IA-32 family fetched instructions and data directly from system memory as they
     were needed by the execution unit. Because it takes considerably longer to retrieve data from memory
     than to process it, a backlog occurs, whereby the processor is continually waiting for instructions and
     data to be retrieved from memory. To solve this problem, the concept of prefetching was created.

     Although the name sounds odd, prefetching involves attempting to retrieve (fetch) instructions and/or
     data before they are actually needed by the execution unit. To incorporate prefetching, a special storage
     area is needed on the processor chip itself — one that can be easily accessed by the processor, quicker
     than normal memory access. This was solved using pipelining.

     Pipelining involves creating a memory cache on the processor chip from which both instructions and
     data elements can be retrieved and stored ahead of the time that they are required for processing. When
     the execution unit is ready for the next instruction, that instruction is already available in the cache and
     can be quickly processed. This is demonstrated in Figure 2-4.

                       System Memory

                   L2 Execution cache

                          Decoder

                                                                                  Out-of-Order
                   L1 Execution cache                                              Execution
                                                                                    Engine

                       Instruction Prefetch & Decoder

                    Branch Prediction
          Figure 2-4

The IA-32 platform implements pipelining by utilizing two (or more) layers of cache. The first cache
layer (called L1) attempts to prefetch both instruction code and data from memory as it thinks it will
be needed by the processor. As the instruction pointer moves along in memory, the prefetch algorithm
determines which instruction codes should be read and placed in the cache. In a similar manner, if data
is being processed from memory, the prefetch algorithm attempts to determine what data elements
may be accessed next and also reads them from memory and places them in cache.

Of course, one pitfall to caching instructions and data is that there is no guarantee that the program will
execute instructions in a sequential order. If the program takes a logic branch that moves the instruction
pointer to a completely different location in memory, the entire cache is useless and must be cleared and
repopulated with instructions from the new location.

To help alleviate this problem, a second cache layer was created. The second cache layer (called L2) can
also hold instruction code and data elements, separate from the first cache layer. When the program
logic jumps to a completely different area in memory to execute instructions, the second layer cache can
still hold instructions from the previous instruction location. If the program logic jumps back to the area,
those instructions are still being cached and can be processed almost as quickly as instructions stored in
the first layer cache.

Chapter 2
     While assembly language programs cannot access the instruction and data caches, it is good to know
     how these elements work. By minimizing branches in programs, you can help speed up the execution of
     the instruction codes in your program.

Branch prediction unit
     While implementing multiple layers of cache is one way to help speed up processing of program logic, it
     still does not solve the problem of “jumpy” programs. If a program takes many different logic branches,
     it may well be impossible for the different layers of cache to keep up, resulting in more last-minute
     memory access for both instruction code and data elements.

     To help solve this problem, the IA-32 platform processors also incorporate branch prediction. Branch pre-
     diction uses specialized algorithms to attempt to predict which instruction codes will be needed next
     within a program branch.

     Special statistical algorithms and analysis are incorporated to determine the most likely path traveled
     through the instruction code. Instruction codes along that path are prefetched and loaded into the cache
     layers.

     The Pentium 4 processor utilizes three techniques to implement branch prediction:

        ❑    Deep branch prediction
        ❑    Dynamic data flow analysis
        ❑    Speculative execution

     Deep branch prediction enables the processor to attempt to decode instructions beyond multiple
     branches in the program. Again, statistical algorithms are implemented to predict the most likely path
     the program will take throughout the branches. While this technique is helpful, it is not totally foolproof.

     Dynamic data flow analysis performs statistical real-time analysis of the data flow throughout the pro-
     cessor. Instructions that are predicted to be necessary for the flow of the program but not reached yet by
     the instruction pointer are passed to the out-of-order execution core (described next). In addition, any
     instructions that can be executed while the processor is waiting for data related to another instruction
     are processed.

     Speculative execution enables the processor to determine what distant instruction codes not immedi-
     ately in the instruction code branch are likely to be required, and attempt to process those instructions,
     again using the out-of-order execution engine.

Out-of-order execution engine
     The out-of-order execution engine is one of the greatest improvements to the Pentium 4 processor in
     terms of speed. This is where instructions are prepared for processing by the execution unit. It contains
     several buffers to change the order of instructions within the pipeline to increase the performance of the
     control unit. This is demonstrated in Figure 2-5.

             Instruction
         Prefetch & Decoder

                                                                                         Execution
                                                                                           Unit

                                    Register             Micro-operation
               Allocator
                                   Renaming                scheduler

                                                                                        Retirement
                                                                                           Unit
                                       RAT

                           Out-of-Order Execution Engine

       Figure 2-5

Instructions retrieved from the prefetch and decoding pipeline are analyzed and reordered, enabling
them to be executed as quickly as possible. By analyzing a large number of instructions, the out-of-order
execution engine can find independent instructions that can be executed (and their results saved) until
required by the rest of the program. The Pentium 4 processor can have up to 126 instructions in the out-
of-order execution engine at any one time.

There are three sections within the out-of-order execution engine:

   ❑     The allocator
   ❑     Register renaming
   ❑     The micro-operation scheduler

The allocator is the traffic cop for the out-of-order execution engine. Its job is to ensure that buffer space
is allocated properly for each instruction that the out-of-order execution engine is processing. If a needed
resource is not available, the allocator will stall the processing of the instruction and allocate resources
for another instruction that can complete its processing.

Chapter 2
     The register renaming section allocates logical registers to process instructions that require register
     access. Instead of the eight general-purpose registers available on the IA-32 processor (described later
     in the “Registers” section), the register renaming section contains 128 logical registers. It maps register
     requests made by instructions into one of the logical registers, to allow simultaneous access to the same
     register by multiple instructions. The register mapping is done using the register allocation table (RAT).
     This helps speed up processing instructions that require access to the same register sets.

     The micro-operation scheduler determines when a micro-operation is ready for processing by examining
     the input elements that it requires. Its job is to send micro-operations that are ready to be processed to
     the retirement unit, while still maintaining program dependencies. The micro-operation scheduler uses
     two queues to place micro-operations in — one for micro-operations that require memory access and one
     for micro-operations that do not. The queues are tied to dispatch ports. Different types of Pentium pro-
     cessors may contain a different number of dispatch ports. The dispatch ports send the micro-operations
     to the retirement unit.

Retirement unit
     The retirement unit receives all of the micro-operations from the pipeline decoders and the out-of-order
     execution engine and attempts to reassemble the micro-operations into the proper order for the program
     to properly execute.

     The retirement unit passes micro-operations to the execution unit for processing in the order that the
     out-of-order execution engine sends them, but then monitors the results, reassembling the results into
     the proper order for the program to execute.

     This is accomplished using a large buffer area to hold micro-operation results and place them in the
     proper order as they are required.

     When a micro-operation is completed and the results placed in the proper order, the micro-operation is
     considered retired and is removed from the retirement unit. The retirement unit also updates informa-
     tion in the branch prediction unit to ensure that it knows which branches have been taken, and which
     instruction codes have been processed.

Execution unit
     The main function of the processor is to execute instructions. This function is performed in the execution
     unit. A single processor can actually contain multiple execution units, capable of processing multiple
     instruction codes simultaneously.

     The execution unit consists of one or more Arithmetic Logic Units (ALUs) The ALUs are specifically
     designed to handle mathematical operations on different types of data. The Pentium 4 execution unit
     includes separate ALUs for the following functions:

        ❑    Simple-integer operations
        ❑    Complex-integer operations
        ❑    Floating-point operations

Low-latency integer execution unit
  The low-latency integer execution unit is designed to quickly perform simple integer mathematical oper-
  ations, such as additions, subtractions, and Boolean operations. Pentium 4 processors are capable of per-
  forming two low-latency integer operations per clock cycle, effectively doubling the processing speed.

Complex-integer execution unit
  The complex-integer execution unit handles more involved integer mathematical operations. The
  complex-integer execution unit handles most shift and rotate instructions in four clock cycles.
  Multiplication and division operations involve long calculation times, and often take 14 to 60 clock cycles.

Floating-point execution unit
  The floating-point execution unit differs between the different processors in the IA-32 family. All
  Pentium processors can process floating-point mathematical operations using the standard floating-
  point execution unit. Pentium processors that contain MMX and SSE support also perform these calcula-
  tions in the floating-point execution unit.

  The floating-point execution unit contains registers to handle data elements that contain 64-bit to 128-bit
  lengths. This enables larger floating-point values to be used in calculations, which can speed up complex
  floating-point calculations, such as digital signal processing and video compression.

Registers
  Most of the operations of the processor require processing data. Unfortunately, the slowest operations
  a processor can undertake are trying to read or store data in memory. As shown in Figure 2-1, when the
  processor accesses a data element, the request must travel outside of the processor, across the control
  bus, and into the memory storage unit. This process is not only complicated, but also forces the proces-
  sor to wait while the memory access is being performed. This downtime could be spent processing other
  instructions.

  To help solve this problem, the processor includes internal memory locations, called registers. The regis-
  ters are capable of storing data elements for processing without having to access the memory storage
  unit. The downside to registers is that a limited number of them are built into the processor chip.

  The IA-32 platform processors have multiple groups of registers of different sizes. Different processors
  within the IA-32 platform include specialized registers. The core groups of registers available to all pro-
  cessors in the IA-32 family are shown in the following table.

    Register                                 Description

    General purpose                          Eight 32-bit registers used for storing working data
    Segment                                  Six 16-bit registers used for handling memory access
    Instruction pointer                      A single 32-bit register pointing to the next instruction code
                                             to execute
                                                                              Table continued on following page

Chapter 2

       Register                               Description

       Floating-point data                    Eight 80-bit registers used for floating-point arithmetic data
       Control                                Five 32-bit registers used to determine the operating mode
                                              of the processor
       Debug                                  Eight 32-bit registers used to contain information when
                                              debugging the processor

     The following sections describe the more common registers in greater detail.

General-purpose registers
     The general-purpose registers are used to temporarily store data as it is processed on the processor.
     The general-purpose registers have evolved from the old 8-bit 8080 processor days to 32-bit registers
     available in the Pentium processors. Each new version of general-purpose registers is created to be
     completely backwardly compatible with previous processors. Thus, code that uses 8-bit registers on the
     8080 chips is still valid on 32-bit Pentium chips.

     While most general-purpose registers can be used for holding any type of data, some have acquired spe-
     cial uses, which are consistently used in assembly language programs. The following table shows the
     general-purpose registers available on the Pentium platform, and what they are most often used for.

       Register                               Description

       EAX                                    Accumulator for operands and results data
       EBX                                    Pointer to data in the data memory segment
       ECX                                    Counter for string and loop operations
       EDX                                    I/O pointer
       EDI                                    Data pointer for destination of string operations
       ESI                                    Data pointer for source of string operations
       ESP                                    Stack pointer
       EBP                                    Stack data pointer

     The 32-bit EAX, EBX, ECX, and EDX registers can also be referenced by 16-bit and 8-bit names to repre-
     sent the older versions of the registers. Figure 2-6 shows how the registers can be referenced.

                                                     EAX

                31                                   15                      7              0

                                                              AH                   AL

                                                                        AX

                                                     EBX

                31                                   15                      7              0

                                                              BH                   BL

                                                                        BX
               Figure 2-6

  By using the reference AX, the lower 16 bits of the EAX register are used. By using the reference AL, the
  lower 8 bits of the EAX register are used. AH references the next 8 higher bits after AL.

Segment registers
  The segment registers are used specifically for referencing memory locations. The IA-32 processor plat-
  form allows three different methods of accessing system memory:

     ❑    Flat memory model
     ❑    Segmented memory model
     ❑    Real-address mode

  The flat memory model presents all system memory as a contiguous address space. All instructions,
  data, and the stack are contained in the same address space. Each memory location is accessed by a spe-
  cific address, called a linear address.

  The segmented memory model divides the system memory into groups of independent segments, refer-
  enced by pointers located in the segment registers. Each segment is used to contain a specific type of
  data. One segment is used to contain instruction codes, another data elements, and a third the program
  stack.

Chapter 2
     Memory locations in segments are defined by logical addresses. A logical address consists of a segment
     address and an offset address. The processor translates a logical address to a corresponding linear
     address location to access the byte of memory.

     The segment registers are used to contain the segment address for specific data access. The following
     table describes the available segment addresses.

       Segment Register                            Description

       CS                                          Code segment
       DS                                          Data segment
       SS                                          Stack segment
       ES                                          Extra segment pointer
       FS                                          Extra segment pointer
       GS                                          Extra segment pointer

     Each segment register is 16 bits and contains the pointer to the start of the memory-specific segment. The
     CS register contains the pointer to the code segment in memory. The code segment is where the instruc-
     tion codes are stored in memory. The processor retrieves instruction codes from memory based on the
     CS register value, and an offset value contained in the EIP instruction pointer register. A program cannot
     explicitly load or change the CS register. The processor assigns its value as the program is assigned a
     memory space.

     The DS, ES, FS, and GS segment registers are all used to point to data segments. By having four separate
     data segments, the program can help separate data elements, ensuring that they do not overlap. The pro-
     gram must load the data segment registers with the appropriate pointer value for the segments, and ref-
     erence individual memory locations using an offset value.

     The SS segment register is used to point to the stack segment. The stack contains data values passed to
     functions and procedures within the program.

     If a program is using the real address mode, all of the segment registers point to the zero linear address,
     and are not changed by the program. All instruction codes, data elements, and stack elements are
     accessed directly by their linear address.

Instruction pointer register
     The instruction pointer register (or EIP register), sometimes called the program counter, keeps track of the
     next instruction code to execute. While this sounds like a simple process, with the implementation of the
     instruction prefetch cache it is not. The instruction pointer points to the next instruction to execute.

     An application program cannot directly modify the instruction pointer per se. You cannot specify a
     memory address and place it in the EIP register. Instead, you must use normal program control instruc-
     tions, such as jumps, to alter the next instruction to be read into the prefetch cache.

  In a flat memory model, the instruction pointer contains the linear address of the memory location for
  the next instruction code. If the application is using a segmented memory model, the instruction pointer
  points to a logical memory address, referenced by the contents of the CS register.

Control registers
  The five control registers are used to determine the operating mode of the processor, and the characteris-
  tics of the currently executing task. The individual control registers are described in the following table.

    Control Register                  Description

    CR0                               System flags that control the operating mode and states of the
                                      processor
    CR1                               Not currently used
    CR2                               Memory page fault information
    CR3                               Memory page directory information
    CR4                               Flags that enable processor features and indicate feature capabili-
                                      ties of the processor

  The values in the control registers cannot be directly accessed, but the data contained in the control reg-
  ister can be moved to a general-purpose register. Once the data is in a general-purpose register, an appli-
  cation program can examine the bit flags in the register to determine the operating status of the
  processor and/or currently running task.

  If a change is required to a control register flag value, the change can be made to the data in the general-
  purpose register, and the register moved to the control register. Systems programmers usually modify
  the values in the control registers. Normal user application programs do not usually modify control reg-
  isters entries, although they might query flag values to determine the capabilities of the host processor
  chip on which the application is running.

Flags
  For each operation that is performed in the processor, there must be a mechanism to determine whether
  the operation was successful or not. The processor flags are used to perform this function.

  Flags are important to assembly language programs, as they are the only means available to determine
  whether a program’s function succeeded or not. For example, if an application performed a subtraction
  operation that resulted in a negative value, a special flag within the processor would be set. Without
  checking the flag, the assembly language program would not have any way to know that something
  went wrong.

  The IA-32 platform uses a single 32-bit register to contain a group of status, control, and system flags.
  The EFLAGS register contains 32 bits of information that are mapped to represent specific flags of infor-
  mation. Some bits are reserved for future use, to allow additional flags to be defined in future proces-
  sors. At the time of this writing, 17 bits are used for flags.

Chapter 2
     The flags are divided into three groups based on function:

        ❑     Status flags
        ❑     Control flags
        ❑     System flags

     The following sections describe the flags found in each group.

Status flags
     The status flags are used to indicate the results of a mathematical operation by the processor. The current
     status flags are shown in the following table.

       Flag                                Bit                              Name

       CF                                  0                                Carry flag
       PF                                  2                                Parity flag
       AF                                  4                                Adjust flag
       ZF                                  6                                Zero flag
       SF                                  7                                Sign flag
       OF                                  11                               Overflow flag

     The carry flag is set if a mathematical operation on an unsigned integer value generates a carry or a bor-
     row for the most significant bit. This represents an overflow condition for the register involved in the
     mathematical operation. When an overflow occurs, the data remaining in the register is not the correct
     answer to the mathematical operation.

     The parity flag is used to indicate whether the result register in a mathematical operation contains cor-
     rupt data. As a simple check for validity, the parity flag is set if the total number of 1 bits in the result is
     even, and is cleared if the total number of 1 bits in the result is odd. By checking the parity flag, an appli-
     cation can determine whether the register has been corrupted since the operation.

     The adjust flag is used in Binary Coded Decimal (BCD) mathematical operations (see Chapter 7, “Using
     Numbers”). The adjust flag is set if a carry or borrow operation occurs from bit 3 of the register used for
     the calculation.

     The zero flag is set if the result of an operation is zero. This is most often used as an easy way to deter-
     mine whether a mathematical operation results in a zero value.

     The sign flag is set to the most significant bit of the result, which is the sign bit. This indicates whether
     the result is positive or negative.

     The overflow flag is used in signed integer arithmetic when a positive value is too large, or a negative
     value is too small, to be properly represented in the register.

Control flags
  Control flags are used to control specific behavior in the processor. Currently, only one control flag is
  defined, the DF flag, or direction flag. It is used to control the way strings are handled by the processor.

  When the DF flag is set (set to one), string instructions automatically decrement memory addresses to
  get the next byte in the string. When the DF flag is cleared (set to zero), string instructions automatically
  increment memory addresses to get the next byte in the string.

System flags
  The system flags are used to control operating system–level operations. Application programs should
  never attempt to modify the system flags. The system flags are listed in the following table.

    Flag                               Bit                              Name

    TF                                 8                                Trap flag
    IF                                 9                                Interrupt enable flag
    IOPL                               12 and 13                        I/O privilege level flag
    NT                                 14                               Nested task flag
    RF                                 16                               Resume flag
    VM                                 17                               Virtual-8086 mode flag
    AC                                 18                               Alignment check flag
    VIF                                19                               Virtual interrupt flag
    VIP                                20                               Virtual interrupt pending flag
    ID                                 21                               Identification flag

  The trap flag is set to enable single-step mode. In single-step mode, the processor performs only one
  instruction code at a time, waiting for a signal to perform the next instruction. This feature is extremely
  useful when debugging assembly language applications.

  The interrupt enable flag controls how the processor responds to signals received from external sources.

  The I/O privilege field indicates the I/O privilege level of the currently running task. This defines
  access levels for the I/O address space. The privilege field value must be less than or equal to the access
  level required to access the I/O address space; otherwise, any request to access the address space will
  be denied.

  The nested task flag controls whether the currently running task is linked to the previously executed
  task. This is used for chaining interrupted and called tasks.

  The resume flag controls how the processor responds to exceptions when in debugging mode.

Chapter 2
     The virtual-8086 flag indicates that the processor is operating in virtual-8086 mode instead of protected
     or real mode.

     The alignment check flag is used (along with the AM bit in the CR0 control register) to enable alignment
     checking of memory references.

     The virtual interrupt flag replicates the IF flag when the processor is operating in virtual mode.

     The virtual interrupt pending flag is used when the processor is operating in virtual mode to indicate
     that an interrupt is pending.

     The ID flag is interesting in that it indicates whether the processor supports the CPUID instruction. If
     the processor is able to set or clear this flag, it supports the CPUID instruction. If not, then the CPUID
     instruction is not available.

Advanced IA-32 Features
     The core features of the IA-32 platform mentioned so far are available on all of the processors in the
     family, starting with the 80386 processor. This section describes some advanced features that the assem-
     bly language programmer can utilize when creating programs specifically designed for the Pentium
     processors.

The x87 floating-point unit
     Early processors in the IA-32 family required a separate processor chip to perform floating-point mathe-
     matical operations. The 80287 and 80387 processors specialized in providing floating-point arithmetic
     operations for the computer chips. Programmers who needed fast processing of floating-point opera-
     tions were forced to turn to additional hardware to support their needs.

     Starting with the 80486 processor, the advanced arithmetic functions found in the 80287 and 80387 chips
     were incorporated into the main processor. To support these functions, additional instruction codes as
     well as additional registers and execution units were required. Together these elements are referred to as
     the x87 floating-point unit (FPU).

     The x87 FPU incorporates the following additional registers:

       FPU Register                          Description

       Data registers                        Eight 80-bit registers for floating-point data
       Status register                       16-bit register to report the status of the FPU
       Control register                      16-bit register to control the precision of the FPU
       Tag register                          16-bit register to describe the contents of the eight data
                                             registers

   FPU Register                         Description

   FIP register                         48-bit FPU instruction pointer (FIP) points to the next FPU
                                        instruction
   FDP register                         48-bit FPU data pointer (FDP) points to the data in memory
   Opcode register                      11-bit register to hold the last instruction processed by the FPU

 The FPU registers and instruction codes enable assembly language programs to quickly process complex
 floating-point mathematical functions, such as those required for graphics processing, digital signal pro-
 cessing, and complex business applications. The FPU can process floating-point arithmetic considerably
 faster than the software simulation used in the standard processor without the FPU. Whenever possible,
 the assembly language programmer should utilize the FPU for floating-point arithmetic.

Multimedia extensions (MMX)
 The Pentium II processor introduced another method for programmers to perform complex integer
 arithmetic operations. MMX was the first technology to support the Intel Single Instruction, Multiple
 Data (SIMD) execution model.

 The SIMD model was developed to process larger numbers, commonly found in multimedia applica-
 tions. The SIMD model uses expanded register sizes and new number formats to speed up the complex
 number crunching required for real-time multimedia presentations.

 The MMX environment includes three new floating-point data types that can be handled by the
 processor:

    ❑    64-bit packed byte integers
    ❑    64-bit packed word integers
    ❑    64-bit packed doubleword integers

 These data types are described in detail in Chapter 7, “Using Numbers.” To handle the new data for-
 mats, MMX technology incorporates the eight FPU registers as special-purpose registers. The MMX reg-
 isters are named MM0 through MM7, and are used to perform integer arithmetic on the 64-bit packed
 integers.

 While the MMX technology improved processing speeds for complex integer arithmetic, it did nothing
 for programs that require complex floating-point arithmetic. That problem was solved with the SSE
 environment.

Streaming SIMD extensions (SSE)
 The next generation of SIMD technology was implemented starting with the Pentium III processor. SSE
 enhances performance for complex floating-point arithmetic, often used in 3-D graphics, motion video,
 and video conferencing.

Chapter 2
     The first implementation of SSE in the Pentium III processor incorporated eight new 128-bit registers
     (called XMM0 through XMM7) and a new data type — a 128-bit packed single-precision floating point.
     The SSE technology also incorporated additional new instruction codes for processing up to four 128-bit
     packed single-precision floating-point numbers in a single instruction.

     The second implementation of SSE (SSE2) in the Pentium 4 processors incorporates the same XMM reg-
     isters that SSE uses, and also introduces five new data types:

        ❑    128-bit packed double-precision floating point
        ❑    128-bit packed byte integers
        ❑    128-bit packed word integers
        ❑    128-bit packed doubleword integers
        ❑    128-bit packed quadword integers

     These data types are also described in detail in Chapter 7. The new data types and the corresponding
     instruction codes enable programmers to utilize even more complex mathematical operations within
     their programs. The 128-bit double-precision floating-point data types allow for advanced 3-D geometry
     techniques, such as ray tracing, to be performed with minimal processor time.

     A third implementation of SSE (SSE3) does not create any new data types, but provides several new
     instructions for processing both integer and floating-point values in the XMM registers.

Hyperthreading
     One of the most exciting features added to the Pentium 4 processor line is hyperthreading. Hyperthreading
     enables a single IA-32 processor to handle multiple program execution threads simultaneously.

     The hyperthreading technology consists of two or more logical processors located on a single physical
     processor. Each logical processor contains a complete set of general-purpose, segment, control, and
     debug registers. All of the logical processors share the same execution unit. The out-of-order execution
     core is responsible for handling the separate threads of instruction codes provided by the different logi-
     cal processors.

     Most of the advantages of hyperthreading appear at the operating system level. Multitasking operating
     systems, such as Microsoft Windows and the various UNIX implementations, can assign application
     threads to the individual logical processors. To the application programmer, hyperthreading may not
     appear to be that much of a benefit.

The IA-32 Processor Family
     At the time of this writing, the IA-32 family of processors is the most popular computing platform used
     in desktop workstations and many server environments. The most popular operating system that
     utilizes the IA-32 platform is Microsoft Windows, although other popular operating systems run on the
     IA-32 platform, such as Novell file servers, and UNIX-based OSs such as Linux and the BSD derivatives.

  While many advances in the IA-32 processor platform have been made throughout the years, many
  features are common to all IA-32 processors. The features mentioned in this chapter form the core of all
  assembly language programs written for the IA-32 platform. However, knowing the special features
  available on a particular processor can help speed your assembly language program along very nicely.
  This section describes the different processors available in the IA-32 family, and how their features must
  be taken into consideration when programming for the platform.

Intel processors
  Of course, Intel is the main supplier of processors in the IA-32 platform. In today’s computing environ-
  ment, the most commonly used processor platform is the Pentium processor. It is extremely unusual to
  encounter hardware from the earlier IA-32 processors, such as the 80486 processor.

  Unfortunately, several different types of Pentium processors are still active in businesses, schools, and
  homes. Creating assembly language programs that utilize advanced IA-32 features found only on the
  latest processors may limit your application’s marketability. Conversely, if you know that your program-
  ming environment consists of a specific type of processor, utilizing available features may help give your
  application the performance boost needed to smoke the competition.

  This section describes the different types of Pentium processors commonly available in workstations and
  servers, highlighting the features that are available with each processor.

The Pentium processor family
  The core of the Pentium processor line is, of course, the base Pentium processor. The Pentium processor
  was introduced in 1993 as a replacement for the 80486 processor. The Pentium processor was the first
  processor to incorporate the dual execution pipeline, and was the first processor to use a full 32-bit
  address bus and 64-bit internal data path.

  While the performance benefits of the Pentium processor were obvious, from a programming point of
  view, the Pentium processor did not provide any new features beyond the 80486 architecture. All of the
  core registers and instruction codes from the 80486 processor were supported, including the internal
  FPU support.

The P6 processor family
  The P6 processor family was introduced in 1995 with the Pentium Pro processor. The Pentium Pro pro-
  cessor incorporated a completely new architecture from the original Pentium processor. The P6 family of
  processors were the first to utilize a superscalar microarchitecture, which greatly increased performance
  by enabling multiple execution units and instruction prefetch pipelines.

  The Pentium MMX and Pentium II processors, part of the P6 family, were the first processors to incorpo-
  rate MMX technology, and also introduced new low-power states that enabled the processor to be put in
  sleep mode when idling. This feature helped conserve power, and became the ideal platform for laptop
  computing devices.

  The Pentium III processor was the first processor to incorporate SSE technology, enabling programmers
  to perform complex floating-point arithmetic operations both quickly and easily.

Chapter 2

The Pentium 4 processor family
     The Pentium 4 processor was introduced in 2000, and again started a new trend in microprocessor
     design. The Pentium 4 utilizes the Intel NetBurst architecture, which provides extremely fast processing
     speeds by incorporating the instruction pipelines, the out-of-order execution core, and execution units.

     The Pentium 4 processor supports SSE3, a more advanced SSE technology that implements additional
     floating-point operations to support high-speed multimedia computations.

The Pentium Xeon processor family
     In 2001, Intel introduced the Pentium Xeon processor. It is primarily intended for multi-processor server
     operations. It supports the MMX, SSE, SSE2, and SSE3 technologies.

Non-Intel processors
     While the IA-32 platform is often considered to be an Intel thing, there are many other non-Intel proces-
     sors available on the market that also implement the IA-32 features. It is possible that your assembly lan-
     guage application may be run on a non-Intel platform, so it is important that you understand some
     differences between the platforms.

AMD processors
     Today, Intel’s biggest competitor is AMD. AMD has released a competing processor chip for every
     release of Intel’s Pentium processor. It is not uncommon to run across Microsoft Windows workstations
     using AMD processors. The following table shows the AMD processor’s history.

       AMD Processor                     Equivalent to                     Notes

       K5                                Pentium                           100% software compatible
       K6                                Pentium MMX                       Pentium with full MMX support
       K6-2                              Pentium II                        Uses 3D Now technology
       K6-III                            Pentium III
       Athlon                            Pentium 4
       Athlon XP                         Pentium 4 w/SSE

     For the assembly language programmer, the most important difference between AMD and Intel proces-
     sors is apparent when using SIMD technology. While AMD has duplicated the MMX technology, it has
     not fully duplicated the newer SSE technology. When Intel introduced SSE in the Pentium II processor,
     AMD took a different route. The AMD K6-2 processor uses a different SIMD technology called 3D Now.
     The 3D Now technology uses similar registers and data types as SSE, but it is not software compatible.
     This has caused high-speed programmers considerable difficulty when programming for SSE functions.

     With the release of the Athlon XP processor in 2001, AMD supported SSE integer arithmetic. At the time
     of this writing, the newest AMD processor chips now fully support SSE technology.

Cyrix processors
  While the Cyrix corporation has not been in business for a few years, their IA-32 platform processors
  still live on in many workstations and low-end servers. It is still possible to run across a Cyrix processor
  in various environments.

  The evolution of the Cyrix processor family mirrored the Intel processors for many versions. The
  first Pentium-grade processor produced by Cyrix was originally called the 6x86 processor. It is
  100 percent software compatible with the Pentium processor. When Intel introduced MMX technology,
  Cyrix produced the 6x86MX processor (they didn’t have a license to call it MMX, but MX was close
  enough).

  When Cyrix was sold to the VIA chipset company, the original Cyrix processor line was renamed. The
  6x86 processor was called the M1, and the 6x86MX processor was called M2. Again, these processors
  retained their compatibility with their Pentium counterparts.

  Before the demise of the Cyrix processor, one final version made it to market. Dubbed the Cyrix III, it
  was also compatible with the Pentium III processor. Unfortunately, similar to AMD, it too had to support
  SSE using the 3D Now technology, which made it incompatible with assembly language programs writ-
  ten for SSE.

Summar y
  Before writing an assembly language program, you must know the target processor used when the
  program is executed. The most popular processor platform in use today is the Intel IA-32 platform.
  This platform includes the Pentium family of processors from Intel, as well as the Athlon processors
  from AMD.

  The flagship of the IA-32 platform is the Intel Pentium 4 processor. It incorporates the NetBurst architec-
  ture to quickly and easily process instructions and data. The core of the NetBurst architecture includes a
  control unit, an execution unit, registers, and flags.

  The control unit controls how the execution unit processes instructions and data. Speed is accomplished
  by prefetching and decoding instructions from memory long before the execution unit processes them.
  Instructions can also be processed out of order and the results stored until they are needed in the
  application.

  The execution unit in a Pentium 4 processor has the capability of processing multiple instructions con-
  currently. Simple integer processes are performed quickly and stored in the out-of-order area in the con-
  trol unit until needed. Complex integer and floating-point processes are also streamlined to increase
  performance.

  Registers are used as local data storage within the processor to prevent costly memory access for data.
  The IA-32 platform processors provide several general-purpose registers for holding data and pointers
  as the program is executed. Instructions are retrieved from memory based on the value of the instruction
  pointer register. The control register controls the processor’s behavior.

Chapter 2
     A special register containing several flags determines the status and operation of the processor. Each flag
     represents a different operation within the processor. Status flags indicate the result of operations per-
     formed by the processor. Control flags control how the processor behaves for specific operations. System
     flags determine operating system behavior, and should not be touched by application programmers.

     Innovation in the IA-32 platform is alive and well. Many new features have been introduced in recent
     processor releases. The floating-point unit (FPU) has been incorporated into Pentium processors to assist
     in floating-point mathematical operations.

     To further support complex mathematical processing, the Single Instruction, Multiple Data (SIMD) tech-
     nology enables the processing of large numerical values in both integer and floating-point form. The
     Multimedia Extensions (MMX) enable programmers to use 64-bit integers in high-precision integer cal-
     culations. Following that, the Streaming SIMD Extensions (SSE) technology enables programmers to use
     128-bit single-precision floating-point values, and subsequently, the SSE2 technology enables the use of
     128-bit double-precision floating-point data values. These new data types greatly speed up the process-
     ing of mathematically intensive programs, such as those used for multimedia processing and digital sig-
     nal processing.

     When programming for the IA-32 platform, you should be aware of the different processors available,
     and know what functions each processor type supports. The core of the IA-32 platform is the original
     Pentium processor. It supports the core IA-32 registers and instruction sets, along with simple built-in
     FPU support. Similar to the Pentium processor, AMD produced the K5 processor, and Cyrix produced
     the 6x86 processor. Each of these processors is 100 percent software compatible with the IA-32 instruc-
     tion code set.

     Intel introduced MMX functionality in the Pentium II processor line. Following suit, AMD incorporated
     MMX features in the K6 processor, and Cyrix with the 6x86MX processor. All of these processors include
     the MMX registers, and the additional MMX instruction codes.

     The SSE technology is where things get complicated in the IA-32 world. The Pentium II processor intro-
     duced SSE registers and instruction sets, but unfortunately, other processor manufacturers were not able
     to directly incorporate these features. Instead, AMD and Cyrix implemented the 3D Now technology in
     their K6-2 (AMD) and Cyrix III (Cyrix) processors. The 3D Now technology provided the same 64-bit
     integer data types as SSE, but the instruction codes were different.

     At the time of this writing, the Pentium 4 processor is the flagship processor for Intel. It supports SSE3
     technology, as well as the NetBurst architecture. The AMD rival is the Athlon XP, which now incorpo-
     rates SSE registers and instruction sets, making it software compatible with the Pentium 4 processor.

     Now that you have an understanding of the hardware platform used in this book, it’s time to examine
     the software development environment. The next chapter discusses the assembly language tools that are
     available in the Linux operating system environment. By using Linux, you can leverage the GNU devel-
     opment tools to create a professional software development environment with minimal cost.

