
        4         General principles                                                                               [intro]
        4.1     Implementation compliance                                                                 [intro.compliance]
        4.1.1     General                                                                     [intro.compliance.general]
   1    The set of diagnosable rules consists of all syntactic and semantic rules in this document except for those
        rules containing an explicit notation that “no diagnostic is required” or which are described as resulting in
        “undefined behavior”.
   2    Although this document states only requirements on C++ implementations, those requirements are often
        easier to understand if they are phrased as requirements on programs, parts of programs, or execution of
        programs. Such requirements have the following meaning:
(2.1)     — If a program contains no violations of the rules in Clause 5 through Clause 33 and Annex D, a conforming
            implementation shall, within its resource limits as described in Annex B, accept and correctly execute4
            that program.
(2.2)     — If a program contains a violation of a rule for which no diagnostic is required, this document places no
            requirement on implementations with respect to that program.
(2.3)     — Otherwise, if a program contains a violation of any diagnosable rule or an occurrence of a construct
            described in this document as “conditionally-supported” when the implementation does not support
            that construct, a conforming implementation shall issue at least one diagnostic message.
        [Note 1 : During template argument deduction and substitution, certain constructs that in other contexts require a
        diagnostic are treated differently; see 13.10.3. — end note]
        Furthermore, a conforming implementation
(2.4)     — shall not accept a preprocessing translation unit containing a #error preprocessing directive (15.8),
(2.5)     — shall issue at least one diagnostic message for each #warning or #error preprocessing directive not
            following a #error preprocessing directive in a preprocessing translation unit, and
(2.6)     — shall not accept a translation unit with a static_assert-declaration that fails (9.1).
   3    For classes and class templates, the library Clauses specify partial definitions. Private members (11.8) are not
        specified, but each implementation shall supply them to complete the definitions according to the description
        in the library Clauses.
   4    For functions, function templates, objects, and values, the library Clauses specify declarations. Implementa-
        tions shall supply definitions consistent with the descriptions in the library Clauses.
   5    A C++ translation unit (5.2) obtains access to the names defined in the library by including the appropriate
        standard library header or importing the appropriate standard library named header unit (16.4.3.2).
   6    The templates, classes, functions, and objects in the library have external linkage (6.6). The implementation
        provides definitions for standard library entities, as necessary, while combining translation units to form a
        complete C++ program (5.2).
   7    Two kinds of implementations are defined: a hosted implementation and a freestanding implementation. A
        freestanding implementation is one in which execution may take place without the benefit of an operating
        system. A hosted implementation supports all the facilities described in this document, while a freestanding
        implementation supports the entire C++ language described in Clause 5 through Clause 15 and the subset of
        the library facilities described in 16.4.2.5.
   8    A conforming implementation may have extensions (including additional library functions), provided they
        do not alter the behavior of any well-formed program. Implementations are required to diagnose programs
        that use such extensions that are ill-formed according to this document. Having done so, however, they can
        compile and execute such programs.
   9    Each implementation shall include documentation that identifies all conditionally-supported constructs that
        it does not support and defines all locale-specific characteristics.5

          4) “Correct execution” can include undefined behavior, depending on the data being processed; see Clause 3 and 6.9.1.
          5) This documentation also defines implementation-defined behavior; see 4.1.2.

        § 4.1.1                                                                                                                   10

        4.1.2     Abstract machine                                                                                [intro.abstract]
   1    The semantic descriptions in this document define a parameterized nondeterministic abstract machine. This
        document places no requirement on the structure of conforming implementations. In particular, they need
        not copy or emulate the structure of the abstract machine. Rather, conforming implementations are required
        to emulate (only) the observable behavior of the abstract machine as explained below.6
   2    Certain aspects and operations of the abstract machine are described in this document as implementation-
        defined (for example, sizeof(int)). These constitute the parameters of the abstract machine. Each
        implementation shall include documentation describing its characteristics and behavior in these respects.7
        Such documentation shall define the instance of the abstract machine that corresponds to that implementation
        (referred to as the “corresponding instance” below).
   3    Certain other aspects and operations of the abstract machine are described in this document as unspecified
        (for example, order of evaluation of arguments in a function call (7.6.1.3)). Where possible, this document
        defines a set of allowable behaviors. These define the nondeterministic aspects of the abstract machine. An
        instance of the abstract machine can thus have more than one possible execution for a given program and a
        given input.
   4    Certain other operations are described in this document as undefined (for example, the effect of attempting
        to modify a const object).
        [Note 1 : This document imposes no requirements on the behavior of programs that contain undefined behavior.
        — end note]
   5    A conforming implementation executing a well-formed program shall produce the same observable behavior as
        one of the possible executions of the corresponding instance of the abstract machine with the same program
        and the same input. However, if any such execution contains an undefined operation, this document places
        no requirement on the implementation executing that program with that input (not even with regard to
        operations preceding the first undefined operation).
   6    The least requirements on a conforming implementation are:
(6.1)      — Accesses through volatile glvalues are evaluated strictly according to the rules of the abstract machine.
(6.2)      — At program termination, all data written into files shall be identical to one of the possible results that
             execution of the program according to the abstract semantics would have produced.
(6.3)      — The input and output dynamics of interactive devices shall take place in such a fashion that prompting
             output is actually delivered before a program waits for input. What constitutes an interactive device is
             implementation-defined.
        These collectively are referred to as the observable behavior of the program.
        [Note 2 : More stringent correspondences between abstract and actual semantics can be defined by each implementation.
        — end note]

        4.2     Structure of this document                                                                      [intro.structure]
   1    Clause 5 through Clause 15 describe the C++ programming language. That description includes detailed
        syntactic specifications in a form described in 4.3. For convenience, Annex A repeats all such syntactic
        specifications.
   2    Clause 17 through Clause 33 and Annex D (the library clauses) describe the C++ standard library. That
        description includes detailed descriptions of the entities and macros that constitute the library, in a form
        described in Clause 16.
   3    Annex B recommends lower bounds on the capacity of conforming implementations.
   4    Annex C summarizes the evolution of C++ since its first published description, and explains in detail the
        differences between C++ and C. Certain features of C++ exist solely for compatibility purposes; Annex D
        describes those features.

           6) This provision is sometimes called the “as-if” rule, because an implementation is free to disregard any requirement of this
        document as long as the result is as if the requirement had been obeyed, as far as can be determined from the observable
        behavior of the program. For instance, an actual implementation need not evaluate part of an expression if it can deduce that
        its value is not used and that no side effects affecting the observable behavior of the program are produced.
           7) This documentation also includes conditionally-supported constructs and locale-specific behavior. See 4.1.1.

        § 4.2                                                                                                                         11

        4.3     Syntax notation                                                                                 [syntax]
   1    In the syntax notation used in this document, syntactic categories are indicated by italic type, and literal
        words and characters in constant width type. Alternatives are listed on separate lines except in a few cases
        where a long set of alternatives is marked by the phrase “one of”. If the text of an alternative is too long to
        fit on a line, the text is continued on subsequent lines indented from the first one. An optional terminal or
        non-terminal symbol is indicated by the subscript “opt ”, so
                { expressionopt }
        indicates an optional expression enclosed in braces.
   2    Names for syntactic categories have generally been chosen according to the following rules:
(2.1)     — X-name is a use of an identifier in a context that determines its meaning (e.g., class-name, typedef-name).
(2.2)     — X-id is an identifier with no context-dependent meaning (e.g., qualified-id).
(2.3)     — X-seq is one or more X ’s without intervening delimiters (e.g., declaration-seq is a sequence of declarations).
(2.4)     — X-list is one or more X ’s separated by intervening commas (e.g., identifier-list is a sequence of identifiers
            separated by commas).

        § 4.3                                                                                                           12
