3.1. Debug Module Interface (DMI) | Page 12

Chapter 3. Debug Module (DM) (non-ISA
extension)
The Debug Module implements a translation interface between abstract debug operations and their
specific implementation. It might support the following operations:

 1. Give the debugger necessary information about the implementation. (Required)
 2. Allow any individual hart to be halted and resumed. (Required)
 3. Provide status on which harts are halted. (Required)
 4. Provide abstract read and write access to a halted hart’s GPRs. (Required)
 5. Provide access to a reset signal that allows debugging from the very first instruction after reset.
    (Required)
6. Provide a mechanism to allow debugging harts immediately out of reset (regardless of the reset
   cause). (Optional)
 7. Provide abstract access to non-GPR hart registers. (Optional)
 8. Provide a Program Buffer to force the hart to execute arbitrary instructions. (Optional)
9. Allow multiple harts to be halted, resumed, and/or reset at the same time. (Optional)
10. Allow memory access from a hart’s point of view. (Optional)
11. Allow direct System Bus Access. (Optional)
12. Group harts. When any hart in the group halts, they all halt. (Optional)
13. Respond to external triggers by halting each hart in a configured group. (Optional)
14. Signal an external trigger when a hart in a group halts. (Optional)

In order to be compatible with this specification an implementation must:

 1. Implement all the required features listed above.
 2. Implement at least one of Program Buffer, System Bus Access, or Abstract Access Memory
    command mechanisms.
 3. Do at least one of:
     a. Implement the Program Buffer.
     b. Implement abstract access to all registers that are visible to software running on the hart
        including all the registers that are present on the hart and listed in Table 4.
     c. Implement abstract access to at least all GPRs, dcsr, and dpc, and advertise the implementation
        as conforming to the "Minimal RISC-V Debug Specification", instead of the "RISC-V Debug
        Specification".

A single DM can debug up to         harts.

3.1. Debug Module Interface (DMI)
Debug Modules are subordinates on a bus called the Debug Module Interface (DMI). The bus manager
is the Debug Transport Module(s). The Debug Module Interface can be a trivial bus with one manager

                                                                                    3.2. Reset Control | Page 13

and one subordinate (see Table 21), or use a more full-featured bus like TileLink or the AMBA
Advanced Peripheral Bus. The details are left to the system designer.

The DMI uses between 7 and 32 address bits. Each address points at a single 32-bit register that can be
read or written. The bottom of the address space is used for the first (and usually only) DM. Extra
space can be used for custom debug devices, other cores, additional DMs, etc. If there are additional
DMs on this DMI, the base address of the next DM in the DMI address space is given in nextdm.

The Debug Module is controlled via register accesses to its DMI address space.

3.2. Reset Control
There are two methods that allow a debugger to reset harts. ndmreset resets all the harts in the
hardware platform, as well as all other parts of the hardware platform except for the Debug Modules,
Debug Transport Modules, and Debug Module Interface. Exactly what is affected by this reset is
implementation dependent, but it must be possible to debug programs from the first instruction
executed. hartreset resets all the currently selected harts. In this case an implementation may reset
more harts than just the ones that are selected. The debugger can discover which other harts are reset
(if any) by selecting them and checking anyhavereset and allhavereset.

To perform either of these resets, the debugger first asserts the bit, and then clears it. The actual reset
may start as soon as the bit is asserted, but may start an arbitrarily long time after the bit is deasserted.
The reset itself may also take an arbitrarily long time. While the reset is on-going, harts are either in
the running state, indicating it’s possible to perform some abstract commands during this time, or in
the unavailable state, indicating it’s not possible to perform any abstract commands during this time.
Once a hart’s reset is complete, havereset becomes set. When a hart comes out of reset and haltreq or
resethaltreq are set, the hart will immediately enter Debug Mode (halted state). Otherwise, if the hart
was initially running it will execute normally (running state) and if the hart was initially halted it
should now be running but may be halted.

              There is no general, reliable way for the debugger to know when reset has actually begun.

The Debug Module’s own state and registers should only be reset at power-up and while dmactive in
dmcontrol is 0. If there is another mechanism to reset the DM, this mechanism must also reset all the
harts accessible to the DM.

Due to clock and power domain crossing issues, it might not be possible to perform arbitrary DMI
accesses across hardware platform reset. While ndmreset or any external reset is asserted, the only
supported DM operations are reading/writing dmcontrol and reading ndmresetpending. The behavior
of other accesses is undefined.

When harts have been reset, they must set a sticky havereset state bit. The conceptual havereset
state bits can be read for selected harts in anyhavereset and allhavereset in dmstatus. These bits must
be set regardless of the cause of the reset. The havereset bits for the selected harts can be cleared by
writing 1 to ackhavereset in dmcontrol. The havereset bits might or might not be cleared when
dmactive is low.

3.3. Selecting Harts
Up to      harts can be connected to a single DM. Commands issued to the DM only apply to the
currently selected harts.

3.4. Hart DM States | Page 14

To enumerate all the harts, a debugger must first determine HARTSELLEN by writing all ones to hartsel
(assuming the maximum size) and reading back the value to see which bits were actually set. Then it
selects each hart starting from 0 until either anynonexistent in dmstatus is 1, or the highest index
(depending on HARTSELLEN) is reached.

The debugger can discover the mapping between hart indices and mhartid by using the interface to
read mhartid, or by reading the hardware platform’s configuration structure.

3.3.1. Selecting a Single Hart
All debug modules must support selecting a single hart. The debugger can select a hart by writing its
index to hartsel. Hart indexes start at 0 and are contiguous until the final index.

3.3.2. Selecting Multiple Harts
Debug Modules may implement a Hart Array Mask register to allow selecting multiple harts at once.
The th bit in the Hart Array Mask register applies to the hart with index . If the bit is 1 then the hart
is selected. Usually a DM will have a Hart Array Mask register exactly wide enough to select all the
harts it supports, but it’s allowed to tie any of these bits to 0.

The debugger can set bits in the hart array mask register using hawindowsel and hawindow, then
apply actions to all selected harts by setting hasel. If this feature is supported, multiple harts can be
halted, resumed, and reset simultaneously. The state of the hart array mask register is not affected by
setting or clearing hasel.

Execution of Abstract Commands ignores this mechanism and only applies to the hart selected by
hartsel.

3.4. Hart DM States
Every hart that can be selected is in exactly one of the following four DM states: non-existent,
unavailable, running, or halted. Which state the selected harts are in is reflected by allnonexistent,
anynonexistent, allunavail, anyunavail, allrunning, anyrunning, allhalted, and anyhalted.

Harts are nonexistent if they will never be part of this hardware platform, no matter how long a user
waits. E.g. in a simple single-hart hardware platform only one hart exists, and all others are
nonexistent. Debuggers may assume that a hardware platform has no harts with indexes higher than
the first nonexistent one.

Harts are unavailable if they might exist/become available at a later time, or if there are other harts
with higher indexes than this one. Harts may be unavailable for a variety of reasons including being
reset, temporarily powered down, and not being plugged into the hardware platform. That means harts
might become available or unavailable at any time, although these events should be rare in hardware
platforms built to be easily debugged. There are no guarantees about the state of the hart when it
becomes available.

Hardware platforms with very large number of harts may permanently disable some during
manufacturing, leaving holes in the otherwise continuous hart index space. In order to let the
debugger discover all harts, they must show up as unavailable even if there is no chance of them ever
becoming available.

Harts are running when they are executing normally, as if no debugger was attached. This includes

                                                                                   3.5. Run Control | Page 15

being in a low power mode or waiting for an interrupt, as long as a halt request will result in the hart
being halted.

Harts are halted when they are in Debug Mode, only performing tasks on behalf of the debugger.

Which states a hart that is reset goes through is implementation dependent. Harts may be unavailable
while reset is asserted, and some time after reset is deasserted. They might transition to running for
some time after reset is deasserted. Finally they end up either running or halted, depending on haltreq
and resethaltreq.

3.5. Run Control
For every hart, the Debug Module tracks 4 conceptual bits of state: halt request, resume ack, halt-on-
reset request, and hart reset. (The hart reset and halt-on-reset request bits are optional.) These 4 bits
reset to 0, except for resume ack, which may reset to either 0 or 1. The DM receives halted, running,
and havereset signals from each hart. The debugger can observe the state of resume ack in
allresumeack and anyresumeack, and the state of halted, running, and havereset signals in allhalted,
anyhalted, allrunning, anyrunning, allhavereset, and anyhavereset. The state of the other bits cannot
be observed directly.

When a debugger writes 1 to haltreq, each selected hart’s halt request bit is set. When a running hart,
or a hart just coming out of reset, sees its halt request bit high, it responds by halting, deasserting its
running signal, and asserting its halted signal. Halted harts ignore their halt request bit.

When a debugger writes 1 to resumereq, each selected hart’s resume ack bit is cleared and each
selected, halted hart is sent a resume request. Harts respond by resuming, clearing their halted signal,
and asserting their running signal. At the end of this process the resume ack bit is set. These status
signals of all selected harts are reflected in allresumeack, anyresumeack, allrunning, and anyrunning.
Resume requests are ignored by running harts.

When halt or resume is requested, a hart must respond in less than one second, unless it is
unavailable. (How this is implemented is not further specified. A few clock cycles will be a more
typical latency).

The DM can implement optional halt-on-reset bits for each hart, which it indicates by setting
hasresethaltreq to 1. This means the DM implements the setresethaltreq and clrresethaltreq bits.
Writing 1 to setresethaltreq sets the halt-on-reset request bit for each selected hart. When a hart’s halt-
on-reset request bit is set, the hart will immediately enter debug mode on the next deassertion of its
reset. This is true regardless of the reset’s cause. The hart’s halt-on-reset request bit remains set until
cleared by the debugger writing 1 to clrresethaltreq while the hart is selected, or by DM reset.

If the DM is reset while a hart is halted, it is UNSPECIFIED whether that hart resumes. Debuggers
should use resumereq to explicitly resume harts before clearing dmactive and disconnecting.

3.6. Halt Groups, Resume Groups, and External
Triggers
An optional feature allows a debugger to place harts into two kinds of groups: halt groups and resume
groups. It is also possible to add external triggers to a halt and resume groups. At any given time, each
hart and each trigger is a member of exactly one halt group and exactly one resume group.

3.6. Halt Groups, Resume Groups, and External Triggers | Page 16

In both halt and resume groups, group 0 is special. Harts in group 0 halt/resume as if groups aren’t
implemented at all.

When any hart in a halt group halts:

 1. That hart halts normally, with cause reflecting the original cause of the halt.
 2. All the other harts in the halt group that are running will quickly halt. cause for those harts should
    be set to 6, but may be set to 3. Other harts in the halt group that are halted but have started the
    process of resuming must also quickly become halted, even if they do resume briefly.
 3. Any external triggers in that group are notified.

Adding a hart to a halt group does not automatically halt that hart, even if other harts in the group are
already halted.

When an external trigger that’s a member of the halt group fires:

 1. All the harts in the halt group that are running will quickly halt. cause for those harts should be set
    to 6, but may be set to 3. Other harts in the halt group that are halted but have started the process
    of resuming must also quickly become halted, even if they do resume briefly.

When any hart in a resume group resumes:

 1. All the other harts in that group that are halted will quickly resume as soon as any currently
    executing abstract commands have completed. Each hart in the group sets its resume ack bit as
    soon as it has resumed. Harts that are in the process of halting should complete that process and
    stay halted.
 2. Any external triggers in that group are notified.

Adding a hart to a resume group does not automatically resume that hart, even if other harts in the
group are currently running.

When an external trigger that’s a member of the resume group fires:

 1. All the harts in that group that are halted will quickly resume as soon as any currently executing
    abstract commands have completed. Each hart in the group sets its resume ack bit as soon as it has
    resumed. Harts that are in the process of halting should complete that process and stay halted.

External triggers are abstract concepts that can signal the DM and/or receive signals from the DM.
This configuration is done through dmcs2, where external triggers are referred to by a number.
Commonly, external triggers are capable of sending a signal from the hardware platform into the DM,
as well as receiving a signal from the DM to take their own action on. It is also allowable for an
external trigger to be input-only or output-only. By convention external triggers 0-7 are bidirectional,
triggers 8-11 are input-only, and triggers 12-15 are output-only but this is not required.

                External triggers could be used to implement near simultaneous halting/resuming of all
               cores in a hardware platform, when not all cores are RISC-V cores.

When the DM is reset, all harts must be placed in the lowest-numbered halt and resume groups that
they can be in. (This will usually be group 0.)

Some designs may choose to hardcode hart groups to a group other than group 0, meaning it is never
possible to halt or resume just a single hart. This is explicitly allowed. In that case it must be possible
to discover the groups by using dmcs2 even if it’s not possible to change the configuration.

3.7. Abstract Commands
The DM supports a set of abstract commands, most of which are optional. Depending on the
implementation, the debugger may be able to perform some abstract commands even when the
selected hart is not halted. Debuggers can only determine which abstract commands are supported by
a given hart in a given state (running, halted, or held in reset) by attempting them and then looking at
cmderr in abstractcs to see if they were successful. Commands may be supported with some options
set, but not with other options set. If a command has unsupported options set or if bits that are defined
as 0 aren’t 0, then the DM must set cmderr to 2 (not supported).

               Example: Every DM must support the Access Register command, but might not support
              accessing CSRs. If the debugger requests to read a CSR in that case, the command will
               return "not supported".

Debuggers execute abstract commands by writing them to command. They can determine whether an
abstract command is complete by reading busy in abstractcs. If the debugger starts a new command
while busy is set, cmderr becomes 1 (busy), the currently executing command still gets to run to
completion, but any error generated by the currently executing command is lost. After completion,
cmderr indicates whether the command was successful or not. Commands may fail because a hart is
not halted, not running, unavailable, or because they encounter an error during execution.

If the command takes arguments, the debugger must write them to the data registers before writing to
command. If a command returns results, the Debug Module must ensure they are placed in the data
registers before busy is cleared. Which data registers are used for the arguments is described in Table
2. In all cases the least-significant word is placed in the lowest-numbered data register. The argument
width depends on the command being executed, and is DXLEN where not explicitly specified.

                                       Table 2. Use of Data Registers
                  Argument Width arg0/return value arg1                    arg2
                          32         data0                  data1          data2
                          64         data0, data1           data2, data3 data4, data5
                         128         data0-data3            data4-data7 data8-data11

               The Abstract Command interface is designed to allow a debugger to write commands as
               fast as possible, and then later check whether they completed without error. In the
               common case the debugger will be much slower than the target and commands succeed,
              which allows for maximum throughput. If there is a failure, the interface ensures that no
               commands execute after the failing one. To discover which command failed, the debugger
               has to look at the state of the DM (e.g. contents of data0) or hart (e.g. contents of a
               register modified by a Program Buffer program) to determine which one failed.

While an abstract command is executing (busy in abstractcs is high), a debugger must not change
hartsel, and must not write 1 to haltreq, resumereq, ackhavereset, setresethaltreq, or clrresethaltreq.
The hardware should not rely on this debugger behavior, but should enforce it by ignoring writes to
these bits while busy is high.

If an abstract command does not complete in the expected time and appears to be hung, the debugger
can try to reset the hart (using hartreset or ndmreset). If that doesn’t clear busy, then it can try
resetting the Debug Module (using dmactive).

If an abstract command is started while the selected hart is unavailable or if a hart becomes

unavailable while executing an abstract command, then the Debug Module may terminate the abstract
command, setting busy low, and cmderr to 4 (halt/resume). Alternatively, the command could just
appear to be hung (busy never goes low).

3.7.1. Abstract Command Listing
This section describes each of the different abstract commands and how their fields should be
interpreted when they are written to command.

Each abstract command is a 32-bit value. The top 8 bits contain cmdtype which determines the kind
of command. Table 3 lists all commands.

                                            Table 3. Meaning of cmdtype
                                   cmdtype Command
                                              0 Access Register Command
                                              1 Quick Access
                                              2 Access Memory Command

3.7.1.1. Access Register

This command gives the debugger access to CPU registers and allows it to execute the Program Buffer.
It performs the following sequence of operations:

 1. If write is clear and transfer is set, then copy data from the register specified by regno into the arg0
    region of data, and perform any side effects that occur when this register is read from M-mode.
 2. If write is set and transfer is set, then copy data from the arg0 region of data into the register
    specified by regno, and perform any side effects that occur when this register is written from M-
    mode.
 3. If aarpostincrement and transfer are set, increment regno. regno may also be incremented if
    aarpostincrement is set and transfer is clear.
 4. Execute the Program Buffer, if postexec is set.

If any of these operations fail, cmderr is set and none of the remaining steps are executed. An
implementation may detect an upcoming failure early, and fail the overall command before it reaches
the step that would cause failure. If the failure is that the requested register does not exist in the hart,
cmderr must be set to 3 (exception).

Debug Modules must implement this command and must support read and write access to all GPRs
when the selected hart is halted. Debug Modules may optionally support accessing other registers, or
accessing registers when the hart is running. It is recommended that if one register in a group is
accessible, then all registers in that group are accessible, but each individual register (aside from
GPRs) may be supported differently across read, write, and halt status.

Registers might not be accessible if they wouldn’t be accessible by M mode code currently running.
(E.g. fflags might not be accessible when mstatus.FS is 0.) If this is the case, the debugger is
responsible for changing state to make the registers accessible. The Core Debug Registers (Section 4.9)
should be accessible if abstract CSR access is implemented.

                                     Table 4. Abstract Register Numbers

                  Numbers                     Group Description
                  0x0000 — 0x0fff CSRs. The ``PC'' can be accessed here through dpc.
                  0x1000 — 0x101f GPRs
                  0x1020 — 0x103f Floating point registers
                  0xc000 — 0xffff             Reserved for non-standard extensions and internal use.

                 The encoding of aarsize was chosen to match sbaccess in sbcs.

This command modifies arg0 only when a register is read. The other data registers are not changed.
   31              24   23   22              20            19             18          17           16     15                 0

        cmdtype         0         aarsize           aarpostincrement   postexec     transfer      write          regno

           8            1            3                     1              1            1           1               16

Field                                    Description
 cmdtype                                 This is 0 to indicate Access Register Command.
 aarsize                                 2 (32bit): Access the lowest 32 bits of the register.

                                         3 (64bit): Access the lowest 64 bits of the register.

                                         4 (128bit): Access the lowest 128 bits of the register.

                                         If aarsize specifies a size larger than the register’s actual size, then the
                                         access must fail. If a register is accessible, then reads of aarsize less than
                                         or equal to the register’s actual size must be supported. Writing less than
                                         the full register may be supported, but what happens to the high bits in
                                         that case is UNSPECIFIED.

                                         This field controls the Argument Width as referenced in Table 2.
 aarpostincrement                        0 (disabled): No effect. This variant must be supported.

                                         1 (enabled): After a successful register access, regno is incremented.
                                         Incrementing past the highest supported value causes regno to become
                                         UNSPECIFIED. Supporting this variant is optional. It is undefined
                                         whether the increment happens when transfer is 0.
 postexec                                0 (disabled): No effect. This variant must be supported, and is the only
                                         supported one if progbufsize is 0.

                                         1 (enabled): Execute the program in the Program Buffer exactly once after
                                         performing the transfer, if any. Supporting this variant is optional.
 transfer                                0 (disabled): Don’t do the operation specified by write.

                                         1 (enabled): Do the operation specified by write.

                                         This bit can be used to just execute the Program Buffer without having to
                                         worry about placing valid values into aarsize or regno.

Field                             Description
 write                            When transfer is set:

                                  0 (arg0): Copy data from the specified register into arg0 portion of data.

                                  1 (register): Copy data from arg0 portion of data into the specified
                                  register.
 regno                            Number of the register to access, as described in Table 4. dpc may be
                                  used as an alias for PC if this command is supported on a non-halted
                                  hart.

3.7.1.2. Quick Access

Perform the following sequence of operations:

 1. If the hart is halted, the command sets cmderr to ``halt/resume'' and does not continue.
 2. Halt the hart. If the hart halts for some other reason (e.g. breakpoint), the command sets cmderr to
    ``halt/resume'' and does not continue.
3. Execute the Program Buffer. If an exception occurs, cmderr is set to ``exception,'' the Program
   Buffer execution ends, and the hart is halted with cause set to 3.
 4. If the Program Buffer executed without an exception, then resume the hart.

Implementing this command is optional.

This command does not touch the data registers.

     31                 24   23                           0

           cmdtype                          0

              8                            24

Field                             Description
 cmdtype                          This is 1 to indicate Quick Access command.

3.7.1.3. Access Memory

This command lets the debugger perform memory accesses, with the exact same memory view and
permissions as performing loads/stores on the selected hart. This includes access to hart-local
memory-mapped registers, etc. The command performs the following sequence of operations:

 1. Copy data from the memory location specified in arg1 into the arg0 portion of data, if write is
    clear.
 2. Copy data from the arg0 portion of data into the memory location specified in arg1, if write is set.
3. If aampostincrement is set, increment arg1.

If any of these operations fail, cmderr is set and none of the remaining steps are executed. An access
may only fail if the hart, running M-mode code, might encounter that same failure when it attempts
the same access. An implementation may detect an upcoming failure early, and fail the overall
command before it reaches the step that would cause failure.

Debug Modules may optionally implement this command and may support read and write access to
memory locations when the selected hart is running or halted. If this command supports memory
accesses while the hart is running, it must also support memory accesses while the hart is halted.

                      The encoding of aamsize was chosen to match sbaccess in sbcs.

This command modifies arg0 only when memory is read. It modifies arg1 only if aampostincrement
is set. The other data registers are not changed.
   31             24          23       22             20          19          18       17    16     15                     14   13        0

        cmdtype           aamvirtual        aamsize        aampostincrement        0        write        target-specific             0

            8                 1                3                  1                2         1                 2                     14

Field                                  Description
 cmdtype                               This is 2 to indicate Access Memory Command.
 aamvirtual                            An implementation does not have to implement both virtual and
                                       physical accesses, but it must fail accesses that it doesn’t support.

                                       0 (physical): Addresses are physical (to the hart they are performed on).

                                       1 (virtual): Addresses are virtual, and translated the way they would be
                                       from M-mode, with MPRV set.

                                       Debug Modules on systems without address translation (i.e. virtual
                                       addresses equal physical) may optionally allow aamvirtual set to 1, which
                                       would produce the same result as that same abstract command with
                                       aamvirtual cleared.
 aamsize                               0 (8bit): Access the lowest 8 bits of the memory location.

                                       1 (16bit): Access the lowest 16 bits of the memory location.

                                       2 (32bit): Access the lowest 32 bits of the memory location.

                                       3 (64bit): Access the lowest 64 bits of the memory location.

                                       4 (128bit): Access the lowest 128 bits of the memory location.
 aampostincrement                      After a memory access has completed, if this bit is 1, increment arg1
                                       (which contains the address used) by the number of bytes encoded in
                                       aamsize.

                                       Supporting this variant is optional, but highly recommended for
                                       performance reasons.
 write                                 0 (arg0): Copy data from the memory location specified in arg1 into the
                                       low bits of arg0. The value of the remaining bits of arg0 are
                                       UNSPECIFIED.

                                       1 (memory): Copy data from the low bits of arg0 into the memory
                                       location specified in arg1.
 target-specific                       These bits are reserved for target-specific uses.

3.8. Program Buffer | Page 22

3.8. Program Buffer
To support executing arbitrary instructions on a halted hart, a Debug Module can include a Program
Buffer that a debugger can write small programs to. DMs that support all necessary functionality using
abstract commands only may choose to omit the Program Buffer.

A debugger can write a small program to the Program Buffer, and then execute it exactly once with the
Access Register Abstract Command, setting the postexec bit in command. The debugger can write
whatever program it likes (including jumps out of the Program Buffer), but the program must end with
ebreak or c.ebreak. An implementation may support an implicit ebreak that is executed when a hart
runs off the end of the Program Buffer. This is indicated by impebreak. With this feature, a Program
Buffer of just 2 32-bit words can offer efficient debugging.

While these programs are executed, the hart does not leave Debug Mode (see Section 4.1). If an
exception is encountered during execution of the Program Buffer, no more instructions are executed,
the hart remains in Debug Mode, and cmderr is set to 3 (exception error). If the debugger executes a
program that doesn’t terminate with an ebreak instruction, the hart will remain in Debug Mode and
the debugger will lose control of the hart.

If progbufsize is 1 then the following apply:

 1. impebreak must be 1.
 2. If the debugger writes a compressed instruction into the Program Buffer, it must be placed into the
    lower 16 bits and accompanied by a compressed nop in the upper 16 bits.

                This requirement on the debugger for the case of progbufsize equal to 1 is to accommodate
               hardware designs that prefer to stuff instructions directly into the pipeline when halted,
                instead of having the Program Buffer exist in the address space somewhere.

The Program Buffer may be implemented as RAM which is accessible to the hart. A debugger can
determine if this is the case by executing small programs that attempt to write and read back relative
to pc while executing from the Program Buffer. If so, the debugger has more flexibility in what it can
do with the program buffer.

3.9. Overview of Hart Debug States
Figure 2 shows a conceptual view of the states passed through by a hart during run/halt debugging as
influenced by the different fields of dmcontrol, abstractcs, abstractauto, and command.

                                                                                3.10. System Bus Access | Page 23

Figure 2. Run/Halt Debug State Machine for single-hart hardware platforms. As only a small amount of state is
visible to the debugger, the states and transitions are conceptual.

3.10. System Bus Access
A debugger can access memory from a hart’s point of view using a Program Buffer or the Abstract
Access Memory command. (Both these features are optional.) A Debug Module may also include a
System Bus Access block to provide memory access without involving a hart, regardless of whether
Program Buffer is implemented. The System Bus Access block uses physical addresses.

The System Bus Access block may support 8-, 16-, 32-, 64-, and 128-bit accesses. Table 5 shows which
bits in sbdata are used for each access size.

3.11. Minimally Intrusive Debugging | Page 24

                                           Table 5. System Bus Data Bits
                               Access Size Data Bits
                                            8 sbdata0 bits 7:0
                                          16 sbdata0 bits 15:0
                                          32 sbdata0
                                          64 sbdata1, sbdata0
                                         128 sbdata3, sbdata2, sbdata1, sbdata0

Depending on the microarchitecture, data accessed through System Bus Access might not always be
coherent with that observed by each hart. It is up to the debugger to enforce coherency if the
implementation does not. This specification does not define a standard way to do this. Possibilities
may include writing to special memory-mapped locations, or executing special instructions via the
Program Buffer.

                Implementing a System Bus Access block has several benefits even when a Debug Module
                also implements a Program Buffer. First, it is possible to access memory in a running
               system with minimal impact. Second, it may improve performance when accessing
                memory. Third, it may provide access to devices that a hart does not have access to.

3.11. Minimally Intrusive Debugging
Depending on the task it is performing, some harts can only be halted very briefly. There are several
mechanisms that allow accessing resources in such a running system with a minimal impact on the
running hart.

First, an implementation may allow some abstract commands to execute without halting the hart.

Second, the Quick Access abstract command can be used to halt a hart, quickly execute the contents of
the Program Buffer, and let the hart run again. Combined with instructions that allow Program Buffer
code to access the data registers, as described in hartinfo, this can be used to quickly perform a
memory or register access. For some hardware platforms this will be too intrusive, but many hardware
platforms that can’t be halted can bear an occasional hiccup of a hundred or less cycles.

Third, if the System Bus Access block is implemented, it can be used while a hart is running to access
system memory.

3.12. Security
To protect intellectual property it may be desirable to lock access to the Debug Module. To allow access
during a manufacturing process and not afterwards, a reasonable solution could be to add a fuse bit to
the Debug Module that can be used to permanently disable it. Since this is technology specific, it is not
further addressed in this spec.

Another option is to allow the DM to be unlocked only by users who have an access key. Between
authenticated, authbusy, and authdata arbitrarily complex authentication mechanism can be
supported. When authenticated is clear, the DM must not interact with the rest of the hardware
platform, nor expose details about the harts connected to the DM. All DM registers should read 0,
while writes should be ignored, with the following mandatory exceptions:

                                                                             3.13. Version Detection | Page 25

 1. authenticated in dmstatus is readable.
 2. authbusy in dmstatus is readable.
 3. version in dmstatus is readable.
 4. dmactive in dmcontrol is readable and writable.
 5. authdata is readable and writable.

Implementations where it’s not possible to unlock the DM by using authdata should not implement
that register.

3.13. Version Detection
To detect the version of the Debug Module with a minimum of side effects, use the following
procedure:

 1. Read dmcontrol.
 2. If dmactive is 0 or ndmreset is 1:
     a. Write dmcontrol, preserving hartreset, hasel, hartsello, and hartselhi from the value that was
        read, setting dmactive, and clearing all the other bits.
    b. Read dmcontrol until dmactive is high.
 3. Read dmstatus, which contains version.

If it was necessary to clear ndmreset, this might have the following side effects:

 1. haltreq is cleared, potentially preventing a halt request made by a previous debugger from taking
    effect.
 2. resumereq is cleared, potentially preventing a resume request made by a previous debugger from
    taking effect.
 3. ndmreset is deasserted, releasing the hardware platform from reset if a previous debugger had set
    it.
 4. dmactive is asserted, releasing the DM from reset. This in itself is not observable by any harts.

This procedure is guaranteed to work in future versions of this spec. The meaning of the dmcontrol
bits where hartreset, hasel, hartsello, and hartselhi currently reside might change, but preserving them
will have no side effects. Clearing the bits of dmcontrol not explicitly mentioned here will have no side
effects beyond the ones mentioned above.

3.14. Debug Module Registers
The registers described in this section are accessed over the DMI bus. Each DM has a base address
(which is 0 for the first DM). The register addresses below are offsets from this base address.

Debug Module DMI Registers that are unimplemented or not mentioned in the table below return 0
when read. Writing them has no effect.

                                Table 6. Debug Module Debug Bus Registers

Address      Name                                              Section
0x04         Abstract Data 0 (data0)                           Section 3.14.14
0x05         Abstract Data 1 (data1)
0x06         Abstract Data 2 (data2)
0x07         Abstract Data 3 (data3)
0x08         Abstract Data 4 (data4)
0x09         Abstract Data 5 (data5)
0x0a         Abstract Data 6 (data6)
0x0b         Abstract Data 7 (data7)
0x0c         Abstract Data 8 (data8)
0x0d         Abstract Data 9 (data9)
0x0e         Abstract Data 10 (data10)
0x0f         Abstract Data 11 (data11)
0x10         Debug Module Control (dmcontrol)                  Section 3.14.2
0x11         Debug Module Status (dmstatus)                    Section 3.14.1
0x12         Hart Info (hartinfo)                              Section 3.14.3
0x13         Halt Summary 1 (haltsum1)                         Section 3.14.19
0x14         Hart Array Window Select (hawindowsel)            Section 3.14.4
0x15         Hart Array Window (hawindow)                      Section 3.14.5
0x16         Abstract Control and Status (abstractcs)          Section 3.14.6
0x17         Abstract Command (command)                        Section 3.14.7
0x18         Abstract Command Autoexec (abstractauto)          Section 3.14.8
0x19         Configuration Structure Pointer 0 (confstrptr0)   Section 3.14.9
0x1a         Configuration Structure Pointer 1 (confstrptr1)   Section 3.14.10
0x1b         Configuration Structure Pointer 2 (confstrptr2)   Section 3.14.11
0x1c         Configuration Structure Pointer 3 (confstrptr3)   Section 3.14.12
0x1d         Next Debug Module (nextdm)                        Section 3.14.13
0x1f         Custom Features (custom)                          Section 3.14.31
0x20         Program Buffer 0 (progbuf0)                       Section 3.14.15
0x21         Program Buffer 1 (progbuf1)
0x22         Program Buffer 2 (progbuf2)
0x23         Program Buffer 3 (progbuf3)
0x24         Program Buffer 4 (progbuf4)
0x25         Program Buffer 5 (progbuf5)
0x26         Program Buffer 6 (progbuf6)
0x27         Program Buffer 7 (progbuf7)

Address   Name                                                           Section
0x28      Program Buffer 8 (progbuf8)
0x29      Program Buffer 9 (progbuf9)
0x2a      Program Buffer 10 (progbuf10)
0x2b      Program Buffer 11 (progbuf11)
0x2c      Program Buffer 12 (progbuf12)
0x2d      Program Buffer 13 (progbuf13)
0x2e      Program Buffer 14 (progbuf14)
0x2f      Program Buffer 15 (progbuf15)
0x30      Authentication Data (authdata)                                 Section 3.14.16
0x32      Debug Module Control and Status 2 (dmcs2)                      Section 3.14.17
0x34      Halt Summary 2 (haltsum2)                                      Section 3.14.20
0x35      Halt Summary 3 (haltsum3)                                      Section 3.14.21
0x37      System Bus Address 127:96 (sbaddress3)                         Section 3.14.26
0x38      System Bus Access Control and Status (sbcs)                    Section 3.14.22
0x39      System Bus Address 31:0 (sbaddress0)                           Section 3.14.23
0x3a      System Bus Address 63:32 (sbaddress1)                          Section 3.14.24
0x3b      System Bus Address 95:64 (sbaddress2)                          Section 3.14.25
0x3c      System Bus Data 31:0 (sbdata0)                                 Section 3.14.27
0x3d      System Bus Data 63:32 (sbdata1)                                Section 3.14.28
0x3e      System Bus Data 95:64 (sbdata2)                                Section 3.14.29
0x3f      System Bus Data 127:96 (sbdata3)                               Section 3.14.30
0x40      Halt Summary 0 (haltsum0)                                      Section 3.14.18
0x70      Custom Features 0 (custom0)                                    Section 3.14.32
0x71      Custom Features 1 (custom1)
0x72      Custom Features 2 (custom2)
0x73      Custom Features 3 (custom3)
0x74      Custom Features 4 (custom4)
0x75      Custom Features 5 (custom5)
0x76      Custom Features 6 (custom6)
0x77      Custom Features 7 (custom7)
0x78      Custom Features 8 (custom8)
0x79      Custom Features 9 (custom9)
0x7a      Custom Features 10 (custom10)
0x7b      Custom Features 11 (custom11)
0x7c      Custom Features 12 (custom12)

Address                Name                                                                                                           Section
0x7d                   Custom Features 13 (custom13)
0x7e                   Custom Features 14 (custom14)
0x7f                   Custom Features 15 (custom15)

3.14.1. Debug Module Status (dmstatus, at 0x11)
This register reports status for the overall Debug Module as well as the currently selected harts, as
defined in hasel. Its address will not change in the future, because it contains version.

This entire register is read-only.
    31                     25               24                           23                       22    21              20       19                           18

                   0              ndmresetpending                  stickyunavail         impebreak             0             allhavereset                anyhavereset

                   7                        1                                1                    1            2                  1                           1

              17                       16                        15                      14                        13                 12                       11

         allresumeack           anyresumeack                allnonexistent         anynonexistent            allunavail           anyunavail                allrunning

              1                        1                          1                      1                         1                  1                           1

              10                   9                8                   7                     6                5                      4              3                    0

          anyrunning            allhalted       anyhalted         authenticated        authbusy        hasresethaltreq         confstrptrvalid              version

              1                    1                1                   1                     1                1                      1                           4

Field                                  Description                                                                                          Access                Reset
 ndmresetpending                       0 (false): Unimplemented, or ndmreset is zero and no                                                      R                    -
                                       ndmreset is currently in progress.

                                       1 (true): ndmreset is currently nonzero, or there is an
                                       ndmreset in progress.
 stickyunavail                         0 (current): The per-hart unavail bits reflect the current                                                R             Preset
                                       state of the hart.

                                       1 (sticky): The per-hart unavail bits are sticky. Once they
                                       are set, they will not clear until the debugger acknowledges
                                       them using ackunavail.
 impebreak                             If 1, then there is an implicit ebreak instruction at the                                                 R             Preset
                                       non-existent word immediately after the Program Buffer.
                                       This saves the debugger from having to write the ebreak
                                       itself, and allows the Program Buffer to be one word
                                       smaller.

                                       This must be 1 when progbufsize is 1.
 allhavereset                          This field is 1 when all currently selected harts have been                                               R                    -
                                       reset and reset has not been acknowledged for any of
                                       them.
 anyhavereset                          This field is 1 when at least one currently selected hart has                                             R                    -
                                       been reset and reset has not been acknowledged for that
                                       hart.

Field             Description                                                       Access      Reset
allresumeack      This field is 1 when all currently selected harts have their         R           -
                  resume ack bit set.
anyresumeack      This field is 1 when any currently selected hart has its             R           -
                  resume ack bit set.
allnonexistent    This field is 1 when all currently selected harts do not exist       R           -
                  in this hardware platform.
anynonexistent    This field is 1 when any currently selected hart does not            R           -
                  exist in this hardware platform.
allunavail        This field is 1 when all currently selected harts are                R           -
                  unavailable, or (if stickyunavail is 1) were unavailable
                  without that being acknowledged.
anyunavail        This field is 1 when any currently selected hart is                  R           -
                  unavailable, or (if stickyunavail is 1) was unavailable
                  without that being acknowledged.
allrunning        This field is 1 when all currently selected harts are                R           -
                  running.
anyrunning        This field is 1 when any currently selected hart is running.         R           -
allhalted         This field is 1 when all currently selected harts are halted.        R           -
anyhalted         This field is 1 when any currently selected hart is halted.          R           -
authenticated     0 (false): Authentication is required before using the DM.           R        Preset

                  1 (true): The authentication check has passed.

                  On components that don’t implement authentication, this
                  bit must be preset as 1.
authbusy          0 (ready): The authentication module is ready to process             R          0
                  the next read/write to authdata.

                  1 (busy): The authentication module is busy. Accessing
                  authdata results in unspecified behavior.

                  authbusy only becomes set in immediate response to an
                  access to authdata.
hasresethaltreq   1 if this Debug Module supports halt-on-reset functionality          R        Preset
                  controllable by the setresethaltreq and clrresethaltreq bits.
                  0 otherwise.
confstrptrvalid   0 (invalid): confstrptr0--confstrptr3 hold information               R        Preset
                  which is not relevant to the configuration structure.

                  1 (valid): confstrptr0--confstrptr3 hold the address of the
                  configuration structure.

Field                                Description                                                                  Access         Reset
 version                             0 (none): There is no Debug Module present.                                    R              3

                                     1 (0.11): There is a Debug Module and it conforms to
                                     version 0.11 of this specification.

                                     2 (0.13): There is a Debug Module and it conforms to
                                     version 0.13 of this specification.

                                     3 (1.0): There is a Debug Module and it conforms to
                                     version 1.0 of this specification.

                                     15 (custom): There is a Debug Module but it does not
                                     conform to any available version of this spec.

3.14.2. Debug Module Control (dmcontrol, at 0x10)
This register controls the overall Debug Module as well as the currently selected harts, as defined in
hasel.

 Throughout this document we refer to hartsel, which is hartselhi combined with hartsello. While the
spec allows for 20 hartsel bits, an implementation may choose to implement fewer than that. The
actual width of hartsel is called HARTSELLEN. It must be at least 0 and at most 20. A debugger should
discover HARTSELLEN by writing all ones to hartsel (assuming the maximum size) and reading back the
value to see which bits were actually set. Debuggers must not change hartsel while an abstract
command is executing. Hardware should enforce this by ignoring changes to hartsel while busy is set.

                        There are separate setresethaltreq and clrresethaltreq bits so that it is possible to write
                       dmcontrol without changing the halt-on-reset request bit for each selected hart, when not
                        all selected harts have the same configuration.

On any given write, a debugger may only write 1 to at most one of the following bits: resumereq,
hartreset, ackhavereset, setresethaltreq, and clrresethaltreq. The others must be written 0.

 resethaltreq is an optional internal bit of per-hart state that cannot be read, but can be written with
setresethaltreq and clrresethaltreq.

 keepalive is an optional internal bit of per-hart state. When it is set, it suggests that the hardware
should attempt to keep the hart available for the debugger, e.g. by keeping it from entering a low-power
state once powered on. Even if the bit is implemented, hardware might not be able to keep a hart
available. The bit is written through setkeepalive and clrkeepalive.

For forward compatibility, version will always be readable when bit 1 (ndmreset) is 0 and bit 0
(dmactive) is 1.
           31               30            29                 28                  27              26         25                          16

         haltreq        resumereq      hartreset        ackhavereset         ackunavail         hasel               hartsello

           1                1             1                  1                   1                1                         10

    15                           6             5                   4                  3                 2               1           0

                hartselhi                setkeepalive         clrkeepalive    setresethaltreq   clrresethaltreq    ndmreset      dmactive

                   10                          1                   1                  1                 1               1           1

Field          Description                                                      Access      Reset
haltreq        Writing 0 clears the halt request bit for all currently WARZ                    -
               selected harts. This may cancel outstanding halt requests
               for those harts.

               Writing 1 sets the halt request bit for all currently selected
               harts. Running harts will halt whenever their halt request
               bit is set.

               Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.

               Writes to this bit should be ignored while an abstract
               command is executing.
resumereq      Writing 1 causes the currently selected harts to resume            W1           -
               once, if they are halted when the write occurs. It also clears
               the resume ack bit for those harts.

               resumereq is ignored if haltreq is set.

               Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.

               Writes to this bit should be ignored while an abstract
               command is executing.
hartreset      This optional field writes the reset bit for all the currently WARL            0
               selected harts. To perform a reset the debugger writes 1,
               and then writes 0 to deassert the reset signal.

               While this bit is 1, the debugger must not change which
               harts are selected.

               If this feature is not implemented, the bit always stays 0,
               so after writing 1 the debugger can read the register back to
               see if the feature is supported.

               Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.
ackhavereset   0 (nop): No effect.                                                W1           -

               1 (ack): Clears havereset for any selected harts.

               Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.

               Writes to this bit should be ignored while an abstract
               command is executing.
ackunavail     0 (nop): No effect.                                                W1           -

               1 (ack): Clears unavail for any selected harts that are
               currently available.

               Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.

Field                     Description                                                      Access   Reset
 hasel                    Selects the definition of currently selected harts.              WARL      0

                          0 (single): There is a single currently selected hart, that is
                          selected by hartsel.

                          1 (multiple): There may be multiple currently selected
                          harts — the hart selected by hartsel, plus those selected by
                          the hart array mask register.

                          An implementation which does not implement the hart
                          array mask register must tie this field to 0. A debugger
                          which wishes to use the hart array mask register feature
                          should set this bit and read back to see if the functionality
                          is supported.
 hartsello                The low 10 bits of hartsel: the DM-specific index of the WARL              0
                          hart to select. This hart is always part of the currently
                          selected harts.
 hartselhi                The high 10 bits of hartsel: the DM-specific index of the WARL             0
                          hart to select. This hart is always part of the currently
                          selected harts.
 setkeepalive             This optional field sets keepalive for all currently selected     W1        -
                          harts, unless clrkeepalive is simultaneously set to 1.

                          Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.
 clrkeepalive             This optional field clears keepalive for all currently            W1        -
                          selected harts.

                          Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.
 setresethaltreq          This optional field writes the halt-on-reset request bit for      W1        -
                          all currently selected harts, unless clrresethaltreq is
                          simultaneously set to 1. When set to 1, each selected hart
                          will halt upon the next deassertion of its reset. The halt-
                          on-reset request bit is not automatically cleared. The
                          debugger must write to clrresethaltreq to clear it.

                          Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.

                          If hasresethaltreq is 0, this field is not implemented.

                          Writes to this bit should be ignored while an abstract
                          command is executing.
 clrresethaltreq          This optional field clears the halt-on-reset request bit for      W1        -
                          all currently selected harts.

                          Writes apply to the new value of hartsel and hasel.

                          Writes to this bit should be ignored while an abstract
                          command is executing.

Field                    Description                                                        Access      Reset
 ndmreset                This bit controls the reset signal from the DM to the rest of       R/W          0
                         the hardware platform. The signal should reset every part
                         of the hardware platform, including every hart, except for
                         the DM and any logic required to access the DM. To
                         perform a hardware platform reset the debugger writes 1,
                         and then writes 0 to deassert the reset.
 dmactive                This bit serves as a reset signal for the Debug Module              R/W          0
                         itself. After changing the value of this bit, the debugger
                         must poll dmcontrol until dmactive has taken the
                         requested value before performing any action that
                         assumes the requested dmactive state change has
                         completed. Hardware may take an arbitrarily long time to
                         complete activation or deactivation and will indicate
                         completion by setting dmactive to the requested value.
                         During this time, the DM may ignore any register writes.

                         0 (inactive): The module’s state, including authentication
                         mechanism, takes its reset values (the dmactive bit is the
                         only bit which can be written to something other than its
                         reset value). Any accesses to the module may fail.
                         Specifically, version might not return correct data.

                         When this value is written, the DM may ignore any other
                         bits written to {dmcontrol} in the same write.

                         1 (active): The module functions normally.

                         No other mechanism should exist that may result in
                         resetting the Debug Module after power up.

                         To place the Debug Module into a known state, a debugger
                         should write 0 to dmactive, poll until dmactive is observed
                         0, write 1 to dmactive, and poll until dmactive is observed
                         1.

                         Implementations may pay attention to this bit to further
                         aid debugging, for example by preventing the Debug
                         Module from being power gated while debugging is active.

3.14.3. Hart Info (hartinfo, at 0x12)
This register gives information about the hart currently selected by hartsel.

This register is optional. If it is not present it should read all-zero.

If this register is included, the debugger can do more with the Program Buffer by writing programs
which explicitly access the data and/or dscratch registers.

This entire register is read-only.

    31            24       23                   20    19        17           16       15              12   11                            0

           0                    nscratch                   0             dataaccess        datasize                   dataaddr

           8                       4                       3                 1                4                          12

Field                           Description                                                                     Access           Reset
 nscratch                       Number of dscratch registers available for the debugger to                        R           Preset
                                use during program buffer execution, starting from
                                dscratch0. The debugger can make no assumptions about
                                the contents of these registers between commands.
 dataaccess                     0 (csr): The data registers are shadowed in the hart by                           R           Preset
                                CSRs. Each CSR is DXLEN bits in size, and corresponds to
                                a single argument, per Table 2.

                                1 (memory): The data registers are shadowed in the hart’s
                                memory map. Each register takes up 4 bytes in the
                                memory map.
 datasize                       If dataaccess is 0: Number of CSRs dedicated to shadowing                         R           Preset
                                the data registers.

                                If dataaccess is 1: Number of 32-bit words in the memory
                                map dedicated to shadowing the data registers.

                                Since there are at most 12 data registers, the value in this
                                register must be 12 or smaller.
 dataaddr                       If dataaccess is 0: The number of the first CSR dedicated                         R           Preset
                                to shadowing the data registers.

                                If dataaccess is 1: Address of RAM where the data registers
                                are shadowed. This address is sign extended giving a range
                                of -2048 to 2047, easily addressed with a load or store
                                using x0 as the address register.

3.14.4. Hart Array Window Select (hawindowsel, at 0x14)
This register selects which of the 32-bit portion of the hart array mask register (see Section 3.3.2) is
accessible in hawindow.

     31                                    15        14                           0

                       0                                   hawindowsel

                   17                                          15

Field                           Description                                                                     Access           Reset
 hawindowsel                    The high bits of this field may be tied to 0, depending on WARL                                   0
                                how large the array mask register is. E.g. on a hardware
                                platform with 48 harts only bit 0 of this field may actually
                                be writable.

3.14.5. Hart Array Window (hawindow, at 0x15)
This register provides R/W access to a 32-bit portion of the hart array mask register (see Section 3.3.2).
The position of the window is determined by hawindowsel. I.e. bit 0 refers to hart hawindowsel           ,
while bit 31 refers to hart hawindowsel        .

Since some bits in the hart array mask register may be constant 0, some bits in this register may be
constant 0, depending on the current value of hawindowsel.

        31                                              0

                           maskdata

                                    32

3.14.6. Abstract Control and Status (abstractcs, at 0x16)
Writing this register while an abstract command is executing causes cmderr to become 1 (busy) once
the command completes (busy becomes 0).

                      datacount must be at least 1 to support RV32 harts, 2 to support RV64 harts, or 4 to
                     support RV128 harts.
   31            29   28                 24   23            13    12        11         10            8   7          4   3               0

             0             progbufsize             0             busy   relaxedpriv         cmderr           0              datacount

             3                  5                  11             1         1                 3              4                  4

Field                                Description                                                                 Access       Reset
 progbufsize                         Size of the Program Buffer, in 32-bit words. Valid sizes are                  R         Preset
                                     0 - 16.
 busy                                0 (ready): There is no abstract command currently being                       R                0
                                     executed.

                                     1 (busy): An abstract command is currently being executed.

                                     This bit is set as soon as command is written, and is not
                                     cleared until that command has completed.
 relaxedpriv                         This optional bit controls whether program buffer and WARL                              Preset
                                     abstract memory accesses are performed with the exact
                                     and full set of permission checks that apply based on the
                                     current architectural state of the hart performing the
                                     access, or with a relaxed set of permission checks (e.g. PMP
                                     restrictions are ignored). The details of the latter are
                                     implementation-specific.

                                     0 (full checks): Full permission checks apply.

                                     1 (relaxed checks): Relaxed permission checks apply.

Field                     Description                                                     Access   Reset
 cmderr                   Gets set if an abstract command fails. The bits in this field R/W1C        0
                          remain set until they are cleared by writing 1 to them. No
                          abstract command is started until the value is reset to 0.

                          This field only contains a valid value if busy is 0.

                          0 (none): No error.

                          1 (busy): An abstract command was executing while
                          command, abstractcs, or abstractauto was written, or when
                          one of the data or progbuf registers was read or written.
                          This status is only written if cmderr contains 0.

                          2 (not supported): The command in command is not
                          supported. It may be supported with different options set,
                          but it will not be supported at a later time when the hart or
                          system state are different.

                          3 (exception): An exception occurred while executing the
                          command (e.g. while executing the Program Buffer).

                          4 (halt/resume): The abstract command couldn’t execute
                          because the hart wasn’t in the required state
                          (running/halted), or unavailable.

                          5 (bus): The abstract command failed due to a bus error
                          (e.g. alignment, access size, or timeout).

                          6 (reserved): Reserved for future use.

                          7 (other): The command failed for another reason.
 datacount                Number of data registers that are implemented as part of          R      Preset
                          the abstract command interface. Valid sizes are 1 — 12.

3.14.7. Abstract Command (command, at 0x17)
Writes to this register cause the corresponding abstract command to be executed.

Writing this register while an abstract command is executing causes cmderr to become 1 (busy) once
the command completes (busy becomes 0).

If cmderr is non-zero, writes to this register are ignored.

                cmderr inhibits starting a new command to accommodate debuggers that, for
                performance reasons, send several commands to be executed in a row without checking
               cmderr in between. They can safely do so and check cmderr at the end without worrying
                that one command failed but then a later command (which might have depended on the
                previous one succeeding) passed.

     31                24   23                           0

           cmdtype                         control

              8                              24

Field                   Description                                                           Access      Reset
 cmdtype                The type determines the overall functionality of this WARZ                          0
                        abstract command.
 control                This field is interpreted in a command-specific manner, WARZ                        0
                        described for each abstract command.

3.14.8. Abstract Command Autoexec (abstractauto, at 0x18)
This register is optional. Including it allows more efficient burst accesses. A debugger can detect
whether it is supported by setting bits and reading them back.

If this register is implemented then bits corresponding to implemented progbuf and data registers
must be writable. Other bits must be hard-wired to 0.

If this register is written while an abstract command is executing then the write is ignored and cmderr
becomes 1 (busy) once the command completes (busy becomes 0).

     31                          16   15                 12   11                        0

           autoexecprogbuf                           0             autoexecdata

                  16                                 4                  12

Field                   Description                                                           Access      Reset
 autoexecprogbuf        When a bit in this field is 1, read or write accesses to the WARL                   0
                        corresponding progbuf word cause the DM to act as if the
                        current value in command was written there again after
                        the access to progbuf completes.
 autoexecdata           When a bit in this field is 1, read or write accesses to the WARL                   0
                        corresponding data word cause the DM to act as if the
                        current value in command was written there again after
                        the access to data completes.

3.14.9. Configuration Structure Pointer 0 (confstrptr0, at 0x19)
When confstrptrvalid is set, reading this register returns bits 31:0 of the configuration structure
pointer. Reading the other confstrptr registers returns the upper bits of the address.

When system bus access is implemented, this must be an address that can be used with the System
Bus Access module. Otherwise, this must be an address that can be used to access the configuration
structure from the hart with ID 0.

If confstrptrvalid is 0, then the confstrptr registers hold identifier information which is not further
specified in this document.

The configuration structure itself is a data structure of the same format as the data structure pointed
to by mconfigptr as described in the Privileged Spec.

This entire register is read-only.

     31                                     0

                      addr

                        32

3.14.10. Configuration Structure Pointer 1 (confstrptr1, at 0x1a)
When confstrptrvalid is set, reading this register returns bits 63:32 of the configuration structure
pointer. See confstrptr0 for more details.

This entire register is read-only.

     31                                     0

                      addr

                        32

3.14.11. Configuration Structure Pointer 2 (confstrptr2, at 0x1b)
When confstrptrvalid is set, reading this register returns bits 95:64 of the configuration structure
pointer. See confstrptr0 for more details.

This entire register is read-only.

     31                                     0

                      addr

                        32

3.14.12. Configuration Structure Pointer 3 (confstrptr3, at 0x1c)
When confstrptrvalid is set, reading this register returns bits 127:96 of the configuration structure
pointer. See confstrptr0 for more details.

This entire register is read-only.

     31                                     0

                      addr

                        32

3.14.13. Next Debug Module (nextdm, at 0x1d)
If there is more than one DM accessible on this DMI, this register contains the base address of the next
one in the chain, or 0 if this is the last one in the chain.

This entire register is read-only.

     31                                     0

                      addr

                        32

3.14.14. Abstract Data 0 (data0, at 0x04)
data0 through data11 are registers that may be read or changed by abstract commands. datacount
indicates how many of them are implemented, starting at data0, counting up. Table 2 shows how
abstract commands use these registers.

Accessing these registers while an abstract command is executing causes cmderr to be set to 1 (busy) if
it is 0.

Attempts to write them while busy is set does not change their value.

The values in these registers might not be preserved after an abstract command is executed. The only
guarantees on their contents are the ones offered by the command in question. If the command fails,
no assumptions can be made about the contents of these registers.

     31                                0

                     data

                      32

3.14.15. Program Buffer 0 (progbuf0, at 0x20)
progbuf0 through progbuf15 must provide write access to the optional program buffer. It may also be
possible for the debugger to read from the program buffer through these registers. If reading is not
supported, then all reads return 0.

progbufsize indicates how many progbuf registers are implemented starting at progbuf0, counting up.

Accessing these registers while an abstract command is executing causes cmderr to be set to 1 (busy) if
it is 0.

Attempts to write them while busy is set does not change their value.

     31                                0

                     data

                      32

3.14.16. Authentication Data (authdata, at 0x30)
This register serves as a 32-bit serial port to/from the authentication module.

When authbusy is clear, the debugger can communicate with the authentication module by reading or
writing this register. There is no separate mechanism to signal overflow/underflow.

     31                                0

                     data

                      32

3.14.17. Debug Module Control and Status 2 (dmcs2, at 0x32)
This register contains DM control and status bits that didn’t easily fit in dmcontrol and dmstatus. All
are optional.

If halt groups are not implemented, then group will always be 0 when grouptype is 0.

If resume groups are not implemented, then grouptype will remain 0 even after 1 is written there.

The DM external triggers available to add to halt groups may be the same as or distinct from the DM
external triggers available to add to resume groups.

     31                       12         11    10                  7   6           2         1          0

                  0                grouptype        dmexttrigger           group          hgwrite    hgselect

                  20                     1               4                   5               1          1

Field                     Description                                                       Access    Reset
 grouptype                0 (halt): The remaining fields in this register configure WARL                 0
                          halt groups.

                          1 (resume): The remaining fields in this register configure
                          resume groups.
 dmexttrigger             This field contains the currently selected DM external WARL                    0
                          trigger.

                          If a non-existent trigger value is written here, the hardware
                          will change it to a valid one or 0 if no DM external triggers
                          exist.
 group                    When hgselect is 0, contains the group of the hart WARL                     preset
                          specified by hartsel.

                          When hgselect is 1, contains the group of the DM external
                          trigger selected by dmexttrigger.

                          The value written to this field is ignored unless hgwrite is
                          also written 1.

                          Group numbers are contiguous starting at 0, with the
                          highest number being implementation-dependent, and
                          possibly different between different group types.
                          Debuggers should read back this field after writing to
                          confirm they are using a hart group that is supported.

                          If groups aren’t implemented, then this entire field is 0.

Field                   Description                                                       Access      Reset
 hgwrite                When 1 is written and hgselect is 0, for every selected hart        W1           -
                        the DM will change its group to the value written to group,
                        if the hardware supports that group for that hart.
                        Implementations may also change the group of a minimal
                        set of unselected harts in the same way, if that is necessary
                        due to a hardware limitation.

                        When 1 is written and hgselect is 1, the DM will change the
                        group of the DM external trigger selected by dmexttrigger
                        to the value written to group, if the hardware supports that
                        group for that trigger.

                        Writing 0 has no effect.
 hgselect               0 (harts): Operate on harts.                                      WARL          0

                        1 (triggers): Operate on DM external triggers.

                        If there are no DM external triggers, this field must be tied
                        to 0.

3.14.18. Halt Summary 0 (haltsum0, at 0x40)
Each bit in this read-only register indicates whether one specific hart is halted or not.
Unavailable/nonexistent harts are not considered to be halted.

This register might not be present if fewer than 2 harts are connected to this DM.

The LSB reflects the halt status of hart {hartsel[19:5],5’h0}, and the MSB reflects halt status of hart
{hartsel[19:5],5’h1f}.

This entire register is read-only.

     31                                0

                   haltsum0

                      32

3.14.19. Halt Summary 1 (haltsum1, at 0x13)
Each bit in this read-only register indicates whether any of a group of harts is halted or not.
Unavailable/nonexistent harts are not considered to be halted.

This register might not be present if fewer than 33 harts are connected to this DM.

The LSB reflects the halt status of harts {hartsel[19:10],10’h0} through {hartsel[19:10],10’h1f}. The MSB
reflects the halt status of harts {hartsel[19:10],10’h3e0} through {hartsel[19:10],10’h3ff}.

This entire register is read-only.

         31                                                            0

                               haltsum1

                                    32

3.14.20. Halt Summary 2 (haltsum2, at 0x34)
Each bit in this read-only register indicates whether any of a group of harts is halted or not.
Unavailable/nonexistent harts are not considered to be halted.

This register might not be present if fewer than 1025 harts are connected to this DM.

The LSB reflects the halt status of harts {hartsel[19:15],15’h0} through {hartsel[19:15],15’h3ff}. The MSB
reflects the halt status of harts {hartsel[19:15],15’h7c00} through {hartsel[19:15],15’h7fff}.

This entire register is read-only.

         31                                                            0

                               haltsum2

                                    32

3.14.21. Halt Summary 3 (haltsum3, at 0x35)
Each bit in this read-only register indicates whether any of a group of harts is halted or not.
Unavailable/nonexistent harts are not considered to be halted.

This register might not be present if fewer than 32769 harts are connected to this DM.

The LSB reflects the halt status of harts 20’h0 through 20’h7fff. The MSB reflects the halt status of
harts 20’hf8000 through 20’hfffff.

This entire register is read-only.

         31                                                            0

                               haltsum3

                                    32

3.14.22. System Bus Access Control and Status (sbcs, at 0x38)
    31                    29   28                       23                 22                21             20         19                  17             16

              sbversion                   0                         sbbusyerror            sbbusy     sbreadonaddr              sbaccess            sbautoincrement

                    3                     6                                1                 1              1                      3                       1

               15         14                  12   11                      5           4                3                   2                   1                  0

     sbreadondata               sberror                      sbasize              sbaccess128       sbaccess64       sbaccess32            sbaccess16          sbaccess8

                1                   3                           7                      1                1                   1                   1                  1

Field             Description                                                       Access      Reset
sbversion         0 (legacy): The System Bus interface conforms to mainline            R           1
                  drafts of this spec older than 1 January, 2018.

                  1 (1.0): The System Bus interface conforms to this version
                  of the spec.

                  Other values are reserved for future versions.
sbbusyerror       Set when the debugger attempts to read data while a read R/W1C                  0
                  is in progress, or when the debugger initiates a new access
                  while one is already in progress (while sbbusy is set). It
                  remains set until it’s explicitly cleared by the debugger.

                  While this field is set, no more system bus accesses can be
                  initiated by the Debug Module.
sbbusy            When 1, indicates the system bus manager is busy.                    R          0
                  (Whether the system bus itself is busy is related, but not
                  the same thing.) This bit goes high immediately when a
                  read or write is requested for any reason, and does not go
                  low until the access is fully completed.

                  Writes to sbcs while sbbusy is high result in undefined
                  behavior. A debugger must not write to sbcs until it reads
                  sbbusy as 0.
sbreadonaddr      When 1, every write to sbaddress0 automatically triggers a         R/W          0
                  system bus read at the new address.
sbaccess          Select the access size to use for system bus accesses.             R/W          2

                  0 (8bit): 8-bit

                  1 (16bit): 16-bit

                  2 (32bit): 32-bit

                  3 (64bit): 64-bit

                  4 (128bit): 128-bit

                  If sbaccess has an unsupported value when the DM starts a
                  bus access, the access is not performed and sberror is set to
                  4.
sbautoincrement   When 1, sbaddress is incremented by the access size (in            R/W          0
                  bytes) selected in sbaccess after every system bus access.
sbreadondata      When 1, every read from sbdata0 automatically triggers a           R/W          0
                  system bus read at the (possibly auto-incremented)
                  address.

Field                     Description                                                    Access     Reset
 sberror                  When the Debug Module’s system bus manager R/W1C                            0
                          encounters an error, this field gets set. The bits in this field
                          remain set until they are cleared by writing 1 to them.
                          While this field is non-zero, no more system bus accesses
                          can be initiated by the Debug Module.

                          An implementation may report ``Other'' (7) for any error
                          condition.

                          0 (none): There was no bus error.

                          1 (timeout): There was a timeout.

                          2 (address): A bad address was accessed.

                          3 (alignment): There was an alignment error.

                          4 (size): An access of unsupported size was requested.

                          7 (other): Other.
 sbasize                  Width of system bus addresses in bits. (0 indicates there is      R       Preset
                          no bus access support.)
 sbaccess128              1 when 128-bit system bus accesses are supported.                 R       Preset
 sbaccess64               1 when 64-bit system bus accesses are supported.                  R       Preset
 sbaccess32               1 when 32-bit system bus accesses are supported.                  R       Preset
 sbaccess16               1 when 16-bit system bus accesses are supported.                  R       Preset
 sbaccess8                1 when 8-bit system bus accesses are supported.                   R       Preset

3.14.23. System Bus Address 31:0 (sbaddress0, at 0x39)
If sbasize is 0, then this register is not present.

When the system bus manager is busy, writes to this register will set sbbusyerror and don’t do
anything else.

If sberror is 0, sbbusyerror is 0, and sbreadonaddr is set then writes to this register start the following:

 1. Set sbbusy.
 2. Perform a bus read from the new value of sbaddress.
 3. If the read succeeded and sbautoincrement is set, increment sbaddress.
 4. Clear sbbusy.

     31                                     0

                     address

                        32

Field                    Description                                                    Access      Reset
 address                 Accesses bits 31:0 of the physical address in sbaddress.        R/W          0

3.14.24. System Bus Address 63:32 (sbaddress1, at 0x3a)
If sbasize is less than 33, then this register is not present.

When the system bus manager is busy, writes to this register will set sbbusyerror and don’t do
anything else.

     31                                   0

                    address

                       32

Field                    Description                                                    Access      Reset
 address                 Accesses bits 63:32 of the physical address in sbaddress        R/W          0
                         (if the system address bus is that wide).

3.14.25. System Bus Address 95:64 (sbaddress2, at 0x3b)
If sbasize is less than 65, then this register is not present.

When the system bus manager is busy, writes to this register will set sbbusyerror and don’t do
anything else.

     31                                   0

                    address

                       32

Field                    Description                                                    Access      Reset
 address                 Accesses bits 95:64 of the physical address in sbaddress        R/W          0
                         (if the system address bus is that wide).

3.14.26. System Bus Address 127:96 (sbaddress3, at 0x37)
If sbasize is less than 97, then this register is not present.

When the system bus manager is busy, writes to this register will set sbbusyerror and don’t do
anything else.

     31                                   0

                    address

                       32

Field                    Description                                                    Access      Reset
 address                 Accesses bits 127:96 of the physical address in sbaddress       R/W          0
                         (if the system address bus is that wide).

3.14.27. System Bus Data 31:0 (sbdata0, at 0x3c)
If all of the sbaccess bits in sbcs are 0, then this register is not present.

Any successful system bus read updates sbdata. If the width of the read access is less than the width of
sbdata, the contents of the remaining high bits may take on any value.

If either sberror or sbbusyerror isn’t 0 then accesses do nothing.

If the bus manager is busy then accesses set sbbusyerror, and don’t do anything else.

Writes to this register start the following:

 1. Set sbbusy.
 2. Perform a bus write of the new value of sbdata to sbaddress.
 3. If the write succeeded and sbautoincrement is set, increment sbaddress.
 4. Clear sbbusy.

Reads from this register start the following:

 1. "Return" the data.
 2. Set sbbusy.
 3. If sbreadondata is set:
     a. Perform a system bus read from the address contained in sbaddress, placing the result in
        sbdata.
     b. If sbautoincrement is set and the read was successful, increment sbaddress.
 4. Clear sbbusy.

Only sbdata0 has this behavior. The other sbdata registers have no side effects. On systems that have
buses wider than 32 bits, a debugger should access sbdata0 after accessing the other sbdata registers.

     31                                     0

                       data

                         32

Field                     Description                                                   Access   Reset
 data                     Accesses bits 31:0 of sbdata.                                 R/W       0

3.14.28. System Bus Data 63:32 (sbdata1, at 0x3d)
If sbaccess64 and sbaccess128 are 0, then this register is not present.

If the bus manager is busy then accesses set sbbusyerror, and don’t do anything else.

     31                                     0

                       data

                         32

Field                    Description                                                    Access     Reset
 data                    Accesses bits 63:32 of sbdata (if the system bus is that       R/W          0
                         wide).

3.14.29. System Bus Data 95:64 (sbdata2, at 0x3e)
This register only exists if sbaccess128 is 1.

If the bus manager is busy then accesses set sbbusyerror, and don’t do anything else.

     31                                  0

                      data

                       32

Field                    Description                                                    Access     Reset
 data                    Accesses bits 95:64 of sbdata (if the system bus is that       R/W          0
                         wide).

3.14.30. System Bus Data 127:96 (sbdata3, at 0x3f)
This register only exists if sbaccess128 is 1.

If the bus manager is busy then accesses set sbbusyerror, and don’t do anything else.

     31                                  0

                      data

                       32

Field                    Description                                                    Access     Reset
 data                    Accesses bits 127:96 of sbdata (if the system bus is that      R/W          0
                         wide).

3.14.31. Custom Features (custom, at 0x1f)
This optional register may be used for non-standard features. Future version of the debug spec will not
use this address.

3.14.32. Custom Features 0 (custom0, at 0x70)
The optional custom0 through custom15 registers may be used for non-standard features. Future
versions of the debug spec will not use these addresses.

