
Chapter 4. Sdext (ISA Extension)
This chapter describes the Sdext ISA extension. It must be implemented to make external debug work,
and is only useful in conjunction with external debug.

Modifications to the RISC-V core to support debug are kept to a minimum. There is a special execution
mode (Debug Mode) and a few extra CSRs. The DM takes care of the rest.

In order to be compatible with this specification an implementation must implement everything
described in this chapter that is not explicitly listed as optional.

If Sdext is implemented and Sdtrig is not implemented, then accessing any of the Sdtrig CSRs must
raise an illegal instruction exception.

4.1. Debug Mode
Debug Mode is a special processor mode used only when a hart is halted for external debugging.
Because the hart is halted, there is no forward progress in the normal instruction stream. How Debug
Mode is implemented is not specified here.

When executing code due to an abstract command, the hart stays in Debug Mode and the following
apply:

 1. All implemented instructions operate just as they do in M-mode, unless an exception is mentioned
    in this list.
 2. All operations are executed with machine mode privilege, except that additional Debug Mode CSRs
    are accessible and mprv in mstatus may be ignored according to mprven. Full permission checks,
    or a relaxed set of permission checks, will apply according to relaxedpriv.
 3. All interrupts (including NMI) are masked.
 4. Traps don’t take place. Instead, they end execution of the program buffer and the hart remains in
    Debug Mode. Because they do not trap to M-mode, they do not update registers such as , mepc,
    mcause, mtval, mtval2, and mtinst. The same is true for the equivalent privileged registers that are
    updated when trapping to other modes. Registers that may be updated as part of execution before
    the exception are allowed to be updated. For example, vector load/store instructions which raise
    exceptions may partially update the destination register and set vstart appropriately.
 5. Triggers don’t match or fire.
 6. If stopcount is 0 then counters continue. If it is 1 then counters are stopped.
 7. If stoptime is 0 then time continues to update. If it is 1 then time will not update. It will
    resynchronize with time after leaving Debug Mode.
 8. Instructions that place the hart into a stalled state act as a nop. This includes wfi, wrs.sto, and
    wrs.nto.
9. Almost all instructions that change the privilege mode have UNSPECIFIED behavior. This
   includes ecall, mret, sret, and uret. (To change the privilege mode, the debugger can write prv
   and v in dcsr). The only exception is ebreak, which ends execution of the Program Buffer when
   executed.
10. All control transfer instructions may act as illegal instructions if their destination is in the
    Program Buffer. If one such instruction acts as an illegal instruction, all such instructions must act

   as illegal instructions.
11. All control transfer instructions may act as illegal instructions if their destination is outside the
    Program Buffer. If one such instruction acts as an illegal instruction, all such instructions must act
    as illegal instructions.
12. Instructions that depend on the value of the PC (e.g. auipc) may act as illegal instructions.
13. When the Zicfilp extension is implemented, the ELP state is NO_LP_EXPECTED and is not updated by
    any instructions. LPAD instruction executes as a no-op.
14. Effective XLEN is DXLEN.
15. Forward progress is guaranteed.

               When mprven, the external debugger can set MPRV and MPP appropriately to have
               hardware perform memory accesses with the appropriate endianness, address translation,
               permission checks, and PMP/PMA checks (subject to relaxedpriv). This is also the only
              way to access all of physical memory when 34-bit physical addresses are supported on a
               Sv32 hart. If hardware ties mprven to 0 then the external debugger is expected to simulate
               all the effects of MPRV, including any extensions that affect memory accesses. For these
               reasons it is recommended to tie mprven to 1.

4.2. Load-Reserved/Store-Conditional Instructions
The reservation registered by an lr instruction on a memory address may be lost when entering
Debug Mode or while in Debug Mode. This means that there may be no forward progress if Debug
Mode is entered between lr and sc pairs.

               This is a behavior that debug users must be aware of. If they have a breakpoint set between
               a lr and sc pair, or are stepping through such code, the sc may never succeed.
               Fortunately in general use there will be very few instructions in such a sequence, and
              anybody debugging it will quickly notice that the reservation is not occurring. The solution
               in that case is to set a breakpoint on the first instruction after the sc and run to it. A
               higher level debugger may choose to automate this.

4.3. Wait for Interrupt Instruction
If halt is requested while wfi is executing, then the hart must leave the stalled state, completing this
instruction’s execution, and then enter Debug Mode.

4.4. Wait-on-Reservation-Set Instructions
If halt is requested while wrs.sto or wrs.nto is executing, then the hart must leave the stalled state,
completing this instruction’s execution, and then enter Debug Mode.

4.5. Single Step
4.5.1. Step Bit In Dcsr
This method is only available to external debuggers, and is the preferred way to single step.

An external debugger can cause a halted hart to execute a single instruction or trap and then re-enter
Debug Mode by setting step before resuming. If step is set when a hart resumes then it will single step,
regardless of the reason for resuming.

If control is transferred to a trap handler while executing the instruction, then Debug Mode is re-
entered immediately after the PC is changed to the trap handler, and the appropriate tval and cause
registers are updated. In this case none of the trap handler is executed, and if the cause was a pending
interrupt no instructions might be executed at all.

If executing or fetching the instruction causes a trigger to fire with action=1, Debug Mode is re-entered
immediately after that trigger has fired. In that case cause is set to 2 (trigger) instead of 4 (single step).
Whether the instruction is executed or not depends on the specific configuration of the trigger.

If the instruction that is executed causes the PC to change to an address where an instruction fetch
causes an exception, that exception does not occur until the next time the hart is resumed. Similarly, a
trigger at the new address does not fire until the hart actually attempts to execute that instruction.

If the instruction being stepped over would normally stall the hart, then instead the instruction is
treated as a nop. This includes wfi, wrs.sto, and wrs.nto.

4.5.2. Icount Trigger
Native debuggers won’t have access to dcsr, but can use the icount trigger by setting count to 1.

This approach does have some limitations:

 1. Interrupts will fire as usual. Debuggers that want to disable interrupts while stepping must disable
    them by changing mstatus, and specially handle instructions that read mstatus.
 2. wfi instructions are not treated specially and might take a very long time to complete.

This mechanism cleanly supports a system which supports multiple privilege levels, where the OS or a
debug stub runs in M-Mode while the program being debugged runs in a less privileged mode.
Systems that only support M-Mode can use icount as well, but count must be able to count several
instructions (depending on the software implementation). See Section B.3.1.

4.6. Reset
If the halt signal (driven by the hart’s halt request bit in the Debug Module) or hasresethaltreq are
asserted when a hart comes out of reset, the hart must enter Debug Mode before executing any
instructions, but after performing any initialization that would usually happen before the first
instruction is executed.

4.7. Halt
When a hart halts:

 1. cause is updated.
 2. prv and v are set to reflect current privilege mode and virtualization mode.
 3. If the Zicfilp extension is implemented, pelp is set to the current ELP state and ELP is set to
    NO_LP_EXPECTED

 4. dpc is set to the next instruction that should be executed.
5. If the current instruction can be partially executed and should be restarted to complete, then the
   relevant state for that is updated. E.g. if a halt occurs during a partially executed vector instruction,
   then vstart is updated, and dpc is updated to the address of the partially executed instruction.
   This is analogous to how vector instructions behave for exceptions.
6. The hart enters Debug Mode.

4.8. Resume
When a hart resumes:

 1. pc changes to the value stored in dpc.
 2. The current privilege mode and virtualization mode are changed to that specified by prv and v.
3. If the Zicfilp extension is enabled at the new privilege mode, the current ELP state is changed to
   that specified by pelp else it is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED. pelp is set to NO_LP_EXPECTED.
 4. If the new privilege mode is less privileged than M-mode, MPRV in mstatus is cleared.
5. If the Smdbltrp extension is implemented and the new privilege mode is not M, then the MDT bit is
   set to 0.
6. If the Ssdbltrp extension is implemented and the new privilege mode is U, VS, or VU, then
   sstatus.SDT is set to 0. Additionally, if it is VU, then vsstatus.SDT is also set to 0.
 7. The hart is no longer in debug mode.

4.9. Core Debug Registers
The supported Core Debug Registers must be implemented for each hart that can be debugged. They
are CSRs, accessible using the RISC-V csr opcodes and optionally also using abstract debug
commands.

Attempts to access an unimplemented Core Debug Register raise an illegal instruction exception.

These registers are only accessible from Debug Mode.

                                       Table 7. Core Debug Registers
Address     Name                                                                    Section
0x7b0       Debug Control and Status (dcsr)                                         Section 4.9.1
0x7b1       Debug PC (dpc)                                                          Section 4.9.2
0x7b2       Debug Scratch Register 0 (dscratch0)                                    Section 4.9.3
0x7b3       Debug Scratch Register 1 (dscratch1)                                    Section 4.9.4

4.9.1. Debug Control and Status (dcsr, at 0x7b0)
Upon entry into Debug Mode, v and prv are updated with the privilege level the hart was previously in,
and cause is updated with the reason for Debug Mode entry. Other than these fields and nmip, the
other fields of dcsr are only writable by the external debugger.

Table 8 shows the priorities of reasons for entering Debug Mode. Implementations should implement

priorities as shown in the table. For compatibility with old versions of this spec, resethaltreq and
haltreq are allowed to be at different positions than shown as long as:

 1. resethaltreq is higher priority than haltreq
 2. the relative order of the other four causes is maintained

                           Table 8. Priority of reasons for entering Debug Mode from highest to lowest.
                                  cause encoding                                                Cause
                                                5                                         resethaltreq
                                                6                                          halt group
                                                3                                               haltreq
                                                2                 trigger (See Table 13 for detailed priority)
                                                1                                               ebreak
                                                4                                                   step

                     Note that mcontrol/mcontrol6 triggers which fire after the instruction which hit the
                     trigger are considered to be high priority causes on the subsequent instruction. Therefore,
                     an execute trigger with timing=after on an ebreak instruction is lower priority than the
                     ebreak itself because the trigger will fire after the ebreak instruction. For the same reason,
                    if a single instruction is stepped with both icount and step then the step has priority. See
                     Table 13 for the relative priorities of triggers with respect to the ebreak instruction.

                     Most multi-hart implementations will probably hardwire stoptime to 0, as the
                     implementation can get complicated and the benefit is small.

This CSR is read/write.
    31                28     27   26                        24   23                  20         19              18             17             16             15         14

          debugver           0              extcause                         0              cetrig             pelp         ebreakvs       ebreakvu        ebreakm      0

               4             1                 3                             4                  1               1              1              1               1         1

         13           12               11              10                9       8                     6   5            4              3               2      1         0

     ebreaks       ebreaku         stepie           stopcount         stoptime            cause            v          mprven        nmip           step           prv

         1            1                1                1                1                  3              1            1              1               1           2

Field                              Description                                                                                               Access           Reset
 debugver                          0 (none): There is no debug support.                                                                            R          Preset

                                   4 (1.0): Debug support exists as it is described in this
                                   document.

                                   15 (custom): There is debug support, but it does not
                                   conform to any available version of this spec.

Field      Description                                                         Access     Reset
extcause   When cause is 7, this optional field contains the value of a          R          0
           more specific halt reason than "other." Otherwise it
           contains 0.

           0 (critical error): The hart entered a critical error state, as
           defined in the Smdbltrp extension.

           All other values are reserved for future versions of this
           spec, or for use by other RISC-V extensions.
cetrig     This bit is part of Smdbltrp and only exists when that              WARL         0
           extension is implemented.

           0 (disabled): A hart in a critical error state does not enter
           Debug Mode but instead asserts the critical-error signal to
           the platform.

           1 (enabled): A hart in a critical error state enters Debug
           Mode instead of asserting the critical-error signal to the
           platform. Upon such entry into Debug Mode, the cause
           field is set to 7, and the extcause field is set to 0, indicating
           a critical error triggered the Debug Mode entry. This cause
           has the highest priority among all reasons for entering
           Debug Mode. Resuming from Debug Mode following an
           entry from the critical error state returns the hart to the
           critical error state.

                           When cetrig is 1, resuming from Debug
                           Mode following an entry due to a critical
                           error will result in an immediate re-entry
                           into Debug Mode due to the critical error.
                          The debugger may resume with cetrig set to
                           0 to allow the platform defined actions on
                           critical-error signal to occur. Other possible
                           actions include initiating a hart or platform
                           reset using the Debug Module reset control.
pelp       This bit is part of Zicfilp and only exists when that               WARL         0
           extension is implemented.

           0 (NO_LP_EXPECTED): No landing pad instruction
           expected.

           1 (LP_EXPECTED): A landing pad instruction is expected.
ebreakvs   0 (exception): ebreak instructions in VS-mode behave as WARL                     0
           described in the Privileged Spec.

           1 (debug mode): ebreak instructions in VS-mode enter
           Debug Mode.

           This bit is hardwired to 0 if the hart does not support
           virtualization mode.

Field                     Description                                                    Access   Reset
 ebreakvu                 0 (exception): ebreak instructions in VU-mode behave as WARL              0
                          described in the Privileged Spec.

                          1 (debug mode): ebreak instructions in VU-mode enter
                          Debug Mode.

                          This bit is hardwired to 0 if the hart does not support
                          virtualization mode.
 ebreakm                  0 (exception): ebreak instructions in M-mode behave as         R/W        0
                          described in the Privileged Spec.

                          1 (debug mode): ebreak instructions in M-mode enter
                          Debug Mode.
 ebreaks                  0 (exception): ebreak instructions in S-mode behave as WARL               0
                          described in the Privileged Spec.

                          1 (debug mode): ebreak instructions in S-mode enter
                          Debug Mode.

                          This bit is hardwired to 0 if the hart does not support S-
                          mode.
 ebreaku                  0 (exception): ebreak instructions in U-mode behave as WARL               0
                          described in the Privileged Spec.

                          1 (debug mode): ebreak instructions in U-mode enter
                          Debug Mode.

                          This bit is hardwired to 0 if the hart does not support U-
                          mode.
 stepie                   0 (interrupts disabled): Interrupts (including NMI) are WARL              0
                          disabled during single stepping with step set. This value
                          should be supported.

                          1 (interrupts enabled): Interrupts (including NMI) are
                          enabled during single stepping with step set.

                          Implementations may hard wire this bit to 0. In that case
                          interrupt behavior can be emulated by the debugger.

                          The debugger must not change the value of this bit while
                          the hart is running.
 stopcount                0 (normal): Increment counters as usual.                       WARL     Preset

                          1 (freeze): Don’t increment any hart-local counters while in
                          Debug Mode or on ebreak instructions that cause entry
                          into Debug Mode. These counters include the instret
                          CSR. On single-hart cores cycle should be stopped, but on
                          multi-hart cores it must keep incrementing.

                          An implementation may hardwire this bit to 0 or 1.

Field      Description                                                      Access      Reset
stoptime   0 (normal): time continues to reflect mtime.                     WARL       Preset

           1 (freeze): time is frozen at the time that Debug Mode was
           entered. When leaving Debug Mode, time will reflect the
           latest value of mtime again.

           While all harts have stoptime=1 and are in Debug Mode,
           mtime is allowed to stop incrementing.

           An implementation may hardwire this bit to 0 or 1.
cause      Explains why Debug Mode was entered.                                R          0

           When there are multiple reasons to enter Debug Mode in a
           single cycle, hardware should set cause to the cause with
           the highest priority. See Table 8 for priorities.

           1 (ebreak): An ebreak instruction was executed.

           2 (trigger): A Trigger Module trigger fired with action=1.

           3 (haltreq): The debugger requested entry to Debug Mode
           using haltreq.

           4 (step): The hart single stepped because step was set.

           5 (resethaltreq): The hart halted directly out of reset due to
           resethaltreq It is also acceptable to report 3 when this
           happens.

           6 (group): The hart halted because it’s part of a halt group.
           Harts may report 3 for this cause instead.

           7 (other): The hart halted for a reason other than the ones
           mentioned above. extcause may contain a more specific
           reason.
v          Extends the prv field with the virtualization mode the hart WARL               0
           was operating in when Debug Mode was entered. The
           encoding is described in Table 11. A debugger can change
           this value to change the hart’s virtualization mode when
           exiting Debug Mode. This bit is hardwired to 0 on harts
           that do not support virtualization mode.
mprven     0 (disabled): mprv in mstatus is ignored in Debug Mode.          WARL       Preset

           1 (enabled): mprv in mstatus takes effect in Debug Mode.

           Implementing this bit is optional. It may be tied to either 0
           or 1.

Field                     Description                                                    Access    Reset
 nmip                     When set, there is a Non-Maskable-Interrupt (NMI)                R         0
                          pending for the hart.

                          Since an NMI can indicate a hardware error condition,
                          reliable debugging may no longer be possible once this bit
                          becomes set. This is implementation-dependent.
 step                     When set and not in Debug Mode, the hart will only              R/W        0
                          execute a single instruction and then enter Debug Mode.
                          See Section 4.5.1 for details.

                          The debugger must not change the value of this bit while
                          the hart is running.
 prv                      Contains the privilege mode the hart was operating in WARL                  3
                          when Debug Mode was entered. The encoding is described
                          in Table 11. A debugger can change this value to change the
                          hart’s privilege mode when exiting Debug Mode.

                          Not all privilege modes are supported on all harts. If the
                          encoding written is not supported or the debugger is not
                          allowed to change to it, the hart may change to any
                          supported privilege mode.

4.9.2. Debug PC (dpc, at 0x7b1)
Upon entry to debug mode, dpc is updated with the virtual address of the next instruction to be
executed. The behavior is described in more detail in Table 9.

                                        Table 9. Virtual address in DPC.
         Cause                                    Virtual Address in DPC
        ebreak                               Address of the ebreak instruction
   single step     Address of the instruction that would be executed next if no debugging was going on.
                  Ie. pc + 4 for 32-bit instructions that don’t change program flow, the destination PC on
                                                  taken jumps/branches, etc.
        trigger     The address of the next instruction to be executed at the time that debug mode was
        module      entered. If the trigger is mcontrol and timing is 0 or if the trigger is mcontrol6 and
                  hit1 is 0, this corresponds to the address of the instruction which caused the trigger to
                                                              fire.
 halt request Address of the next instruction to be executed at the time that debug mode was entered.

Executing the Program Buffer may cause the value of dpc to become UNSPECIFIED. If that is the case,
it must be possible to read/write dpc using an abstract command with postexec not set. The debugger
must attempt to save dpc between halting and executing a Program Buffer, and then restore dpc before
leaving Debug Mode.

                  Allowing dpc to become UNSPECIFIED upon Program Buffer execution allows for direct
                 implementations that don’t have a separate PC register, and do need to use the PC when
                  executing the Program Buffer.

If the Access Register abstract command supports reading dpc while the hart is running, then the
value read should be the address of a recently executed instruction.

If the Access Register abstract command supports writing dpc while the hart is running, then the
executing program should jump to the written address shortly after the write occurs.

The writability of dpc follows the same rules as mepc as defined in the Privileged Spec. In particular,
dpc must be able to hold all valid virtual addresses and the writability of the low bits depends on
IALIGN.

When resuming, the hart’s PC is updated to the virtual address stored in dpc. A debugger may write
dpc to change where the hart resumes.

This CSR is read/write.

       DXLEN-1                 0

                   dpc

                  DXLEN

4.9.3. Debug Scratch Register 0 (dscratch0, at 0x7b2)
Optional scratch register that can be used by implementations that need it. A debugger must not write
to this register unless hartinfo explicitly mentions it (the Debug Module may use this register
internally).

This CSR is read/write.

       DXLEN-1                 0

                 dscratch0

                  DXLEN

4.9.4. Debug Scratch Register 1 (dscratch1, at 0x7b3)
Optional scratch register that can be used by implementations that need it. A debugger must not write
to this register unless hartinfo explicitly mentions it (the Debug Module may use this register
internally).

This CSR is read/write.

       DXLEN-1                 0

                 dscratch1

                  DXLEN

4.10. Virtual Debug Registers
A virtual register is one that doesn’t exist directly in the hardware, but that the debugger exposes as if
it does. Debug software should implement them, but hardware can skip this section. Virtual registers
exist to give users access to functionality that’s not part of standard debuggers without requiring them
to carefully modify debug registers while the debugger is also accessing those same registers.

                                          Table 10. Virtual Core Debug Registers
Address        Name                                                                         Section
virtual        Privilege Mode (priv)                                                        Section 4.10.1

4.10.1. Privilege Mode (priv, at virtual)
Users can read this register to inspect the privilege mode that the hart was running in when the hart
halted. Users can write this register to change the privilege mode that the hart will run in when it
resumes.

This register contains prv and v from dcsr, but in a place that the user is expected to access. The user
should not access dcsr directly, because doing so might interfere with the debugger.

                                Table 11. Privilege Mode and Virtualization Mode Encoding
           H extension supported v prv Abbreviation Name
                         No               0 0 U-mode              User mode
                         No               0   1   S-mode          Supervisor mode
                         No               0 3 M-mode              Machine mode
                         Yes              0 0 U-mode              User mode
                         Yes              0   1   HS-mode         Hypervisor-enabled supervisor mode
                         Yes              0 3 M-mode              Machine mode
                         Yes              1   0 VU-mode           Virtual user mode
                         Yes              1   1   VS-mode         Virtual supervisor mode

       2   1         0

       v       prv

       1        2

Field                          Description                                                      Access       Reset
 v                             Contains the virtualization mode the hart was operating in WARL                0
                               when Debug Mode was entered. The encoding is described
                               in Table 11, and matches the virtualization mode encoding
                               from the Privileged Spec. A user can write this value to
                               change the hart’s virtualization mode when exiting Debug
                               Mode.
 prv                           Contains the privilege mode the hart was operating in             R/W          0
                               when Debug Mode was entered. The encoding is described
                               in Table 11, and matches the privilege mode encoding from
                               the Privileged Spec. A user can write this value to change
                               the hart’s privilege mode when exiting Debug Mode.

