                                                                                         5.1. Enumeration | Page 59

Chapter 5. Sdtrig (ISA Extension)
This chapter describes the Sdtrig ISA extension, which can be implemented independently of
functionality described in the other chapters. It consists exclusively of the Trigger Module (TM).

Triggers can cause a breakpoint exception, entry into Debug Mode, or a trace action without having to
execute a special instruction. This makes them invaluable when debugging code from ROM. They can
trigger on execution of instructions at a given memory address, or on the address/data in loads/stores.

If Sdtrig is implemented, the Trigger Module must support at least one trigger. Accessing trigger CSRs
that are not used by any of the implemented triggers must result in an illegal instruction exception.
M-Mode and Debug Mode accesses to trigger CSRs that are used by any of the implemented triggers
must succeed, regardless of the current type of the currently selected trigger.

A trigger matches when the conditions that it specifies (e.g. a load from a specific address) are met. A
trigger fires when a trigger that matches performs the action configured for that trigger.

Triggers do not fire while in Debug Mode.

5.1. Enumeration
Each trigger may support a variety of features. A debugger can build a list of all triggers and their
features as follows:

 1. Write 0 to tselect. If this results in an illegal instruction exception, then there are no triggers
    implemented.
 2. Read back tselect and check that it contains the written value. If not, exit the loop.
 3. Read tinfo.
 4. If that caused an exception, the debugger must read tdata1 to discover the type. (If type is 0, this
    trigger doesn’t exist. Exit the loop.)
 5. If info is 1, this trigger doesn’t exist. Exit the loop.
6. Otherwise, the selected trigger supports the types discovered in info.
 7. Repeat, incrementing the value in tselect.

                  The above algorithm reads back tselect so that implementations which have             triggers
                  only need to implement bits of tselect.
                 The algorithm checks tinfo and type in case the implementation has         bits of tselect but
                  fewer than triggers.

5.2. Actions
Triggers can be configured to take one of several actions when they fire. Table 12 lists all options.

                                             Table 12. action encoding

5.3. Priority | Page 60

 Value Description
        0 Raise a breakpoint exception. (Used when software wants to use the trigger module without
          an external debugger attached.) xepc must contain the virtual address of the next
          instruction that must be executed to preserve the program flow.
         1 Enter Debug Mode. dpc must contain the virtual address of the next instruction that must
           be executed to preserve the program flow.
           This action is only legal when the trigger’s dmode is 1. Since tdata1 is WARL, hardware must
           prevent it from containing dmode=0 and action=1.
           This action can only be supported if Sdext is implemented on the hart.
         2 Trace on, described in the trace specification.
         3 Trace off, described in the trace specification.
         4 Trace notify, described in the trace specification.
         5 Reserved for use by the trace specification.
     8 - 9 Send a signal to TM external trigger output 0 or 1 (respectively).
    other Reserved for future use.

                 Actions 8 and 9 are intended to increment custom event counters, but these signals could
                also be brought to outputs for use by external logic.

5.3. Priority
Table 13 lists the synchronous exceptions from the Privileged Spec, and where the various types of
triggers fit in. The first 3 columns come from the Privileged Spec, and the final column shows where
triggers fit in. Priorities in the table are separated by horizontal lines, so e.g. etrigger and itrigger have
the same priority. If this table contradicts the table in the Privileged Spec, then the latter takes
precedence.

This table only applies if triggers are precise. Otherwise triggers will fire some indeterminate time
after the event, and the priority is irrelevant. When triggers are chained, the priority is the lowest
priority of the triggers in the chain.

                          Table 13. Synchronous exception priority in decreasing priority order.
     Priority        Exception            Description                            Trigger
                     Code
     Highest         3                                                           etrigger
                     3                                                           icount
                     3                                                           itrigger
                     3                                                           mcontrol/mcontrol6 after (on
                                                                                 previous instruction)
                     3                    Instruction address breakpoint         mcontrol/mcontrol6 execute
                                                                                 address before
                     12, 20, 1            During instruction address
                                          translation: First encountered
                                          page fault, guest-page fault, or
                                          access fault

                                                                                  5.4. Native Triggers | Page 61

    Priority      Exception         Description                         Trigger
                  Code
                  1                 With physical address for
                                    instruction: Instruction access
                                    fault
                  3                                                     mcontrol/mcontrol6 execute
                                                                        data before
                  2                 Illegal instruction
                  22                Virtual instruction
                  0                 Instruction address misaligned
                  8, 9, 10, 11      Environment call
                  3                 Environment break
                  3                 Load/Store/AMO address              mcontrol/mcontrol6 load/store
                                    breakpoint                          address before, store data before
                  4, 6              Optionally: Load/Store/AMO
                                    address misaligned
                  13, 15, 21, 23, 5, During address translation for
                  7                  an explicit memory access: First
                                     encountered page fault, guest-
                                     page fault, or access fault
                  5, 7              With physical address for an
                                    explicit memory access:
                                    Load/store/AMO access fault
                  4, 6              If not higher priority:
                                    Load/store/AMO address
                                    misaligned
     Lowest       3                                                     mcontrol/mcontrol6 load data
                                                                        before

When multiple triggers in the same priority fire at once, hit (if implemented) is set for all of them. If
more than one of these triggers has action=0 then tval is updated in accordance with one of them, but
which one is UNSPECIFIED . If one of these triggers has the "enter Debug Mode" action (1) and another
trigger has the "raise a breakpoint exception" action (0), the preferred behavior is to have both actions
take place. It is implementation-dependent which of the two happens first. This ensures both that the
presence of an external debugger doesn’t affect execution and that a trigger set by user code doesn’t
affect the external debugger. If this is not implemented, then the hart must enter Debug Mode and
ignore the breakpoint exception. In the latter case, hit of the trigger whose action is 0 must still be set,
giving a debugger an opportunity to handle this case. Since triggers that have an action other than 0 or
1 don’t affect the execution of the hart, they are not mentioned in the priority table. Such triggers fire
independently from those that have an action of 0 or 1.

5.4. Native Triggers
Triggers can be used for native debugging when action=0. If supported by the hart and desired by the
debugger, triggers will often be programmed to have m=0 so that when they fire they cause a
breakpoint exception to trap to a more privileged mode. That breakpoint exception can either be taken
in M-mode or it can be delegated to a less privileged mode. However, it is possible for triggers to fire in

5.4. Native Triggers | Page 62

the same mode that the resulting exception will be handled in.

In these cases such a trigger may cause a breakpoint exception while already in a trap handler. This
might leave the hart unable to resume normal execution because state such as mcause and mepc would
be overwritten.

                 In particular, when action=0:

                   1. mcontrol and mcontrol6 triggers with m=1 can cause a breakpoint exception that is
                      taken from M-mode to M-mode (regardless of delegation).
                  2. mcontrol and mcontrol6 triggers with s=1 can cause a breakpoint exception that is
                     taken from S-mode to S-mode if medeleg [3]=1.
                  3. mcontrol6 triggers with vs=1 can cause a breakpoint exception that is taken from VS-
                     mode to VS-mode if medeleg [3]=1 and hedeleg [3]=1 .
                  4. icount triggers with m=1can cause a breakpoint exception that is taken from M-mode
                     to M-mode (regardless of delegation).
                 5. icount triggers with s=1 can cause a breakpoint exception that is taken from S-mode to
                     S-mode if medeleg [3]=1 .
                  6. icount triggers with vs=1 can cause a breakpoint exception that is taken from VS-mode
                     to VS-mode if medeleg [3]=1 and hedeleg [3]=1.
                  7. etrigger and itrigger triggers will always be taken from a trap handler before the first
                     instruction of the handler. If etrigger/itrigger is set to trigger on exception/interrupt X
                     and if X is delegated to mode Y then the trigger will cause a breakpoint exception that
                     is taken from mode Y to mode Y unless breakpoint exceptions are delegated to a more
                     privileged mode than Y.
                  8. tmexttrigger triggers are asynchronous and may occur in any mode and at any time.

Harts that support triggers with action=0 should implement one of the following two solutions to
solve the problem of reentrancy:

 1. The hardware prevents triggers with action=0 from matching or firing while in M-mode and while
    MIE in mstatus is 0. If medeleg [3]=1 then it prevents triggers with action=0 from matching or
    firing while in S-mode and while SIE in sstatus is 0. If medeleg [3]=1 and hedeleg [3]=1 then it
    prevents triggers with action=0 from matching or firing while in VS-mode and while SIE in
    vstatus is 0.
 2. mte and mpte in tcontrol is implemented. medeleg [3] is hard-wired to 0.

                 The first option has the limitation that interrupts might be disabled at times when a user
                 still might want triggers to fire. It has the benefit that breakpoints are not required to be
                 handled in M-mode.

                 The second option has the benefit that it only disables triggers during the trap handler,
                 though it requires specific software support for this debug feature in the M-mode trap
                handlers. It can only work if breakpoints are not delegated to less privileged modes and
                 therefore targets primarily implementations without S-mode.

                 Because tcontrol is not accessible to S-mode, the second option can not be extended to
                 accommodate delegation without adding additional S-mode and VS-mode CSRs.

                 Both options prevent etrigger and itrigger from having any effect on exceptions and

                                                                        5.5. Memory Access Triggers | Page 63

               interrupts that are handled in M-mode. They also prevent triggering during some initial
               portion of each handler. Debuggers should use other mechanisms to debug these cases,
               such as patching the handler or setting a breakpoint on the instruction after MIE is
               cleared.

5.5. Memory Access Triggers
mcontrol and mcontrol6 both enable triggers on memory accesses. This section describes for both of
them how certain corner cases are treated.

5.5.1. A Extension
If the A extension is supported, then triggers on loads/stores treat them as follows:

 1. lr instructions are loads.
 2. Successful sc instructions are stores.
 3. It is UNSPECIFIED whether failing sc instructions are stores or not.
 4. Each AMO instruction is a load for the read portion of the operation. The address is always
    available to trigger on, although the value loaded might not be, depending on the hardware
    implementation.
 5. Each AMO instruction is a store for the write portion of the operation. The address is always
    available to trigger on. Whether data store triggers match on AMOs is UNSPECIFIED.
6. If the destination register of any load or AMO is zero then it is UNSPECIFIED whether a data load
   trigger will match.

5.5.2. Combined Accesses
Some instructions lead a hart to perform multiple memory accesses. This includes vector loads and
stores, as well as cm.push and cm.pop instructions. The Trigger Module should match such accesses as
if they all happened individually. E.g. a vector load should be treated as if it performed multiple loads
of size SEW (selected element width), and cm.push should be treated as if it performed multiple stores
of size XLEN.

5.5.3. Cache Operations
Cache operations are infrequently performed, and code that uses them can have hard-to-find bugs.
For the purposes of debug triggers, two classes of cache operations must match as stores:

 1. Cache operations that enable software to maintain coherence between otherwise non-coherent
    implicit and explicit memory accesses.
 2. Cache operations that perform block writes of constant data.

Only triggers with size=0 and select=0 will match. Since cache operations affect multiple addresses,
there are multiple possible values to compare against. Implementations must implement one of the
following options. From most desirable to least desirable, they are:

 1. Every address from the effective address rounded down to the nearest cache block boundary
    (inclusive) to the effective address rounded up to the nearest cache block boundary (exclusive) is a
    compare value.

5.6. Multiple State Change Instructions | Page 64

 2. The effective address rounded down to the nearest cache block boundary is a compare value.
3. The effective address of the instruction is a compare value.

Cache operations encoded as HINTs do not match debug triggers.

                The above language intends to capture the trigger behavior with respect to the cache
                operations to be introduced in a forthcoming I/D consistency extension.

                For RISC-V Base Cache Management Operation ISA Extensions 1.0.1, this means the
                following:
                 1. cbo.clean, cbo.flush, and cbo.inval match as if they are stores because they
                     affect consistency.
                  2. cbo.zero matches as if it is a store because it performs a block write of constant data.
                  3. The prefetch instructions don’t match at all.

5.5.4. Address Matches
For address matches without a mask, tdata2 must be able to hold all valid addresses in all supported
translation modes. That means that after writing any of these valid addresses, the exact same value
XLEN-wide value is read back, including any high bits. An implementation may be able to optimize
the storage required, depending on the widest addresses it supports.

                If physical addresses are less than XLEN bits wide, they are zero-extended. If virtual
                addresses are less than XLEN bits wide, they are sign-extended. tdata2 must be
               implemented with enough bits of storage to represent the full range of supported physical
                and virtual address values when read by software and used by hardware.

5.5.4.1. Invalid Addresses

If tdata2 can hold any invalid addresses, then writes of an invalid address that can not be represented
as-is should be converted to a different invalid address that can be represented.

For invalid instruction fetch addresses and load and store effective addresses, the compare value may
be changed to a different invalid address.

In addition, an implementation may choose to inhibit all trigger matching against invalid addresses,
especially if there is no support for storage of any invalid address values in tdata2.

5.6. Multiple State Change Instructions
An instruction that performs multiple architectural state changes (e.g., register updates and/or
memory accesses) might cause a trigger to fire at an intermediate point in its execution. As a result,
architectural state changes up to that point might have been performed, while subsequent state
changes, starting from the event that activated the trigger, might not have been. The definition of such
an instruction will specify the order in which architectural state changes take place. Alternatively, it
may state that partial execution is not allowed, implying that a mid-execution trigger must prevent
any architectural state changes from occurring.

Debuggers won’t be aware if an instruction has been partially executed. When they resume execution,
they will execute the same instruction once more. Therefore, it’s crucial that partially executing the

instruction and then executing it again leaves the hart in a state closely resembling the state it would
have been in if the instruction had only been executed once.

5.7. Trigger Module Registers
These registers are CSRs, accessible using the RISC-V csr opcodes and optionally also using abstract
debug commands. They are the only mechanism to access the triggers.

Almost all trigger functionality is optional. All tdata registers follow write-any-read-legal semantics. If
a debugger writes an unsupported configuration, the register will read back a value that is supported
(which may simply be a disabled trigger). This means that a debugger must always read back values it
writes to tdata registers, unless it already knows what is supported. Writes to one tdata register must
not modify the contents of other tdata registers, nor the configuration of any trigger besides the one
that is currently selected.

The combination of these rules means that a debugger cannot simply set a trigger by writing tdata1,
then tdata2, etc. The current value of tdata2 might not be legal with the new value of tdata1. To help
with this situation, it is guaranteed that writing 0 to tdata1 disables the trigger, and leaves it in a state
where tdata2 and tdata3 can be written with any value that makes sense for any trigger type supported
by this trigger.

As a result, a debugger can write any supported trigger as follows:

 1. Write 0 to tdata1. (This will result in tdata1 containing a non-zero value, since the register is
    WARL.)
 2. Write desired values to tdata2 and tdata3.
 3. Write desired value to tdata1.

Code that restores CSR context of triggers that might be configured to fire in the current privilege
mode must use this same sequence to restore the triggers. This avoids the problem of a partially
written trigger firing at a different time than is expected.

Attempts to access an unimplemented Trigger Module Register raise an illegal instruction exception.

The Trigger Module registers, except mscontext, scontext, and hcontext, are only accessible in
machine and Debug Mode to prevent untrusted user code from causing entry into Debug Mode
without the OS’s permission.

In this section XLEN refers to the effective XLEN in the current execution mode. On systems where
XLEN values can differ between modes, this is handled as follows. Fields retain their values regardless
of XLEN, which only affects where in the register these fields appear (e.g. type). Some fields are wider
when XLEN is 64 than when it is 32 (e.g. svalue). The high bits in such fields retain their value but are
not readable when XLEN is 32. A modification of a register when XLEN is 32 clears any inaccessible
bits in that register.

                                       Table 14. Trigger Module Registers
Address     Name                                                                         Section
0x5a8       Supervisor Context (scontext)                                                Section 5.7.8
0x6a8       Hypervisor Context (hcontext)                                                Section 5.7.7
0x7a0       Trigger Select (tselect)                                                     Section 5.7.1

Address      Name                                                               Section
0x7a1        Trigger Data 1 (tdata1)                                            Section 5.7.2
0x7a1        Match Control (mcontrol)                                           Section 5.7.11
0x7a1        Match Control Type 6 (mcontrol6)                                   Section 5.7.12
0x7a1        Instruction Count (icount)                                         Section 5.7.13
0x7a1        Interrupt Trigger (itrigger)                                       Section 5.7.14
0x7a1        Exception Trigger (etrigger)                                       Section 5.7.15
0x7a1        External Trigger (tmexttrigger)                                    Section 5.7.16
0x7a2        Trigger Data 2 (tdata2)                                            Section 5.7.3
0x7a3        Trigger Data 3 (tdata3)                                            Section 5.7.4
0x7a3        Trigger Extra (RV32) (textra32)                                    Section 5.7.17
0x7a3        Trigger Extra (RV64) (textra64)                                    Section 5.7.18
0x7a4        Trigger Info (tinfo)                                               Section 5.7.5
0x7a5        Trigger Control (tcontrol)                                         Section 5.7.6
0x7a8        Machine Context (mcontext)                                         Section 5.7.9
0x7aa        Machine Supervisor Context (mscontext)                             Section 5.7.10

5.7.1. Trigger Select (tselect, at 0x7a0)
This register determines which trigger is accessible through the other Trigger Module registers. It is
optional if no triggers are implemented. The set of accessible triggers must start at 0, and be
contiguous.

This register is WARL. Writes of values greater than or equal to the number of supported triggers may
result in a different value in this register than what was written or may point to a trigger where
type=0. To verify that what they wrote is a valid index, debuggers can read back the value and check
that tselect holds what they wrote and read tdata1 to see that type is non-zero.

Since triggers can be used both by Debug Mode and M-mode, the external debugger must restore this
register if it modifies it.

This CSR is read/write.

        XLEN-1                              0

                       index

                       XLEN

5.7.2. Trigger Data 1 (tdata1, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is optional if no triggers are implemented.

Writing 0 to this register must result in a trigger that is disabled. If this trigger supports multiple

types, then the hardware should disable it by changing type to 15.

This CSR is read/write.

        XLEN-1       XLEN-4        XLEN-5       XLEN-6                           0

             type                 dmode                       data

                 4                   1                      XLEN - 5

Field                         Description                                                        Access      Reset
 type                         0 (none): There is no trigger at this tselect.                     WARL       Preset

                              1 (legacy): The trigger is a legacy SiFive address match
                              trigger. These should not be implemented and aren’t
                              further documented here.

                              2 (mcontrol): The trigger is an address/data match trigger.
                              The remaining bits in this register act as described in
                              mcontrol.

                              3 (icount): The trigger is an instruction count trigger. The
                              remaining bits in this register act as described in icount.

                              4 (itrigger): The trigger is an interrupt trigger. The
                              remaining bits in this register act as described in itrigger.

                              5 (etrigger): The trigger is an exception trigger. The
                              remaining bits in this register act as described in etrigger.

                              6 (mcontrol6): The trigger is an address/data match
                              trigger. The remaining bits in this register act as described
                              in mcontrol6. This is similar to a type 2 trigger, but
                              provides additional functionality and should be used
                              instead of type 2 in newer implementations.

                              7 (tmexttrigger): The trigger is a trigger source external to
                              the TM. The remaining bits in this register act as described
                              in tmexttrigger.

                              12—14 (custom): These trigger types are available for non-
                              standard use.

                              15 (disabled): This trigger is disabled. In this state, tdata2
                              and tdata3 can be written with any value that is supported
                              for any of the types this trigger implements. The
                              remaining bits in this register, except for dmode, are
                              ignored.

                              Other values are reserved for future use.

Field                     Description                                                   Access   Reset
 dmode                    If type is 0, then this bit is hard-wired to 0.               WARL       0

                          0 (both): Both Debug and M-mode can write the tdata
                          registers at the selected tselect.

                          1 (dmode): Only Debug Mode can write the tdata registers
                          at the selected tselect. Writes from other modes are
                          ignored.

                          This bit is only writable from Debug Mode. In ordinary
                          use, external debuggers will always set this bit when
                          configuring a trigger. When clearing this bit, debuggers
                          should also set the action field (whose location depends on
                          type) to something other than 1.
 data                     If type is 0, then this field is hard-wired to 0.             WARL     Preset

                          Trigger-specific data.

5.7.3. Trigger Data 2 (tdata2, at 0x7a2)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

Trigger-specific data. It is optional if no implemented triggers use it.

If the trigger is disabled, then this register can be written with any value supported by any of the
trigger types supported by this trigger.

If XLEN is less than DXLEN, writes to this register are sign-extended.

This CSR is read/write.

         XLEN-1                             0

                       data

                       XLEN

5.7.4. Trigger Data 3 (tdata3, at 0x7a3)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

Trigger-specific data. It is optional if no implemented triggers use it.

If the trigger is disabled, then this register can be written with any value supported by any of the
trigger types supported by this trigger.

If XLEN is less than DXLEN, writes to this register are sign-extended.

This CSR is read/write.

         XLEN-1                                0

                          data

                          XLEN

5.7.5. Trigger Info (tinfo, at 0x7a4)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is optional if no triggers are implemented, or if type is not writable and version would be
0. In this case the debugger can read the only supported type from tdata1.

Writing this read/write CSR has no effect.

         XLEN-1 32   31                   24   23              16   15                        0

           0                version                    0                       info

        XLEN - 32                 8                    8                        16

Field                       Description                                                        Access      Reset
 version                    Contains the version of the Sdtrig extension implemented.             R       Preset

                            0 (0): Supports triggers as described in this spec at commit
                            5a5c078, made on February 2, 2023.

                            In these older versions:

                                 1. mcontrol6 has a timing bit identical to timing
                             2. hit0 behaves just as hit.
                             3. hit1 is read-only 0.
                             4. Encodings for size for access sizes larger than 64 bits
                                are different.

                            1 (1): Supports triggers as described in the ratified version
                            1.0 of this document.
 info                       One bit for each possible type enumerated in tdata1. Bit N            R       Preset
                            corresponds to type N. If the bit is set, then that type is
                            supported by the currently selected trigger.

                            If the currently selected trigger doesn’t exist, this field
                            contains 1.

5.7.6. Trigger Control (tcontrol, at 0x7a5)
This optional register is only accessible in M-mode and Debug Mode and provides various control bits
related to triggers.

This CSR is read/write.

         XLEN-1                      8          7     6                4    3    2             0

                       0                       mpte           0            mte         0

                    XLEN - 8                    1             3             1          3

Field                          Description                                                   Access   Reset
 mpte                          M-mode previous trigger enable field.                         WARL      0

                               mpte and mte provide one solution to a problem regarding
                               triggers with action=0 firing in M-mode trap handlers. See
                               Section 5.4 for more details.

                               When any trap into M-mode is taken, mpte is set to the
                               value of mte.
 mte                           M-mode trigger enable field.                                  WARL      0

                               0 (disabled): Triggers with action=0 do not match/fire
                               while the hart is in M-mode.

                               1 (enabled): Triggers do match/fire while the hart is in M-
                               mode.

                               When any trap into M-mode is taken, mte is set to 0.
                               When mret is executed, mte is set to the value of mpte.

5.7.7. Hypervisor Context (hcontext, at 0x6a8)
This optional register may be implemented only if the H extension is implemented. If it is
implemented, mcontext must also be implemented.

This register is only accessible in HS-Mode, M-mode and Debug Mode. If Smstateen is implemented,
then accessibility of in HS-Mode is controlled by mstateenzero[57].

This register is an alias of the mcontext register, providing access to the hcontext field from HS-Mode.

5.7.8. Supervisor Context (scontext, at 0x5a8)
This optional register is only accessible in S/HS-mode, VS-mode, M-mode and Debug Mode.

Accessibility of this CSR is controlled by mstateenzero[57] and hstateenzero[57] in the Smstateen
extension. Enabling scontext can be a security risk in a virtualized system with a hypervisor that does
not swap scontext.

This CSR is read/write.

         XLEN-1 32    31                                  0

           0                             data

        XLEN - 32                         32

Field                        Description                                                    Access       Reset
 data                        Supervisor mode software can write a context number to WARL                   0
                             this register, which can be used to set triggers that only fire
                             in that specific context.

                             An implementation may tie any number of high bits in
                             this field to 0. It’s recommended to implement 16 bits on
                             RV32 and 32 bits on RV64.

5.7.9. Machine Context (mcontext, at 0x7a8)
This register must be implemented if hcontext is implemented, and is optional otherwise. It is only
accessible in M-mode and Debug mode.

                 hcontext is primarily useful to set triggers on hypervisor systems that only fire when a
                given VM is executing. It is also useful in systems where M-Mode implements something
                 like a hypervisor directly.

This CSR is read/write.

        XLEN-1                     14   13                       0

                    0                            hcontext

                 XLEN - 14                          14

Field                        Description                                                    Access       Reset
 hcontext                    M-Mode or HS-Mode (using hcontext) software can write a WARL                  0
                             context number to this register, which can be used to set
                             triggers that only fire in that specific context.

                             An implementation may tie any number of upper bits in
                             this field to 0. If the H extension is not implemented, it’s
                             recommended to implement 6 bits on RV32 and 13 bits on
                             RV64 (as visible through the mcontext register). If the H
                             extension is implemented, it’s recommended to
                             implement 7 bits on RV32 and 14 bits on RV64.

5.7.10. Machine Supervisor Context (mscontext, at 0x7aa)
This optional register is an alias for scontext. It is only accessible in S/HS-mode, M-mode and Debug
Mode. It is included for backward compatibility with version 0.13.

                 The encoding of this CSR does not conform to the CSR Address Mapping Convention in
                the Privileged Spec. It is expected that new implementations will not support this encoding
                 and that new debuggers will not use this CSR if scontext is available.

5.7.11. Match Control (mcontrol, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata1 when type is 2. This trigger type is deprecated. It is included for
backward compatibility with version 0.13.

                        This trigger type only supports a subset of features of the newer mcontrol6. It is expected
                       that new implementations will not support this trigger type and that new debuggers will
                        not use it if mcontrol6 is available.

Address and data trigger implementation are heavily dependent on how the processor core is
implemented. To accommodate various implementations, execute, load, and store address/data
triggers may fire at whatever point in time is most convenient for the implementation. The debugger
may request specific timings as described in timing. Table 15 suggests timings for the best user
experience.

A chain of triggers that don’t all have the same timing value will never fire. That means to implement
the suggestions in Table 15, both timings should be supported on load address triggers that can be
chained with a load data trigger.

The Privileged Spec says that breakpoint exceptions that occur on instruction fetches, loads, or stores
update the tval CSR with either zero or the faulting virtual address. The faulting virtual address for
an mcontrol trigger with action=0 is the address being accessed and which caused that trigger to fire.
If multiple mcontrol triggers are chained then the faulting virtual address is the address which caused
any of the chained triggers to fire.

If textra32 or textra64 are implemented for this trigger, it only matches when the conditions set there
are satisfied.

This CSR is read/write.
         XLEN-1        XLEN-4         XLEN-5       XLEN-6       XLEN-11           XLEN-12               23       22            21   20     19        18

               type                   dmode             maskmax                             0                         sizehi        hit   select    timing

                   4                     1                  6                        XLEN - 34                          2           1       1         1

    17            16    15                   12    11           10                     7        6   5        4    3             2            1        0

         sizelo                 action            chain                   match                 m   0        s    u         execute        store     load

           2                      4                 1                       4                   1   1        1    1             1            1        1

Field                                 Description                                                                                         Access    Reset
 maskmax                              Specifies the largest naturally aligned powers-of-two                                                     R   Preset
                                      (NAPOT) range supported by the hardware when match is
                                      1. The value is the logarithm base 2 of the number of bytes
                                      in that range. A value of 0 indicates match 1 is not
                                      supported. A value of 63 corresponds to the maximum
                                      NAPOT range, which is 263 bytes in size.
 sizehi                               This field only exists when XLEN is at least 64. It contains WARL                                               0
                                      the 2 high bits of the access size. The low bits come from
                                      sizelo. See sizelo for how this is used.

Field    Description                                                    Access       Reset
hit      If this bit is implemented then it must become set when WARL                  0
         this trigger fires and may become set when this trigger
         matches. The trigger’s user can set or clear it at any time. It
         is used to determine which trigger(s) matched. If the bit is
         not implemented, it is always 0 and writing it has no
         effect.
select   This bit determines the contents of the XLEN-bit compare WARL                 0
         values.

         0 (address): There is at least one compare value and it
         contains the lowest virtual address of the access. It is
         recommended that there are additional compare values
         for the other accessed virtual addresses. (E.g. on a 32-bit
         read from 0x4000, the lowest address is 0x4000 and the
         other addresses are 0x4001, 0x4002, and 0x4003.)

         1 (data): There is exactly one compare value and it contains
         the data value loaded or stored, or the instruction
         executed. Any bits beyond the size of the data access will
         contain 0.

Field                      Description                                                      Access   Reset
 timing                    0 (before): The action for this trigger will be taken just WARL            0
                           before the instruction that triggered it is retired, but after
                           all preceding instructions are retired. xepc or dpc
                           (depending on action) must be set to the virtual address of
                           the instruction that matched.

                           If this is combined with load and select=1 then a memory
                           access will be performed (including any side effects of
                           performing such an access) even though the load will not
                           update its destination register. Debuggers should consider
                           this when setting such breakpoints on, for example,
                           memory-mapped I/O addresses.

                           If an instruction matches this trigger and the instruction
                           performs multiple memory accesses, it is UNSPECIFIED
                           which memory accesses have completed before the trigger
                           fires.

                           1 (after): The action for this trigger will be taken after the
                           instruction that triggered it is retired. It should be taken
                           before the next instruction is retired, but it is better to
                           implement triggers imprecisely than to not implement
                           them at all. xepc or dpc (depending on action) must be set
                           to the virtual address of the next instruction that must be
                           executed to preserve the program flow.

                           Most hardware will only implement one timing or the
                           other, possibly dependent on select, execute, load, and
                           store. This bit primarily exists for the hardware to
                           communicate to the debugger what will happen. Hardware
                           may implement the bit fully writable, in which case the
                           debugger has a little more control.

                           Data load triggers with timing of 0 will result in the same
                           load happening again when the debugger lets the hart run.
                           For data load triggers, debuggers must first attempt to set
                           the breakpoint with timing of 1.

                           If a trigger with timing of 0 matches, it is implementation-
                           dependent whether that prevents a trigger with timing of 1
                           matching as well.

Field    Description                                                     Access       Reset
sizelo   This field contains the 2 low bits of the access size. The WARL                0
         high bits come from sizehi. The combined value is
         interpreted as follows:

         0 (any): The trigger will attempt to match against an
         access of any size. The behavior is only well-defined if
         select=0, or if the access size is XLEN.

         1 (8bit): The trigger will only match against 8-bit memory
         accesses.

         2 (16bit): The trigger will only match against 16-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 16-bit instructions.

         3 (32bit): The trigger will only match against 32-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 32-bit instructions.

         4 (48bit): The trigger will only match against execution of
         48-bit instructions.

         5 (64bit): The trigger will only match against 64-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 64-bit instructions.

         6 (80bit): The trigger will only match against execution of
         80-bit instructions.

         7 (96bit): The trigger will only match against execution of
         96-bit instructions.

         8 (112bit): The trigger will only match against execution of
         112-bit instructions.

         9 (128bit): The trigger will only match against 128-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 128-bit instructions.

         An implementation must support the value of 0, but all
         other values are optional. When an implementation
         supports address triggers (select=0), it is recommended
         that those triggers support every access size that the hart
         supports, as well as for every instruction size that the hart
         supports.

         Implementations such as RV32D or RV64V are able to
         perform loads and stores that are wider than XLEN.
         Custom extensions may also support instructions that are
         wider than XLEN. Because tdata2 is of size XLEN, there is
         a known limitation that data value triggers (select=1) can
         only be supported for access sizes up to XLEN bits. When
         an implementation supports data value triggers (select=1),
         it is recommended that those triggers support every access
         size up to XLEN that the hart supports, as well as for every
         instruction length up to XLEN that the hart supports.

Field                     Description                                                        Access   Reset
 action                   The action to take when the trigger fires. The values are WARL               0
                          explained in Table 12.
 chain                    0 (disabled): When this trigger matches, the configured WARL                 0
                          action is taken.

                          1 (enabled): While this trigger does not match, it prevents
                          the trigger with the next index from matching.

                          A trigger chain starts on the first trigger with chain=1 after
                          a trigger with chain=0, or simply on the first trigger if that
                          has chain=1. It ends on the first trigger after that which
                          has chain=0. This final trigger is part of the chain. The
                          action on all but the final trigger is ignored. The action on
                          that final trigger will be taken if and only if all the triggers
                          in the chain match at the same time.

                          Debuggers should not terminate a chain with a trigger
                          with a different type. It is undefined when exactly such a
                          chain fires.

                          Because chain affects the next trigger, hardware must zero
                          it in writes to mcontrol that set dmode to 0 if the next
                          trigger has dmode of 1. In addition hardware should ignore
                          writes to mcontrol that set dmode to 1 if the previous
                          trigger has both dmode of 0 and chain of 1. Debuggers
                          must avoid the latter case by checking chain on the
                          previous trigger if they’re writing mcontrol.

                          Implementations that wish to limit the maximum length
                          of a trigger chain (eg. to meet timing requirements) may
                          do so by zeroing chain in writes to mcontrol that would
                          make the chain too long.

Field   Description                                                       Access       Reset
match   0 (equal): Matches when any compare value equals tdata2.          WARL           0

        1 (napot): Matches when the top M bits of any compare
        value match the top M bits of tdata2. M is XLEN-1 minus the
        index of the least-significant bit containing 0 in tdata2.
        Debuggers should only write values to tdata2 such that M +
        maskmax ≥ XLEN and M > 0, otherwise it’s undefined on
        what conditions the trigger will match.

        2 (ge): Matches when any compare value is greater than
        (unsigned) or equal to tdata2.

        3 (lt): Matches when any compare value is less than
        (unsigned) tdata2.

        4 (mask low): Matches when                    of any compare
        value equals                of tdata2 after                  of
        the compare value is ANDed with XLEN-1:             of tdata2.

        5 (mask high): Matches when XLEN-1:                    of any
        compare value equals                 of tdata2 after XLEN-1
        :        of the compare value is ANDed with XLEN-1
        :       of tdata2.

        8 (not equal): Matches when match=0 would not match.

        9 (not napot): Matches when match=1 would not match.

        12 (not mask low): Matches when match=4 would not
        match.

        13 (not mask high): Matches when match=5 would not
        match.

        Other values are reserved for future use.

        All comparisons only look at the lower XLEN (in the
        current mode) bits of the compare values and of tdata2.
        When select=1 and access size is N, this is further reduced,
        and comparisons only look at the lower N bits of the
        compare values and of tdata2.
m       When set, enable this trigger in M-mode.                          WARL           0
s       When set, enable this trigger in S/HS-mode. This bit is WARL                     0
        hard-wired to 0 if the hart does not support S-mode.
u       When set, enable this trigger in U-mode. This bit is hard- WARL                  0
        wired to 0 if the hart does not support U-mode.

Field                      Description                                                    Access     Reset
 execute                   When set, the trigger fires on the virtual address or opcode WARL           0
                           of an instruction that is executed.
 store                     When set, the trigger fires on the virtual address or data of WARL          0
                           any store.
 load                      When set, the trigger fires on the virtual address or data of WARL          0
                           any load.

5.7.12. Match Control Type 6 (mcontrol6, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata1 when type is 6.

Implementing this trigger as described here requires that version is 1 or higher, which in turn means
tinfo must be implemented.

This replaces mcontrol in newer implementations and serves to provide additional functionality.

Address and data trigger implementation are heavily dependent on how the processor core is
implemented. To accommodate various implementations, execute, load, and store address/data
triggers may fire at whatever point in time is most convenient for the implementation.

Table 15 suggests timings for the best user experience. The underlying principle is that firing just
before the instruction gives a user more insight, so is preferable. However, depending on the
instruction and conditions, it might not be possible to evaluate the trigger until the instruction has
partially executed. In that case it is better to let the instruction retire before the trigger fires, to avoid
extra memory accesses which might affect the state of the system.

                                          Table 15. Suggested Trigger Timings
                                              Match Type Suggested Trigger Timing
                                          Execute Address Before
                                     Execute Instruction Before
                          Execute Address+Instruction Before
                                             Load Address Before
                                                 Load Data After
                                     Load Address+Data After
                                             Store Address Before
                                                Store Data Before
                                     Store Address+Data Before

A chain of triggers must only fire if every trigger in the chain was matched by the same instruction.

The Privileged Spec says that breakpoint exceptions that occur on instruction fetches, loads, or stores
update the tval CSR with either zero or the faulting virtual address. The faulting virtual address for
an mcontrol6 trigger with action=0 is the address being accessed and which caused that trigger to fire.

If multiple mcontrol6 triggers are chained then the faulting virtual address is the address which
caused any of the chained triggers to fire.

In implementations that support match mode 1 (NAPOT), not all NAPOT ranges may be supported. All
NAPOT ranges between and                are supported where            . The value of maskmax6
can be determined by the debugger via the following sequence:

 1. Write tdata1=0, in case the current tdata2 value is not supported with mcontrol6 triggers.
 2. Write tdata2=0, which is always supported with mcontrol6 triggers.
3. Write tdata1 with type=mcontrol6 and match=1.
 4. Read match. If it is not 1 then NAPOT matching is not supported.
5. Write all ones to tdata2.
6. Read tdata2. The value of maskmax6 is the index of the most significant 0 bit plus 1.

If textra32 or textra64 are implemented for this trigger, it only matches when the conditions set there
are satisfied.

                        uncertain and uncertainen exist to accommodate systems where not every memory access
                        is fully observed by the Trigger Module. Possible examples include data values in far
                        AMOs, and the address/data/size of accesses by instructions that perform multiple
                        memory accesses, such as vector, push, and pop instructions.
   
                        While the uncertain mechanism exists to deal with these situations, it can lead to an
                        unusable number of false positives. Users will get a much better debug experience if the
                        TM does have perfect visibility into the details of every memory access.

This CSR is read/write.
       XLEN-1       XLEN-4        XLEN-5      XLEN-6 27         26             25       24   23      22                21          20       19       18               16

            type                  dmode         0          uncertain           hit1    vs vu         hit0             select            0                 size

                4                   1        XLEN - 32            1             1       1        1    1                 1               2                  3

      15                     12         11      10                     7   6                 5              4     3            2                 1               0

            action                   chain                match            m          uncertainen           s    u          execute          store             load

                    4                    1                  4              1                 1              1     1            1                 1               1

Field                                   Description                                                                                         Access         Reset
 uncertain                              If implemented, the TM updates this field every time the WARL                                                            0
                                        trigger fires.

                                        0 (certain): The trigger that fired satisfied the configured
                                        conditions, or this bit is not implemented.

                                        1 (uncertain): The trigger that fired might not have
                                        perfectly satisfied the configured conditions. Due to the
                                        implementation the hardware cannot be certain.
 vs                                     When set, enable this trigger in VS-mode. This bit is hard- WARL                                                         0
                                        wired to 0 if the hart does not support virtualization mode.
 vu                                     When set, enable this trigger in VU-mode. This bit is hard- WARL                                                         0
                                        wired to 0 if the hart does not support virtualization mode.

Field                     Description                                                    Access   Reset
 hit0                     If they are implemented, hit1 (MSB) and hit0 (LSB) WARL                  0
                          combine into a single 2-bit field. The TM updates this field
                          when the trigger fires. After the debugger has seen the
                          update, it will normally write 0 to this field to so it can see
                          future changes.

                          If either of the bits is not implemented,               the
                          unimplemented bits will be read-only 0.

                          0 (false): The trigger did not fire.

                          1 (before): The trigger fired before the instruction that
                          matched it was retired, but after all preceding instructions
                          are retired. This explicitly allows for instructions to be
                          partially executed, as described in Section 5.6.

                          xepc or dpc (depending on action) must be set to the
                          virtual address of the instruction that matched.

                          2 (after): The trigger fired after the instruction that
                          triggered and at least one additional instruction were
                          retired. xepc or dpc (depending on action) must be set to
                          the virtual address of the next instruction that must be
                          executed to preserve the program flow.

                          3 (immediately after): The trigger fired just after the
                          instruction that triggered it was retired, but before any
                          subsequent instructions were executed. xepc or dpc
                          (depending on action) must be set to the virtual address of
                          the next instruction that must be executed to preserve the
                          program flow.

                          If the instruction performed multiple memory accesses, all
                          of them have been completed.
 select                   This bit determines the contents of the XLEN-bit compare WARL            0
                          values.

                          0 (address): There is at least one compare value and it
                          contains the lowest virtual address of the access. In
                          addition, it is recommended that there are additional
                          compare values for the other accessed virtual addresses
                          match. (E.g. on a 32-bit read from 0x4000, the lowest
                          address is 0x4000 and the other addresses are 0x4001,
                          0x4002, and 0x4003.)

                          1 (data): There is exactly one compare value and it contains
                          the data value loaded or stored, or the instruction
                          executed. Any bits beyond the size of the data access will
                          contain 0.

Field    Description                                                     Access       Reset
size     0 (any): The trigger will attempt to match against an WARL                     0
         access of any size. The behavior is only well-defined if
         select=0, or if the access size is XLEN.

         1 (8bit): The trigger will only match against 8-bit memory
         accesses.

         2 (16bit): The trigger will only match against 16-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 16-bit instructions.

         3 (32bit): The trigger will only match against 32-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 32-bit instructions.

         4 (48bit): The trigger will only match against execution of
         48-bit instructions.

         5 (64bit): The trigger will only match against 64-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 64-bit instructions.

         6 (128bit): The trigger will only match against 128-bit
         memory accesses or execution of 128-bit instructions.

         An implementation must support the value of 0, but all
         other values are optional. When an implementation
         supports address triggers (select=0), it is recommended
         that those triggers support every access size that the hart
         supports, as well as for every instruction size that the hart
         supports.

         Implementations such as RV32D or RV64V are able to
         perform loads and stores that are wider than XLEN.
         Custom extensions may also support instructions that are
         wider than XLEN. Because tdata2 is of size XLEN, there is
         a known limitation that data value triggers (select=1) can
         only be supported for access sizes up to XLEN bits. When
         an implementation supports data value triggers (select=1),
         it is recommended that those triggers support every access
         size up to XLEN that the hart supports, as well as for every
         instruction length up to XLEN that the hart supports.
action   The action to take when the trigger fires. The values are WARL                 0
         explained in Table 12.

Field                     Description                                                        Access   Reset
 chain                    0 (disabled): When this trigger matches, the configured WARL                 0
                          action is taken.

                          1 (enabled): While this trigger does not match, it prevents
                          the trigger with the next index from matching.

                          A trigger chain starts on the first trigger with chain=1 after
                          a trigger with chain=0, or simply on the first trigger if that
                          has chain=1. It ends on the first trigger after that which
                          has chain=0. This final trigger is part of the chain. The
                          action on all but the final trigger is ignored. The action on
                          that final trigger will be taken if and only if all the triggers
                          in the chain match at the same time.

                          Debuggers should not terminate a chain with a trigger
                          with a different type. It is undefined when exactly such a
                          chain fires.

                          Because chain affects the next trigger, hardware must zero
                          it in writes to mcontrol6 that set dmode to 0 if the next
                          trigger has dmode of 1. In addition hardware should ignore
                          writes to mcontrol6 that set dmode to 1 if the previous
                          trigger has both dmode of 0 and chain of 1. Debuggers
                          must avoid the latter case by checking chain on the
                          previous trigger if they’re writing mcontrol6.

                          Implementations that wish to limit the maximum length
                          of a trigger chain (eg. to meet timing requirements) may
                          do so by zeroing chain in writes to mcontrol6 that would
                          make the chain too long.

Field   Description                                                       Access      Reset
match   0 (equal): Matches when any compare value equals tdata2.          WARL          0

        1 (napot): Matches when the top M bits of any compare
        value match the top M bits of tdata2. M is XLEN-1 minus the
        index of the least-significant bit containing 0 in tdata2.
        tdata2 is WARL and if bits maskmax6-1:0 are written with
        all ones then bit maskmax6-1 will be set to 0 while the
        values of bits maskmax6-2:0 are UNSPECIFIED. Legal
        values for tdata2 require M + maskmax6 ≥ XLEN and M > 0.
        See above for how to determine maskmax6.

        2 (ge): Matches when any compare value is greater than
        (unsigned) or equal to tdata2.

        3 (lt): Matches when any compare value is less than
        (unsigned) tdata2.

        4 (mask low): Matches when                    of any compare
        value equals                of tdata2 after                  of
        the compare value is ANDed with XLEN-1:             of tdata2.

        5 (mask high): Matches when XLEN-1:                    of any
        compare value equals                 of tdata2 after XLEN-1
        :        of the compare value is ANDed with XLEN-1
        :       of tdata2.

        8 (not equal): Matches when match =0 would not match.

        9 (not napot): Matches when match =1 would not match.

        12 (not mask low): Matches when match =4 would not
        match.

        13 (not mask high): Matches when match =5 would not
        match.

        Other values are reserved for future use.

        All comparisons only look at the lower XLEN (in the
        current mode) bits of the compare values and of tdata2.
        When select=1 and access size is N, this is further reduced,
        and comparisons only look at the lower N bits of the
        compare values and of tdata2.
m       When set, enable this trigger in M-mode.                          WARL          0

Field                     Description                                                     Access     Reset
 uncertainen              0 (disabled): This trigger will only match if the hardware WARL              0
                          can perfectly evaluate it.

                          1 (enabled): This trigger will match if it’s possible that it
                          would match if the Trigger Module had perfect
                          information about the operations being performed.
 s                        When set, enable this trigger in S/HS-mode. This bit is WARL                 0
                          hard-wired to 0 if the hart does not support S-mode.
 u                        When set, enable this trigger in U-mode. This bit is hard- WARL              0
                          wired to 0 if the hart does not support U-mode.
 execute                  When set, the trigger fires on the virtual address or opcode WARL            0
                          of an instruction that is executed.
 store                    When set, the trigger fires on the virtual address or data of WARL           0
                          any store.
 load                     When set, the trigger fires on the virtual address or data of WARL           0
                          any load.

5.7.13. Instruction Count (icount, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata1 when type is 3.

This trigger matches when:

 1. An instruction retires after having been fetched in a privilege mode where the trigger is enabled.
    This explicitly includes all RET instructions from various modes.
 2. A trap is taken from a privilege mode where the trigger is enabled. This explicitly includes traps
    taken due to interrupts.

If more than one of the above events occur during a single instruction execution, the trigger still only
matches once for that instruction.

                 For use in single step, icount must match for traps where the instruction will not be
                 reexecuted after the handler, such as illegal instructions that are emulated by privileged
                 software and the instruction being emulated never retires. Ideally, icount would not match
                for traps where the instruction will later be retried by the handler, such as page faults
                 where privileged software modifies the page tables and returns to the faulting instruction
                 which ultimately retires. Trying to distinguish the two cases leads to complex rules, so
                 instead the rule is simply that all traps match. See also Section 4.5.2.

When count is greater than 1 and the trigger matches, then count is decremented by 1.

When count is 1 and the trigger matches, then pending becomes set. In addition count will become 0
unless it is hard-wired to 1.

The only exception to the above is when the instruction the trigger matched on is a write to the icount
trigger. In that case pending might or might not become set if count was 1. Afterwards count contains

the newly written value.

When count is 0 it stays at 0 until explicitly written.

When pending is set, the trigger fires just before any further instructions are executed in a mode
where the trigger is enabled. As the trigger fires, pending is cleared. In addition, if count is hard-wired
to 1 then m, s, u, vs, and vu are all cleared.

If the trigger fires with action=0 then zero is written to the tval CSR on the breakpoint trap.

                        The intent of pending is to cleanly handle the case where action is 0, m is 0, u is 1, count is
                        1, and the U-mode instruction being executed causes a trap into M-mode. In that case we
                       want the entire M-mode handler to be executed, and the debug trap to be taken before the
                        next U-mode instruction.

                        This trigger type is intended to be used as a single step for software monitor programs or
                       native debug. Systems that support multiple privilege modes that want to debug software
                        running in lower privilege modes don’t need to support count greater than 1.

If textra32 or textra64 are implemented for this trigger, it only matches when the conditions set there
are satisfied.

This CSR is read/write.
       XLEN-1       XLEN-4     XLEN-5    XLEN-6 27   26   25   24   23            10   9       8      7   6   5                 0

            type              dmode        0         vs vu hit           count         m    pending   s   u        action

                4                1      XLEN - 32    1    1    1          14           1       1      1   1          6

Field                             Description                                                             Access      Reset
 vs                               When set, enable this trigger in VS-mode. This bit is hard- WARL                          0
                                  wired to 0 if the hart does not support virtualization mode.
 vu                               When set, enable this trigger in VU-mode. This bit is hard- WARL                          0
                                  wired to 0 if the hart does not support virtualization mode.
 hit                              If this bit is implemented, the hardware sets it when this WARL                           0
                                  trigger fires. The trigger’s user can set or clear it at any
                                  time. It is used to determine which trigger(s) fires. If the
                                  bit is not implemented, it is always 0 and writing it has no
                                  effect.
 count                            The trigger will generally fire after count instructions in WARL                          1
                                  enabled modes have been executed. See above for the
                                  precise behavior.
 m                                When set, enable this trigger in M-mode.                                WARL              0
 pending                          This bit becomes set when count is decremented from 1 to                R/W               0
                                  0. It is cleared when the trigger fires, which will happen
                                  just before executing the next instruction in one of the
                                  enabled modes.
 s                                When set, enable this trigger in S/HS-mode. This bit is WARL                              0
                                  hard-wired to 0 if the hart does not support S-mode.

Field                           Description                                                              Access         Reset
 u                              When set, enable this trigger in U-mode. This bit is hard- WARL                            0
                                wired to 0 if the hart does not support U-mode.
 action                         The action to take when the trigger fires. The values are WARL                             0
                                explained in Table 12.

5.7.14. Interrupt Trigger (itrigger, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata1 when type is 4.

This trigger can fire when an interrupt trap is taken.

It can be enabled for individual interrupt numbers by setting the bit corresponding to the interrupt
number in tdata2. The interrupt number is interpreted in the mode that the trap handler executes in.
(E.g. virtualized interrupt numbers are not the same in every mode.) In addition the trigger can be
enabled for non-maskable interrupts using nmi.

                       If XLEN is 32, then it is not possible to set a trigger for interrupts with Exception Code
                       larger than 31. A future version of the RISC-V Privileged Spec will likely define interrupt
                      Exception Codes 32 through 47. Some of those numbers are already being used by the
                       RISC-V Advanced Interrupt Architecture.

Hardware may only support a subset of interrupts for this trigger. A debugger must read back tdata2
after writing it to confirm the requested functionality is actually supported.

When the trigger matches, it fires after the trap occurs, just before the first instruction of the trap
handler is executed. If action=0, the standard CSRs are updated for taking the breakpoint trap, and
zero is written to the relevant tval CSR. If the breakpoint trap does not go to a higher privilege mode,
this will lose CSR information for the original trap. See Section 5.4 for more information about this
case.

If textra32 or textra64 are implemented for this trigger, it only matches when the conditions set there
are satisfied.

This CSR is read/write.
        XLEN-1       XLEN-4    XLEN-5    XLEN-6     XLEN-7               13   12   11   10   9   8   7   6   5                 0

             type             dmode        hit                  0             vs vu nmi m        0   s   u        action

                 4               1         1                 XLEN - 19        1    1    1    1   1   1   1          6

Field                           Description                                                              Access         Reset
 hit                            If this bit is implemented, the hardware sets it when this WARL                            0
                                trigger matches. The trigger’s user can set or clear it at any
                                time. It is used to determine which trigger(s) matched. If
                                the bit is not implemented, it is always 0 and writing it has
                                no effect.

Field                     Description                                                     Access       Reset
 vs                       When set, enable this trigger for interrupts that are taken WARL               0
                          from VS mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart does
                          not support virtualization mode.
 vu                       When set, enable this trigger for interrupts that are taken WARL               0
                          from VU mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart does
                          not support virtualization mode.
 nmi                      When set, non-maskable interrupts cause this trigger to WARL                   0
                          fire if the trigger is enabled for the current mode.
 m                        When set, enable this trigger for interrupts that are taken WARL               0
                          from M mode.
 s                        When set, enable this trigger for interrupts that are taken WARL               0
                          from S/HS mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart
                          does not support S-mode.
 u                        When set, enable this trigger for interrupts that are taken WARL               0
                          from U mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart does
                          not support U-mode.
 action                   The action to take when the trigger fires. The values are WARL                 0
                          explained in Table 12.

5.7.15. Exception Trigger (etrigger, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata1 when type is 5.

This trigger may fire on up to XLEN of the Exception Codes defined in mcause (described in the
Privileged Spec, with Interrupt=0). Those causes are configured by writing the corresponding bit in
tdata2. (E.g. to trap on an illegal instruction, the debugger sets bit 2 in tdata2.)

               If XLEN is 32, then it is not possible to set a trigger on Exception Codes higher than 31. A
              future version of the RISC-V Privileged Spec will likely define Exception Codes 32 through
               47.

Hardware may support only a subset of exceptions. A debugger must read back tdata2 after writing it
to confirm the requested functionality is actually supported.

When the trigger matches, it fires after the trap occurs, just before the first instruction of the trap
handler is executed. If action=0, the standard CSRs are updated for taking the breakpoint trap, and
zero is written to the relevant tval CSR. If the breakpoint trap does not go to a higher privilege mode,
this will lose CSR information for the original trap. See Section 5.4 for more information about this
case.

If textra32 or textra64 are implemented for this trigger, it only matches when the conditions set there
are satisfied.

This CSR is read/write.

        XLEN-1       XLEN-4   XLEN-5   XLEN-6    XLEN-7               13   12   11   10   9   8   7   6   5                 0

             type             dmode       hit                0             vs vu     0    m   0   s   u        action

                 4              1         1               XLEN - 19        1    1    1    1   1   1   1          6

Field                          Description                                                            Access         Reset
 hit                           If this bit is implemented, the hardware sets it when this WARL                          0
                               trigger matches. The trigger’s user can set or clear it at any
                               time. It is used to determine which trigger(s) matched. If
                               the bit is not implemented, it is always 0 and writing it has
                               no effect.
 vs                            When set, enable this trigger for exceptions that are taken WARL                         0
                               from VS mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart does
                               not support virtualization mode.
 vu                            When set, enable this trigger for exceptions that are taken WARL                         0
                               from VU mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart does
                               not support virtualization mode.
 m                             When set, enable this trigger for exceptions that are taken WARL                         0
                               from M mode.
 s                             When set, enable this trigger for exceptions that are taken WARL                         0
                               from S/HS mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart
                               does not support S-mode.
 u                             When set, enable this trigger for exceptions that are taken WARL                         0
                               from U mode. This bit is hard-wired to 0 if the hart does
                               not support U-mode.
 action                        The action to take when the trigger fires. The values are WARL                           0
                               explained in Table 12.

5.7.16. External Trigger (tmexttrigger, at 0x7a1)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata1 when type is 7.

This trigger fires when any selected TM external trigger input signals. Up to 16 TM external trigger
inputs coming from other blocks outside the TM, (e.g. signaling an hpmcounter overflow) can be
selected. Hardware may support none or just a few TM external trigger inputs (starting with TM
external trigger input 0 and continuing sequentially). Unsupported inputs are hardwired to be
inactive.

If the trigger fires with action=0 then zero is written to the tval CSR on the breakpoint trap. This
trigger fires asynchronously but it is subject to delegation by medeleg[3] like the other triggers.

The TM external trigger input can signal when the trigger is prevented from firing due to one of the
mechanisms in Section 5.4. An implementation may either ignore the signal altogether when it cannot
fire (dropping the trigger event) or it may hold the action as pending and fire the trigger once it is legal
to do so.

                      intctl is intended to be used by the clicinttrig mechanism from the Core-Local

                        Interrupt Controller (CLIC) RISC-V Privileged Architecture Extensions.

This CSR is read/write.
       XLEN-1       XLEN-4        XLEN-5          XLEN-6         XLEN-7           23         22          21                       6   5                      0

            type                  dmode            hit                    0                 intctl                 select                     action

                4                   1               1                XLEN - 29                1                     16                             6

Field                               Description                                                                                   Access               Reset
 hit                                If this bit is implemented, the hardware sets it when this WARL                                                     0
                                    trigger matches. The trigger’s user can set or clear it at any
                                    time. It is used to determine which trigger(s) matched. If
                                    the bit is not implemented, it is always 0 and writing it has
                                    no effect.
 intctl                             This optional bit, when set, causes this trigger to fire WARL                                                       0
                                    whenever an attached interrupt controller signals a trigger.
 select                             Selects any combination of up to 16 TM external trigger WARL                                                        0
                                    inputs that cause this trigger to fire.
 action                             The action to take when the trigger fires. The values are WARL                                                      0
                                    explained in Table 12.

5.7.17. Trigger Extra (RV32) (textra32, at 0x7a3)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata3 when type is 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 and XLEN=32.

If DXLEN >= 64, then this register provides access to the low bits of each field defined in textra64.
Writes to this register will clear the high bits of the corresponding fields in textra64.

All functionality in this register is optional. Any number of upper bits of mhvalue and svalue may be
tied to 0. mhselect and sselect may only support 0 (ignore).

Byte-granular comparison of scontext to svalue allows scontext to be defined to include more than one
element of comparison. For example, software instrumentation can program the scontext value to be
the concatenation of different ID contexts such as process ID and thread ID. The user can then
program byte compares based on sbytemask to include one or more of the contexts in the compare.

Byte masking only applies to scontext comparison; i.e when sselect is 1.

                        Note that sselect and mhselect filtering apply in all modes, including M-mode and S-
                       mode. If desired, debuggers can use a trigger’s mode filtering bits to restrict the matching
                        to modes where it considers ASID/VMID/scontext/hcontext to be active.

This CSR is read/write.
    31                       26   25                       23   22                     20   19           18   17                          2    1             0

           mhvalue                         mhselect                           0             sbytemask                    svalue                    sselect

                    6                         3                               3                      2                      16                          2

Field                     Description                                                     Access   Reset
 mhvalue                  Data used together with mhselect.                               WARL      0
 mhselect                 0 (ignore): Ignore mhvalue.                                     WARL      0

                          4 (mcontext): This trigger will only match or fire if the low
                          bits of mcontext/hcontext equal mhvalue.

                          1, 5 (mcontext_select): This trigger will only match or fire
                          if the low bits of mcontext/hcontext equal {mhvalue,
                          mhselect[2]}.

                          2, 6 (vmid_select): This trigger will only match or fire if
                          VMID in hgatp equals the lower VMIDMAX (defined in the
                          Privileged Spec) bits of {mhvalue, mhselect[2]}.

                          3, 7 (reserved): Reserved.

                          If the H extension is not supported, the only legal values
                          are 0 and 4.
 sbytemask                When the least significant bit of this field is 1, it causes bits WARL    0
                          7:0 in the comparison to be ignored, when sselect=1. When
                          the next most significant bit of this field is 1, it causes bits
                          15:8 to be ignored in the comparison, when sselect=1.
 svalue                   Data used together with sselect.                                WARL      0

                          This field should be tied to 0 when S-mode is not
                          supported.
 sselect                  0 (ignore): Ignore svalue.                                      WARL      0

                          1 (scontext): This trigger will only match or fire if the low
                          bits of scontext equal svalue.

                          2 (asid): This trigger will only match or fire if:

                            • the mode is VS-mode or VU-mode and ASID in vsatp
                              equals the lower ASIDMAX (defined in the Privileged
                              Spec) bits of svalue.
                            • in all other modes, ASID in satp equals the lower
                              ASIDMAX (defined in the Privileged Spec) bits of
                              svalue.

                          This field should be tied to 0 when S-mode is not
                          supported.

5.7.18. Trigger Extra (RV64) (textra64, at 0x7a3)
This register provides access to the trigger selected by tselect. The reset values listed here apply to
every underlying trigger.

This register is accessible as tdata3 when type is 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 and XLEN=64. The function of the

fields are defined above, in textra32. This register retains its value when XLEN changes. When
XLEN=32 some of the bits can be accessed through textra32.

Byte-granular comparison of scontext to svalue in textra64 allows scontext to be defined to include
more than one element of comparison. For example, software instrumentation can program the
scontext value to be the concatenation of different ID contexts such as process ID and thread ID. The
user can then program byte compares based on sbytemask to include one or more of the contexts in
the compare.

Byte masking only applies to scontext comparison; i.e when sselect is 1.

This CSR is read/write.
   63               51   50              48   47       40   39               36   35        34   33                         2   1             0

         mhvalue              mhselect             0             sbytemask              0                 svalue                    sselect

           13                    3                 8                 4                  2                   32                        2

Field                     Description                                                                              Access       Reset
 sbytemask                When the least significant bit of this field is 1, it causes bits WARL                                    0
                          7:0 in the comparison to be ignored, when sselect=1.
                          Likewise, the second bit controls the comparison of bits
                          15:8, third bit controls the comparison of bits 23:16, and
                          fourth bit controls the comparison of bits 31:24.

