
Preface
       Introduction

       Changes from the Second Edition

       Using This Book

       Source Code and Errata Availability

       Acknowledgments

Introduction
This book is for people who want to write programs that communicate with each other
using an application program interface (API) known as sockets. Some readers may be very
familiar with sockets already, as that model has become synonymous with network
programming. Others may need an introduction to sockets from the ground up. The goal of
this book is to offer guidance on network programming for beginners as well as
professionals, for those developing new network-aware applications as well as those
maintaining existing code, and for people who simply want to understand how the
networking components of their system function.

All the examples in this text are actual, runnable code tested on Unix systems. However,
many non-Unix systems support the sockets API and the examples are largely operating
system-independent, as are the general concepts we present. Virtually every operating
system (OS) provides numerous network-aware applications such as Web browsers, email
clients, and file-sharing servers. We discuss the usual partitioning of these applications
into client and server and write our own small examples of these many times throughout
the text.

Presenting this material in a Unix-oriented fashion has the natural side effect of providing
background on Unix itself, and on TCP/IP as well. Where more extensive background may
be interesting, we refer the reader to other texts. Four texts are so commonly mentioned in
this book that we've assigned them the following abbreviations:

       APUE: Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment [Stevens 1992]

       TCPv1: TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 1 [Stevens 1994]

       TCPv2: TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 2 [Wright and Stevens 1995]

       TCPv3: TCP/IP Illustrated, Volume 3 [Stevens 1996]

TCPv2 contains a high level of detail very closely related to the material in this book, as it
describes and presents the actual 4.4BSD implementation of the network programming
functions for the sockets API (socket, bind, connect, and so on). If one understands the
implementation of a feature, the use of that feature in an application makes more sense.

Changes from the Second Edition
Sockets have been around, more or less in their current form, since the 1980s, and it is a
tribute to their initial design that they have continued to be the network API of choice.
Therefore, it may come as a surprise to learn that quite a bit has changed since the second
edition of this book was published in 1998. The changes we've made to the text are
summarized as follows:

       This new edition contains updated information on IPv6, which was only in draft form
        at the time of publication of the second edition and has evolved somewhat.

       The descriptions of functions and the examples have all been updated to reflect the
        most recent POSIX specification (POSIX 1003.1-2001), also known as the Single
        Unix Specification Version 3.

       The coverage of the X/Open Transport Interface (XTI) has been dropped. That API
        has fallen out of common use and even the most recent POSIX specification does
        not bother to cover it.

       The coverage of TCP for transactions (T/TCP) has been dropped.

       Three chapters have been added to describe a relatively new transport protocol,
        SCTP. This reliable, message-oriented protocol provides multiple streams between
        endpoints and transport-level support for multihoming. It was originally designed
        for transport of telephony signaling across the Internet, but provides some features
        that many applications could take advantage of.

       A chapter has been added on key management sockets, which may be used with
        Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) and other network security services.

       The machines used, as well as the versions of their variants of Unix, have all been
        updated, and the examples have been updated to reflect how these machines
        behave. In many cases, examples were updated because OS vendors fixed bugs or
        added features, but as one might expect, we've discovered the occasional new bug
        here and there. The machines used for testing the examples in this book were:

           o   Apple Power PC running MacOS/X 10.2.6

           o   HP PA-RISC running HP-UX 11i

           o   IBM Power PC running AIX 5.1

           o   Intel x86 running FreeBSD 4.8

           o   Intel x86 running Linux 2.4.7

           o   Sun SPARC running FreeBSD 5.1

           o   Sun SPARC running Solaris 9

See Figure 1.16 for details on how these machines were used.

Volume 2 of this UNIX Network Programming series, subtitled Interprocess
Communications, builds on the material presented here to cover message passing,
synchronization, shared memory, and remote procedure calls.

Using This Book
This text can be used as either a tutorial on network programming or as a reference for
experienced programmers. When used as a tutorial or for an introductory class on network
programming, the emphasis should be on Part 2, "Elementary Sockets" (Chapters 3
through 11), followed by whatever additional topics are of interest. Part 2 covers the basic
socket functions for both TCP and UDP, along with SCTP, I/O multiplexing, socket options,
and basic name and address conversions. Chapter 1 should be read by all readers,
especially Section 1.4, which describes some wrapper functions used throughout the text.
Chapter 2 and perhaps Appendix A should be referred to as necessary, depending on the
reader's background. Most of the chapters in Part 3, "Advanced Sockets," can be read
independently of the others in that part of the book.

To aid in the use of this book as a reference, a thorough index is provided, along with
summaries on the end papers of where to find detailed descriptions of all the functions and
structures. To help those reading topics in a random order, numerous references to related
topics are provided throughout the text.

Source Code and Errata Availability
The source code for all the examples that appear in the book is available on the Web at
www.unpbook.com. The best way to learn network programming is to take these programs,
modify them, and enhance them. Actually writing code of this form is the only way to
reinforce the concepts and techniques. Numerous exercises are also provided at the end of
each chapter, and most answers are provided in Appendix E.

A current errata for the book is also available from the same Web site.

Acknowledgments
The first and second editions of this book were written solely by W. Richard Stevens, who
passed away on September 1, 1999. His books have set a high standard and are largely
regarded as concise, laboriously detailed, and extremely readable works of art. In providing
this revision, the authors struggled to maintain the quality and thorough coverage of Rich's
earlier editions and any shortcomings in this area are entirely the fault of the new authors.

The work of an author is only as good as the support from family members and friends. Bill
Fenner would like to thank his dear wife, Peggy (beach ?mile champion), and their
housemate, Christopher Boyd for letting him off all his household chores while working in
the treehouse on this project. Thanks are also due to his friend, Jerry Winner, whose
prodding and encouragement were invaluable. Likewise, Andy Rudoff wants to specifically
thank his wife, Ellen, and girls, Jo and Katie, for their understanding and encouragement
throughout this project. We simply could not have done this without all of you.

Randall Stewart with Cisco Systems, Inc. provided much of the SCTP material and
deserves a special acknowledgment for this much-valued contribution. The coverage of this
new and interesting topic simply would not exist without Randall's work.

The feedback from our reviewers was invaluable for catching errors, pointing out areas that
required more explanation, and suggesting improvements to our text and code examples.
The authors would like to thank: James Carlson, Wu-Chang Feng, Rick Jones, Brian
Kernighan, Sam Leffler, John McCann, Craig Metz, Ian Lance Taylor, David Schwartz, and
Gary Wright.

Numerous individuals and their organizations went beyond the normal call of duty to
provide either a loaner system, software, or access to a system, all of which were used to
test some of the examples in the text.

       Jessie Haug of IBM Austin provided an AIX system and compilers.

       Rick Jones and William Gilliam of Hewlett-Packard provided access to multiple
        systems running HP-UX.

The staff at Addison Wesley has been a true pleasure to work with: Noreen Regina,
Kathleen Caren, Dan DePasquale, Anthony Gemellaro, and a very special thanks to our
editor, Mary Franz.

In a trend that Rich Stevens instituted (but contrary to popular fads), we produced
camera-ready copy of the book using the wonderful Groff package written by James Clark,
created the illustrations using the gpic program (using many of Gary Wright's macros),
produced the tables using the gtbl program, performed all the indexing, and did the final
page layout. Dave Hanson's loom program and some scripts by Gary Wright were used to
include the source code in the book. A set of awk scripts written by Jon Bentley and Brian
Kernighan helped in producing the final index.

The authors welcome electronic mail from any readers with comments, suggestions, or bug
fixes.

Bill enner
Woodside, alifornia

Andrew . udoff
Boulder, olorado

October?003
authors@unpbook.com

http://www.unpbook.com

