
Chapter 2. The Transport Layer: TCP,
UDP, and SCTP
       Section 2.1.?Introduction

       Section 2.2.?The Big Picture

       Section 2.3.?User Datagram Protocol (UDP)

       Section 2.4.?Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)

       Section 2.5.?Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)

       Section 2.6.?TCP Connection Establishment and Termination

       Section 2.7.?TIME_WAIT State

       Section 2.8.?SCTP Association Establishment and Termination

       Section 2.9.?Port Numbers

       Section 2.10.?TCP Port Numbers and Concurrent Servers

       Section 2.11.?Buffer Sizes and Limitations

       Section 2.12.?Standard Internet Services

       Section 2.13.?Protocol Usage by Common Internet Applications

       Section 2.14.?Summary

       Exercises

                                                                                Page 61

2.1 Introduction
This chapter provides an overview of the protocols in the TCP/IP suite that are used in the
examples throughout the book. Our goal is to provide enough detail from a network
programming perspective to understand how to use the protocols and provide references to
more detailed descriptions of their actual design, implementation, and history.

This chapter focuses on the transport layer: TCP, UDP, and Stream Control Transmission
Protocol (SCTP). Most client/server applications use either TCP or UDP. SCTP is a newer
protocol, originally designed for transport of telephony signaling across the Internet. These
transport protocols use the network-layer protocol IP, either IPv4 or IPv6. While it is
possible to use IPv4 or IPv6 directly, bypassing the transport layer, this technique, often
called raw sockets, is used much less frequently. Therefore, we have a more detailed
description of IPv4 and IPv6, along with ICMPv4 and ICMPv6, in Appendix A.

UDP is a simple, unreliable datagram protocol, while TCP is a sophisticated, reliable
byte-stream protocol. SCTP is similar to TCP as a reliable transport protocol, but it also
provides message boundaries, transport-level support for multihoming, and a way to
minimize head-of-line blocking. We need to understand the services provided by these
transport protocols to the application, so that we know what is handled by the protocol and
what we must handle in the application.

There are features of TCP that, when understood, make it easier for us to write robust
clients and servers. Also, when we understand these features, it becomes easier to debug
our clients and servers using commonly provided tools such as netstat. We cover various
topics in this chapter that fall into this category: TCP's three-way handshake, TCP's
connection termination sequence, and TCP's TIME_WAIT state; SCTP's four-way handshake
and SCTP's connection termination; plus SCTP, TCP, and UDP buffering by the socket layer,
and so on.

                                                                                                Page 62

2.2 The Big Picture
Although the protocol suite is called "TCP/IP," there are more members of this family than
just TCP and IP. Figure 2.1 shows an overview of these protocols.

                   Figure 2.1. Overview of TCP/IP protocols.

We show both IPv4 and IPv6 in this figure. Moving from right to left, the rightmost five
applications are using IPv6; we will talk about the AF_INET6 constant in Chapter 3, along
with the sockaddr_in6 structure. The next six applications use IPv4.

The leftmost application, tcpdump, communicates directly with the datalink using either the
BSD packet filter (BPF) or the datalink provider interface (DLPI). We mark the dashed line
beneath the nine applications on the right as the API, which is normally sockets or XTI. The
interface to either BPF or DLPI does not use sockets or XTI.

There is an exception to this, which we will describe in more detail in Chapter 28: Linux
provides access to the datalink using a special type of socket called SOCK_PACKET.

We also note in Figure 2.1 that the traceroute program uses two sockets: one for IP and
another for ICMP. In Chapter 28, we will develop IPv4 and IPv6 versions of both ping and
traceroute.

We now describe each of the protocol boxes in this figure.

 IPv4     Internet Protocol version 4. IPv4, which we often denote as just IP, has been the
          workhorse protocol of the IP suite since the early 1980s. It uses 32-bit
          addresses (Section A.4). IPv4 provides packet delivery service for TCP, UDP,
          SCTP, ICMP, and IGMP.

 IPv6     Internet Protocol version 6. IPv6 was designed in the mid-1990s as a
          replacement for IPv4. The major change is a larger address comprising 128 bits
          (Section A.5), to deal with the explosive growth of the Internet in the 1990s.
          IPv6 provides packet delivery service for TCP, UDP, SCTP, and ICMPv6.

          We often use the word "IP" as an adjective, as in IP layer and IP address, when
          the distinction between IPv4 and IPv6 is not needed.

 TCP      Transmission Control Protocol. TCP is a connection-oriented protocol that

                                                                                               Page 63

 IPv4     Internet Protocol version 4. IPv4, which we often denote as just IP, has been the
          workhorse protocol of the IP suite since the early 1980s. It uses 32-bit
          addresses (Section A.4). IPv4 provides packet delivery service for TCP, UDP,
          SCTP, ICMP, and IGMP.

          provides a reliable, full-duplex byte stream to its users. TCP sockets are an
          example of stream sockets. TCP takes care of details such as acknowledgments,
          timeouts, retransmissions, and the like. Most Internet application programs use
          TCP. Notice that TCP can use either IPv4 or IPv6.

 UDP      User Datagram Protocol. UDP is a connectionless protocol, and UDP sockets are
          an example of datagram sockets. There is no guarantee that UDP datagrams
          ever reach their intended destination. As with TCP, UDP can use either IPv4 or
          IPv6.

 SCTP     Stream Control Transmission Protocol. SCTP is a connection-oriented protocol
          that provides a reliable full-duplex association. The word "association" is used
          when referring to a connection in SCTP because SCTP is multihomed, involving a
          set of IP addresses and a single port for each side of an association. SCTP
          provides a message service, which maintains record boundaries. As with TCP
          and UDP, SCTP can use either IPv4 or IPv6, but it can also use both IPv4 and
          IPv6 simultaneously on the same association.

 ICMP     Internet Control Message Protocol. ICMP handles error and control information
          between routers and hosts. These messages are normally generated by and
          processed by the TCP/IP networking software itself, not user processes, although
          we show the ping and traceroute programs, which use ICMP. We sometimes
          refer to this protocol as ICMPv4 to distinguish it from ICMPv6.

 IGMP     Internet Group Management Protocol. IGMP is used with multicasting (Chapter
          21), which is optional with IPv4.

 ARP      Address Resolution Protocol. ARP maps an IPv4 address into a hardware address
          (such as an Ethernet address). ARP is normally used on broadcast networks such
          as Ethernet, token ring, and FDDI, and is not needed on point-to-point
          networks.

 RARP     Reverse Address Resolution Protocol. RARP maps a hardware address into an
          IPv4 address. It is sometimes used when a diskless node is booting.

 ICMPv6   Internet Control Message Protocol version 6. ICMPv6 combines the functionality
          of ICMPv4, IGMP, and ARP.

 BPF      BSD packet filter. This interface provides access to the datalink layer. It is
          normally found on Berkeley-derived kernels.

 DLPI     Datalink provider interface. This interface also provides access to the datalink
          layer. It is normally provided with SVR4.

Each Internet protocol is defined by one or more documents called a Request for
Comments (RFC), which are their formal specifications. The solution to Exercise 2.1 shows
how to obtain RFCs.

We use the terms "IPv4/IPv6 host" and "dual-stack host" to denote hosts that support both
IPv4 and IPv6.

Additional details on the TCP/IP protocols themselves are in TCPv1. The 4.4BSD

                                                                                              Page 64

implementation of TCP/IP is described in TCPv2.

                                                                                Page 65

2.3 User Datagram Protocol (UDP)
UDP is a simple transport-layer protocol. It is described in RFC 768 [Postel 1980]. The
application writes a message to a UDP socket, which is then encapsulated in a UDP
datagram, which is then further encapsulated as an IP datagram, which is then sent to its
destination. There is no guarantee that a UDP datagram will ever reach its final destination,
that order will be preserved across the network, or that datagrams arrive only once.

The problem that we encounter with network programming using UDP is its lack of
reliability. If a datagram reaches its final destination but the checksum detects an error, or
if the datagram is dropped in the network, it is not delivered to the UDP socket and is not
automatically retransmitted. If we want to be certain that a datagram reaches its
destination, we can build lots of features into our application: acknowledgments from the
other end, timeouts, retransmissions, and the like.

Each UDP datagram has a length. The length of a datagram is passed to the receiving
application along with the data. We have already mentioned that TCP is a byte-stream
protocol, without any record boundaries at all (Section 1.2), which differs from UDP.

We also say that UDP provides a connectionless service, as there need not be any
long-term relationship between a UDP client and server. For example, a UDP client can
create a socket and send a datagram to a given server and then immediately send another
datagram on the same socket to a different server. Similarly, a UDP server can receive
several datagrams on a single UDP socket, each from a different client.

                                                                                                 Page 66

2.4 Transmission Control Protocol (TCP)
The service provided by TCP to an application is different from the service provided by UDP.
TCP is described in RFC 793 [Postel 1981c], and updated by RFC 1323 [Jacobson, Braden,
and Borman 1992], RFC 2581 [Allman, Paxson, and Stevens 1999], RFC 2988 [Paxson and
Allman 2000], and RFC 3390 [Allman, Floyd, and Partridge 2002]. First, TCP provides
connections between clients and servers. A TCP client establishes a connection with a given
server, exchanges data with that server across the connection, and then terminates the
connection.

TCP also provides reliability. When TCP sends data to the other end, it requires an
acknowledgment in return. If an acknowledgment is not received, TCP automatically
retransmits the data and waits a longer amount of time. After some number of
retransmissions, TCP will give up, with the total amount of time spent trying to send data
typically between 4 and 10 minutes (depending on the implementation).

Note that TCP does not guarantee that the data will be received by the other endpoint, as
this is impossible. It delivers data to the other endpoint if possible, and notifies the user
(by giving up on retransmissions and breaking the connection) if it is not possible.
Therefore, TCP cannot be described as a 100% reliable protocol; it provides reliable
delivery of data or reliable notification of failure.

TCP contains algorithms to estimate the round-trip time (RTT) between a client and server
dynamically so that it knows how long to wait for an acknowledgment. For example, the
RTT on a LAN can be milliseconds while across a WAN, it can be seconds. Furthermore, TCP
continuously estimates the RTT of a given connection, because the RTT is affected by
variations in the network traffic.

TCP also sequences the data by associating a sequence number with every byte that it
sends. For example, assume an application writes 2,048 bytes to a TCP socket, causing TCP
to send two segments, the first containing the data with sequence numbers 1 1,024 and
the second containing the data with sequence numbers 1,025 2,048. (A segment is the
unit of data that TCP passes to IP.) If the segments arrive out of order, the receiving TCP
will reorder the two segments based on their sequence numbers before passing the data to
the receiving application. If TCP receives duplicate data from its peer (say the peer thought
a segment was lost and retransmitted it, when it wasn't really lost, the network was just
overloaded), it can detect that the data has been duplicated (from the sequence numbers),
and discard the duplicate data.

There is no reliability provided by UDP. UDP itself does not provide anything like
acknowledgments, sequence numbers, RTT estimation, timeouts, or retransmissions. If a
UDP datagram is duplicated in the network, two copies can be delivered to the receiving
host. Also, if a UDP client sends two datagrams to the same destination, they can be
reordered by the network and arrive out of order. UDP applications must handle all these
cases, as we will show in Section 22.5.

TCP provides flow control. TCP always tells its peer exactly how many bytes of data it is
willing to accept from the peer at any one time. This is called the advertised window. At
any time, the window is the amount of room currently available in the receive buffer,
guaranteeing that the sender cannot overflow the receive buffer. The window changes
dynamically over time: As data is received from the sender, the window size decreases, but
as the receiving application reads data from the buffer, the window size increases. It is
possible for the window to reach 0: when TCP's receive buffer for a socket is full and it
must wait for the application to read data from the buffer before it can take any more data
from the peer.

UDP provides no flow control. It is easy for a fast UDP sender to transmit datagrams at a
rate that the UDP receiver cannot keep up with, as we will show in Section 8.13.

                                                                                                Page 67

Finally, a TCP connection is full-duplex. This means that an application can send and
receive data in both directions on a given connection at any time. This means that TCP
must keep track of state information such as sequence numbers and window sizes for each
direction of data flow: sending and receiving. After a full-duplex connection is established,
it can be turned into a simplex connection if desired (see Section 6.6).

UDP can be full-duplex.

                                                                                                Page 68

2.5 Stream Control Transmission Protocol (SCTP)
SCTP provides services similar to those offered by UDP and TCP. SCTP is described in RFC
2960 [Stewart et al. 2000], and updated by RFC 3309 [Stone, Stewart, and Otis 2002]. An
introduction to SCTP is available in RFC 3286 [Ong and Yoakum 2002]. SCTP provides
associations between clients and servers. SCTP also provides applications with reliability,
sequencing, flow control, and full-duplex data transfer, like TCP. The word "association" is
used in SCTP instead of "connection" to avoid the connotation that a connection involves
communication between only two IP addresses. An association refers to a communication
between two systems, which may involve more than two addresses due to multihoming.

Unlike TCP, SCTP is message-oriented. It provides sequenced delivery of individual records.
Like UDP, the length of a record written by the sender is passed to the receiving
application.

SCTP can provide multiple streams between connection endpoints, each with its own
reliable sequenced delivery of messages. A lost message in one of these streams does not
block delivery of messages in any of the other streams. This approach is in contrast to TCP,
where a loss at any point in the single stream of bytes blocks delivery of all future data on
the connection until the loss is repaired.

SCTP also provides a multihoming feature, which allows a single SCTP endpoint to support
multiple IP addresses. This feature can provide increased robustness against network
failure. An endpoint can have multiple redundant network connections, where each of these
networks has a different connection to the Internet infrastructure. SCTP can work around a
failure of one network or path across the Internet by switching to another address already
associated with the SCTP association.

Similar robustness can be obtained from TCP with help from routing protocols. For
example, BGP connections within a domain (iBGP) often use addresses that are assigned to
a virtual interface within the router as the endpoints of the TCP connection. The domain's
routing protocol ensures that if there is a route between two routers, it can be used, which
would not be possible if the addresses used belonged to an interface that went down, for
example. SCTP's multihoming feature allows hosts to multihome, not just routers, and
allows this multihoming to occur across different service providers, which the
routing-based TCP method cannot allow.

                                                                                                Page 69

2.6 TCP Connection Establishment and Termination
To aid in our understanding of the connect, accept, and close functions and to help us
debug TCP applications using the netstat program, we must understand how TCP
connections are established and terminated, and TCP's state transition diagram.

Three-Way Handshake
The following scenario occurs when a TCP connection is established:

    1.   The server must be prepared to accept an incoming connection. This is normally
         done by calling socket, bind, and listen and is called a passive open.

    2.   The client issues an active open by calling connect. This causes the client TCP to
         send a "synchronize" (SYN) segment, which tells the server the client's initial
         sequence number for the data that the client will send on the connection. Normally,
         there is no data sent with the SYN; it just contains an IP header, a TCP header, and
         possible TCP options (which we will talk about shortly).

    3.   The server must acknowledge (ACK) the client's SYN and the server must also send
         its own SYN containing the initial sequence number for the data that the server will
         send on the connection. The server sends its SYN and the ACK of the client's SYN in
         a single segment.

    4.   The client must acknowledge the server's SYN.

The minimum number of packets required for this exchange is three; hence, this is called
TCP's three-way handshake. We show the three segments in Figure 2.2.

                       Figure 2.2. TCP three-way handshake.

We show the client's initial sequence number as J and the server's initial sequence number
as K. The acknowledgment number in an ACK is the next expected sequence number for
the end sending the ACK. Since a SYN occupies one byte of the sequence number space,
the acknowledgment number in the ACK of each SYN is the initial sequence number plus
one. Similarly, the ACK of each FIN is the sequence number of the FIN plus one.

An everyday analogy for establishing a TCP connection is the telephone system [Nemeth
1997]. The socket function is the equivalent of having a telephone to use. bind is telling
other people your telephone number so that they can call you. listen is turning on the
ringer so that you will hear when an incoming call arrives. connect requires that we know
the other person's phone number and dial it. accept is when the person being called
answers the phone. Having the client's identity returned by accept (where the identify is
the client's IP address and port number) is similar to having the caller ID feature show the
caller's phone number. One difference, however, is that accept returns the client's identity
only after the connection has been established, whereas the caller ID feature shows the

                                                                                                Page 70

caller's phone number before we choose whether to answer the phone or not. If the DNS is
used (Chapter 11), it provides a service analogous to a telephone book. getaddrinfo is
similar to looking up a person's phone number in the phone book. getnameinfo would be
the equivalent of having a phone book sorted by telephone numbers that we could search,
instead of a book sorted by name.

TCP Options
Each SYN can contain TCP options. Commonly used options include the following:

        MSS option. With this option, the TCP sending the SYN announces its maximum
         segment size, the maximum amount of data that it is willing to accept in each TCP
         segment, on this connection. The sending TCP uses the receiver's MSS value as the
         maximum size of a segment that it sends. We will see how to fetch and set this TCP
         option with the TCP_MAXSEG socket option (Section 7.9).

        Window scale option. The maximum window that either TCP can advertise to the
         other TCP is 65,535, because the corresponding field in the TCP header occupies 16
         bits. But, high-speed connections, common in today's Internet (45 Mbits/sec and
         faster, as described in RFC 1323 [Jacobson, Braden, and Borman 1992]), or long
         delay paths (satellite links) require a larger window to obtain the maximum
         throughput possible. This newer option specifies that the advertised window in the
         TCP header must be scaled (left-shifted) by 0 14 bits, providing a maximum
         window of almost one gigabyte (65,535 x 214). Both end-systems must support this
         option for the window scale to be used on a connection. We will see how to affect
         this option with the SO_RCVBUF socket option (Section 7.5).

         To provide interoperability with older implementations that do not support this
         option, the following rules apply. TCP can send the option with its SYN as part of an
         active open. But, it can scale its windows only if the other end also sends the option
         with its SYN. Similarly, the server's TCP can send this option only if it receives the
         option with the client's SYN. This logic assumes that implementations ignore options
         that they do not understand, which is required and common, but unfortunately, not
         guaranteed with all implementations.

        Timestamp option. This option is needed for high-speed connections to prevent
         possible data corruption caused by old, delayed, or duplicated segments. Since it is
         a newer option, it is negotiated similarly to the window scale option. As network
         programmers there is nothing we need to worry about with this option.

These common options are supported by most implementations. The latter two are
sometimes called the "RFC 1323 options," as that RFC [Jacobson, Braden, and Borman
1992] specifies the options. They are also called the "long fat pipe options," since a
network with either a high bandwidth or a long delay is called a long fat pipe. Chapter 24
of TCPv1 contains more details on these options.

TCP Connection Termination
While it takes three segments to establish a connection, it takes four to terminate a
connection.

    1.   One application calls close first, and we say that this end performs the active close.
         This end's TCP sends a FIN segment, which means it is finished sending data.

    2.   The other end that receives the FIN performs the passive close. The received FIN is
         acknowledged by TCP. The receipt of the FIN is also passed to the application as an
         end-of-file (after any data that may have already been queued for the application to
         receive), since the receipt of the FIN means the application will not receive any
         additional data on the connection.

                                                                                                  Page 71

    3.   Sometime later, the application that received the end-of-file will close its socket.
         This causes its TCP to send a FIN.

    4.   The TCP on the system that receives this final FIN (the end that did the active
         close) acknowledges the FIN.

Since a FIN and an ACK are required in each direction, four segments are normally
required. We use the qualifier "normally" because in some scenarios, the FIN in Step 1 is
sent with data. Also, the segments in Steps 2 and 3 are both from the end performing the
passive close and could be combined into one segment. We show these packets in Figure
2.3.

    Figure 2.3. Packets exchanged when a TCP connection is closed.

A FIN occupies one byte of sequence number space just like a SYN. Therefore, the ACK of
each FIN is the sequence number of the FIN plus one.

Between Steps 2 and 3 it is possible for data to flow from the end doing the passive close
to the end doing the active close. This is called a half-close and we will talk about this in
detail with the shutdown function in Section 6.6.

The sending of each FIN occurs when a socket is closed. We indicated that the application
calls close for this to happen, but realize that when a Unix process terminates, either
voluntarily (calling exit or having the main function return) or involuntarily (receiving a
signal that terminates the process), all open descriptors are closed, which will also cause a
FIN to be sent on any TCP connection that is still open.

Although we show the client in Figure 2.3 performing the active close, either end the
client or the server can perform the active close. Often the client performs the active
close, but with some protocols (notably HTTP/1.0), the server performs the active close.

TCP State Transition Diagram
The operation of TCP with regard to connection establishment and connection termination
can be specified with a state transition diagram. We show this in Figure 2.4.

                     Figure 2.4. TCP state transition diagram.

                                                                                                Page 72

There are 11 different states defined for a connection and the rules of TCP dictate the
transitions from one state to another, based on the current state and the segment received
in that state. For example, if an application performs an active open in the CLOSED state,
TCP sends a SYN and the new state is SYN_SENT. If TCP next receives a SYN with an ACK,
it sends an ACK and the new state is ESTABLISHED. This final state is where most data
transfer occurs.

The two arrows leading from the ESTABLISHED state deal with the termination of a
connection. If an application calls close before receiving a FIN (an active close), the
transition is to the FIN_WAIT_1 state. But if an application receives a FIN while in the
ESTABLISHED state (a passive close), the transition is to the CLOSE_WAIT state.

We denote the normal client transitions with a darker solid line and the normal server
transitions with a darker dashed line. We also note that there are two transitions that we
have not talked about: a simultaneous open (when both ends send SYNs at about the
same time and the SYNs cross in the network) and a simultaneous close (when both ends
send FINs at the same time). Chapter 18 of TCPv1 contains examples and a discussion of
both scenarios, which are possible but rare.

One reason for showing the state transition diagram is to show the 11 TCP states with their
names. These states are displayed by netstat, which is a useful tool when debugging
client/server applications. We will use netstat to monitor state changes in Chapter 5.

Watching the Packets
Figure 2.5 shows the actual packet exchange that takes place for a complete TCP
connection: the connection establishment, data transfer, and connection termination. We

                                                                                              Page 73

also show the TCP states through which each endpoint passes.

               Figure 2.5. Packet exchange for TCP connection.

The client in this example announces an MSS of 536 (indicating that it implements only
the minimum reassembly buffer size) and the server announces an MSS of 1,460 (typical
for IPv4 on an Ethernet). It is okay for the MSS to be different in each direction (see
Exercise 2.5).

Once a connection is established, the client forms a request and sends it to the server. We
assume this request fits into a single TCP segment (i.e., less than 1,460 bytes given the
server's announced MSS). The server processes the request and sends a reply, and we
assume that the reply fits in a single segment (less than 536 in this example). We show
both data segments as bolder arrows. Notice that the acknowledgment of the client's
request is sent with the server's reply. This is called piggybacking and will normally
happen when the time it takes the server to process the request and generate the reply is
less than around 200 ms. If the server takes longer, say one second, we would see the
acknowledgment followed later by the reply. (The dynamics of TCP data flow are covered in
detail in Chapters 19 and 20 of TCPv1.)

We then show the four segments that terminate the connection. Notice that the end that
performs the active close (the client in this scenario) enters the TIME_WAIT state. We will
discuss this in the next section.

It is important to notice in Figure 2.5 that if the entire purpose of this connection was to
send a one-segment request and receive a one-segment reply, there would be eight
segments of overhead involved when using TCP. If UDP was used instead, only two packets
would be exchanged: the request and the reply. But switching from TCP to UDP removes all
the reliability that TCP provides to the application, pushing lots of these details from the
transport layer (TCP) to the UDP application. Another important feature provided by TCP is
congestion control, which must then be handled by the UDP application. Nevertheless, it is
important to understand that many applications are built using UDP because the
application exchanges small amounts of data and UDP avoids the overhead of TCP
connection establishment and connection termination.

                                                                                               Page 74

2.7 TIME_WAIT State
Undoubtedly, one of the most misunderstood aspects of TCP with regard to network
programming is its TIME_WAIT state. We can see in Figure 2.4 that the end that performs
the active close goes through this state. The duration that this endpoint remains in this
state is twice the maximum segment lifetime (MSL), sometimes called 2MSL.

Every implementation of TCP must choose a value for the MSL. The recommended value in
RFC 1122 [Braden 1989] is 2 minutes, although Berkeley-derived implementations have
traditionally used a value of 30 seconds instead. This means the duration of the
TIME_WAIT state is between 1 and 4 minutes. The MSL is the maximum amount of time
that any given IP datagram can live in a network. We know this time is bounded because
every datagram contains an 8-bit hop limit (the IPv4 TTL field in Figure A.1 and the IPv6
hop limit field in Figure A.2) with a maximum value of 255. Although this is a hop limit
and not a true time limit, the assumption is made that a packet with the maximum hop
limit of 255 cannot exist in a network for more than MSL seconds.

The way in which a packet gets "lost" in a network is usually the result of routing
anomalies. A router crashes or a link between two routers goes down and it takes the
routing protocols seconds or minutes to stabilize and find an alternate path. During that
time period, routing loops can occur (router A sends packets to router B, and B sends them
back to A) and packets can get caught in these loops. In the meantime, assuming the lost
packet is a TCP segment, the sending TCP times out and retransmits the packet, and the
retransmitted packet gets to the final destination by some alternate path. But sometime
later (up to MSL seconds after the lost packet started on its journey), the routing loop is
corrected and the packet that was lost in the loop is sent to the final destination. This
original packet is called a lost duplicate or a wandering duplicate. TCP must handle these
duplicates.

There are two reasons for the TIME_WAIT state:

    1.   To implement TCP's full-duplex connection termination reliably

    2.   To allow old duplicate segments to expire in the network

The first reason can be explained by looking at Figure 2.5 and assuming that the final ACK
is lost. The server will resend its final FIN, so the client must maintain state information,
allowing it to resend the final ACK. If it did not maintain this information, it would respond
with an RST (a different type of TCP segment), which would be interpreted by the server as
an error. If TCP is performing all the work necessary to terminate both directions of data
flow cleanly for a connection (its full-duplex close), then it must correctly handle the loss of
any of these four segments. This example also shows why the end that performs the active
close is the end that remains in the TIME_WAIT state: because that end is the one that
might have to retransmit the final ACK.

To understand the second reason for the TIME_WAIT state, assume we have a TCP
connection between 12.106.32.254 port 1500 and 206.168.112.219 port 21. This
connection is closed and then sometime later, we establish another connection between
the same IP addresses and ports: 12.106.32.254 port 1500 and 206.168.112.219 port 21.
This latter connection is called an incarnation of the previous connection since the IP
addresses and ports are the same. TCP must prevent old duplicates from a connection from
reappearing at some later time and being misinterpreted as belonging to a new incarnation
of the same connection. To do this, TCP will not initiate a new incarnation of a connection
that is currently in the TIME_WAIT state. Since the duration of the TIME_WAIT state is
twice the MSL, this allows MSL seconds for a packet in one direction to be lost, and another
MSL seconds for the reply to be lost. By enforcing this rule, we are guaranteed that when
we successfully establish a TCP connection, all old duplicates from previous incarnations of
the connection have expired in the network.

                                                                                                   Page 75

There is an exception to this rule. Berkeley-derived implementations will initiate a new
incarnation of a connection that is currently in the TIME_WAIT state if the arriving SYN has
a sequence number that is "greater than" the ending sequence number from the previous
incarnation. Pages 958 959 of TCPv2 talk about this in more detail. This requires the
server to perform the active close, since the TIME_WAIT state must exist on the end that
receives the next SYN. This capability is used by the rsh command. RFC 1185 [Jacobson,
Braden, and Zhang 1990] talks about some pitfalls in doing this.

                                                                                               Page 76

2.8 SCTP Association Establishment and Termination
SCTP is connection-oriented like TCP, so it also has association establishment and
termination handshakes. However, SCTP's handshakes are different than TCP's, so we
describe them here.

Four-Way Handshake
The following scenario, similar to TCP, occurs when an SCTP association is established:

    1.   The server must be prepared to accept an incoming association. This preparation is
         normally done by calling socket, bind, and listen and is called a passive open.

    2.   The client issues an active open by calling connect or by sending a message, which
         implicitly opens the association. This causes the client SCTP to send an INIT
         message (which stands for "initialization") to tell the server the client's list of IP
         addresses, initial sequence number, initiation tag to identify all packets in this
         association, number of outbound streams the client is requesting, and number of
         inbound streams the client can support.

    3.   The server acknowledges the client's INIT message with an INIT-ACK message,
         which contains the server's list of IP addresses, initial sequence number, initiation
         tag, number of outbound streams the server is requesting, number of inbound
         streams the server can support, and a state cookie. The state cookie contains all of
         the state that the server needs to ensure that the association is valid, and is
         digitally signed to ensure its validity.

    4.   The client echos the server's state cookie with a COOKIE-ECHO message. This
         message may also contain user data bundled within the same packet.

    5.   The server acknowledges that the cookie was correct and that the association was
         established with a COOKIE-ACK message. This message may also contain user data
         bundled within the same packet.

The minimum number of packets required for this exchange is four; hence, this process is
called SCTP's four-way handshake. We show a picture of the four segments in Figure 2.6.

                       Figure 2.6. SCTP four-way handshake.

The SCTP four-way handshake is similar in many ways to TCP's three-way handshake,
except for the cookie generation, which is an integral part. The INIT carries with it (along
with its many parameters) a verification tag, Ta, and an initial sequence number, J. The
tag Ta must be present in every packet sent by the peer for the life of the association. The
initial sequence number J is used as the starting sequence number for DATA messages
termed DATA chunks. The peer also chooses a verification tag, Tz, which must be present
in each of its packets for the life of the association. Along with the verification tag and

                                                                                                  Page 77

initial sequence number, K, the receiver of the INIT also sends a cookie, C. The cookie
contains all the state needed to set up the SCTP association, so that the server's SCTP
stack does not need to keep information about the associating client. Further details on
SCTP's association setup can be found in Chapter 4 of [Stewart and Xie 2001].

At the conclusion of the four-way handshake, each side chooses a primary destination
address. The primary destination address is used as the default destination to which data
will be sent in the absence of network failure.

The four-way handshake is used in SCTP to avoid a form of denial-of-service attack we will
discuss in Section 4.5.

SCTP's four-way handshake using Cookies formalizes a method of protection against this
attack. Many TCP implementations use a similar method; the big difference is that in TCP,
the cookie state must be encoded into the initial sequence number, which is only 32 bits.
SCTP provides an arbitrary-length field, and requires cryptographic security to prevent
attacks.

Association Termination
Unlike TCP, SCTP does not permit a "half-closed" association. When one end shuts down an
association, the other end must stop sending new data. The receiver of the shutdown
request sends the data that was queued, if any, and then completes the shutdown. We
show this exchange in Figure 2.7.

  Figure 2.7. Packets exchanged when an SCTP association is closed.

SCTP does not have a TIME_WAIT state like TCP, due to its use of verification tags. All
chunks are tagged with the tag exchanged in the INIT chunks; a chunk from an old
connection will arrive with an incorrect tag. Therefore, in lieu of keeping an entire
connection in TIME_WAIT, SCTP instead places verification tag values in TIME_WAIT.

SCTP State Transition Diagram
The operation of SCTP with regard to association establishment and termination can be
specified with a state transition diagram. We show this in Figure 2.8.

                   Figure 2.8. SCTP state transition diagram.

                                                                                             Page 78

As in Figure 2.4, the transitions from one state to another in the state machine are dictated
by the rules of SCTP, based on the current state and the chunk received in that state. For
example, if an application performs an active open in the CLOSED state, SCTP sends an
INIT and the new state is COOKIE-WAIT. If SCTP next receives an INIT ACK, it sends a
COOKIE ECHO and the new state is COOKIE-ECHOED. If SCTP then receives a COOKIE
ACK, it moves to the ESTABLISHED state. This final state is where most data transfer
occurs, although DATA chunks can be piggybacked on COOKIE ECHO and COOKIE ACK
chunks.

The two arrows leading from the ESTABLISHED state deal with the termination of an
association. If an application calls close before receiving a SHUTDOWN (an active close),
the transition is to the SHUTDOWN-PENDING state. However, if an application receives a
SHUTDOWN while in the ESTABLISHED state (a passive close), the transition is to the
SHUTDOWN-RECEIVED state.

Watching the Packets
Figure 2.9 shows the actual packet exchange that takes place for a sample SCTP
association: the association establishment, data transfer, and association termination. We
also show the SCTP states through which each endpoint passes.

              Figure 2.9. Packet exchange for SCTP association.

                                                                                                Page 79

In this example, the client piggybacks its first data chunk on the COOKIE ECHO, and the
server replies with data on the COOKIE ACK. In general, the COOKIE ECHO will often have
one or more DATA chunks bundled with it when the application is using the one-to-many
interface style (we will discuss the one-to-one and one-to-many interface styles in Section
9.2).

The unit of information within an SCTP packet is a "chunk." A "chunk" is self-descriptive
and contains a chunk type, chunk flags, and a chunk length. This approach facilitates the
bundling of chunks simply by combining multiple chunks into an SCTP outbound packet
(details on chunk bundling and normal data transmission procedures can be found in
Chapter 5 of [Stewart and Xie 2001]).

SCTP Options
SCTP uses parameters and chunks to facilitate optional features. New features are defined
by adding either of these two items, and allowing normal SCTP processing rules to report
unknown parameters and unknown chunks. The upper two bits of both the parameter
space and the chunk space dictate what an SCTP receiver should do with an unknown
parameter or chunk (further details can be found in Section 3.1 of [Stewart and Xie
2001]).

Currently, two extensions for SCTP are under development:

    1.   The dynamic address extension, which allows cooperating SCTP endpoints to
         dynamically add and remove IP addresses from an existing association.

    2.   The partial reliability extension, which allows cooperating SCTP endpoints, under
         application direction, to limit the retransmission of data. When a message becomes
         too old to send (according to the application's direction), the message will be
         skipped and thus no longer sent to the peer. This means that not all data is assured
         of arrival at the other end of the association.

                                                                                                Page 80

2.9 Port Numbers
At any given time, multiple processes can be using any given transport: UDP, SCTP, or
TCP. All three transport layers use 16-bit integer port numbers to differentiate between
these processes.

When a client wants to contact a server, the client must identify the server with which it
wants to communicate. TCP, UDP, and SCTP define a group of well-known ports to identify
well-known services. For example, every TCP/IP implementation that supports FTP assigns
the well-known port of 21 (decimal) to the FTP server. Trivial File Transfer Protocol (TFTP)
servers are assigned the UDP port of 69.

Clients, on the other hand, normally use ephemeral ports, that is, short-lived ports. These
port numbers are normally assigned automatically by the transport protocol to the client.
Clients normally do not care about the value of the ephemeral port; the client just needs to
be certain that the ephemeral port is unique on the client host. The transport protocol code
guarantees this uniqueness.

The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) maintains a list of port number
assignments. Assignments were once published as RFCs; RFC 1700 [Reynolds and Postel
1994] is the last in this series. RFC 3232 [Reynolds 2002] gives the location of the online
database that replaced RFC 1700: http://www.iana.org/. The port numbers are divided
into three ranges:

    1.   The well-known ports: 0 through 1023. These port numbers are controlled and
         assigned by the IANA. When possible, the same port is assigned to a given service
         for TCP, UDP, and SCTP. For example, port 80 is assigned for a Web server, for both
         TCP and UDP, even though all implementations currently use only TCP.

         At the time that port 80 was assigned, SCTP did not yet exist. New port
         assignments are made for all three protocols, and RFC 2960 states that all existing
         TCP port numbers should be valid for the same service using SCTP.

    2.   The registered ports: 1024 through 49151. These are not controlled by the IANA,
         but the IANA registers and lists the uses of these ports as a convenience to the
         community. When possible, the same port is assigned to a given service for both
         TCP and UDP. For example, ports 6000 through 6063 are assigned for an X Window
         server for both protocols, even though all implementations currently use only TCP.
         The upper limit of 49151 for these ports was introduced to allow a range for
         ephemeral ports; RFC 1700 [Reynolds and Postel 1994] lists the upper range as
         65535.

    3.   The dynamic or private ports, 49152 through 65535. The IANA says nothing about
         these ports. These are what we call ephemeral ports. (The magic number 49152 is
         three-fourths of 65536.)

Figure 2.10 shows this division, along with the common allocation of the port numbers.

                     Figure 2.10. Allocation of port numbers.

                                                                                               Page 81

We note the following points from this figure:

       Unix systems have the concept of a reserved port, which is any port less than 1024.
        These ports can only be assigned to a socket by an appropriately privileged process.
        All the IANA well-known ports are reserved ports; hence, the server allocating this
        port (such as the FTP server) must have superuser privileges when it starts.

       Historically, Berkeley-derived implementations (starting with 4.3BSD) have
        allocated ephemeral ports in the range 1024 5000. This was fine in the early
        1980s, but it is easy today to find a host that can support more than 3977
        connections at any given time. Therefore, many newer systems allocate ephemeral
        ports differently to provide more ephemeral ports, either using the IANA-defined
        ephemeral range or a larger range (e.g., Solaris as we show in Figure 2.10).

        As it turns out, the upper limit of 5000 for the ephemeral ports, which many older
        systems implement, was a typo [Borman 1997a]. The limit should have been
        50,000.

       There are a few clients (not servers) that require a reserved port as part of the
        client/server authentication: the rlogin and rsh clients are common examples.
        These clients call the library function rresvport to create a TCP socket and assign
        an unused port in the range 513 1023 to the socket. This function normally tries to
        bind port 1023, and if that fails, it tries to bind 1022, and so on, until it either
        succeeds or fails on port 513.

        Notice that the BSD reserved ports and the rresvport function both overlap with
        the upper half of the IANA well-known ports. This is because the IANA well-known
        ports used to stop at 255. RFC 1340 (a previous "Assigned Numbers" RFC) in 1992
        started assigning well-known ports between 256 and 1023. The previous "Assigned
        Numbers" document, RFC 1060 in 1990, called ports 256 1023 the Unix Standard
        Services. There are numerous Berkeley-derived servers that picked their well-known
        ports in the 1980s starting at 512 (leaving 256 511 untouched). The rresvport
        function chose to start at the top of the 512 1023 range and work down.

Socket Pair
The socket pair for a TCP connection is the four-tuple that defines the two endpoints of the
connection: the local IP address, local port, foreign IP address, and foreign port. A socket
pair uniquely identifies every TCP connection on a network. For SCTP, an association is
identified by a set of local IP addresses, a local port, a set of foreign IP addresses, and a
foreign port. In its simplest form, where neither endpoint is multihomed, this results in the
same four-tuple socket pair used with TCP. However, when either of the endpoints of an
association are multihomed, then multiple four-tuple sets (with different IP addresses but
the same port numbers) may identify the same association.

The two values that identify each endpoint, an IP address and a port number, are often
called a socket.

We can extend the concept of a socket pair to UDP, even though UDP is connectionless.
When we describe the socket functions (bind, connect, getpeername, etc.), we will note

                                                                                                Page 82

which functions specify which values in the socket pair. For example, bind lets the
application specify the local IP address and local port for TCP, UDP, and SCTP sockets.

                                                                                          Page 83

2.10 TCP Port Numbers and Concurrent Servers
With a concurrent server, where the main server loop spawns a child to handle each new
connection, what happens if the child continues to use the well-known port number while
servicing a long request? Let's examine a typical sequence. First, the server is started on
the host freebsd, which is multihomed with IP addresses 12.106.32.254 and
192.168.42.1, and the server does a passive open using its well-known port number (21,
for this example). It is now waiting for a client request, which we show in Figure 2.11.

          Figure 2.11. TCP server with a passive open on port 21.

We use the notation {*:21, *:*} to indicate the server's socket pair. The server is waiting
for a connection request on any local interface (the first asterisk) on port 21. The foreign IP
address and foreign port are not specified and we denote them as *:*. We also call this a
listening socket.

We use a colon to separate the IP address from the port number because that is what HTTP
uses and is commonly seen elsewhere. The netstat program uses a period to separate the
IP address and port, but this is sometimes confusing because decimal points are used in
both domain names (freebsd.unpbook.com.21) and in IPv4 dotted-decimal notation (
12.106.32.254.21).

When we specify the local IP address as an asterisk, it is called the wildcard character. If
the host on which the server is running is multihomed (as in this example), the server can
specify that it wants only to accept incoming connections that arrive destined to one
specific local interface. This is a one-or-any choice for the server. The server cannot specify
a list of multiple addresses. The wildcard local address is the "any" choice. In Figure 1.9,
the wildcard address was specified by setting the IP address in the socket address
structure to INADDR_ANY before calling bind.

At some later time, a client starts on the host with IP address 206.168.112.219 and
executes an active open to the server's IP address of 12.106.32.254. We assume the
ephemeral port chosen by the client TCP is 1500 for this example. This is shown in Figure
2.12. Beneath the client we show its socket pair.

           Figure 2.12. Connection request from client to server.

When the server receives and accepts the client's connection, it forks a copy of itself,
letting the child handle the client, as we show in Figure 2.13. (We will describe the fork
function in Section 4.7.)

           Figure 2.13. Concurrent server has child handle client.

                                                                                                  Page 84

At this point, we must distinguish between the listening socket and the connected socket
on the server host. Notice that the connected socket uses the same local port (21) as the
listening socket. Also notice that on the multihomed server, the local address is filled in for
the connected socket (12.106.32.254) once the connection is established.

The next step assumes that another client process on the client host requests a connection
with the same server. The TCP code on the client host assigns the new client socket an
unused ephemeral port number, say 1501. This gives us the scenario shown in Figure 2.14.
On the server, the two connections are distinct: the socket pair for the first connection
differs from the socket pair for the second connection because the client's TCP chooses an
unused port for the second connection (1501).

          Figure 2.14. Second client connection with same server.

Notice from this example that TCP cannot demultiplex incoming segments by looking at
just the destination port number. TCP must look at all four elements in the socket pair to
determine which endpoint receives an arriving segment. In Figure 2.14, we have three
sockets with the same local port (21). If a segment arrives from 206.168.112.219 port
1500 destined for 12.106.32.254 port 21, it is delivered to the first child. If a segment
arrives from 206.168.112.219 port 1501 destined for 12.106.32.254 port 21, it is delivered
to the second child. All other TCP segments destined for port 21 are delivered to the
original server with the listening socket.

                                                                                                  Page 85

2.11 Buffer Sizes and Limitations
Certain limits affect the size of IP datagrams. We first describe these limits and then tie
them all together with regard to how they affect the data an application can transmit.

       The maximum size of an IPv4 datagram is 65,535 bytes, including the IPv4 header.
        This is because of the 16-bit total length field in Figure A.1.

       The maximum size of an IPv6 datagram is 65,575 bytes, including the 40-byte IPv6
        header. This is because of the 16-bit payload length field in Figure A.2. Notice that
        the IPv6 payload length field does not include the size of the IPv6 header, while the
        IPv4 total length field does include the header size.

        IPv6 has a jumbo payload option, which extends the payload length field to 32 bits,
        but this option is supported only on datalinks with a maximum transmission unit
        (MTU) that exceeds 65,535. (This is intended for host-to-host interconnects, such as
        HIPPI, which often have no inherent MTU.)

       Many networks have an MTU which can be dictated by the hardware. For example,
        the Ethernet MTU is 1,500 bytes. Other datalinks, such as point-to-point links using
        the Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP), have a configurable MTU. Older SLIP links often
        used an MTU of 1,006 or 296 bytes.

        The minimum link MTU for IPv4 is 68 bytes. This permits a maximum-sized IPv4
        header (20 bytes of fixed header, 30 bytes of options) and minimum-sized fragment
        (the fragment offset is in units of 8 bytes). The minimum link MTU for IPv6 is 1,280
        bytes. IPv6 can run over links with a smaller MTU, but requires link-specific
        fragmentation and reassembly to make the link appear to have an MTU of at least
        1,280 bytes (RFC 2460 [Deering and Hinden 1998]).

       The smallest MTU in the path between two hosts is called the path MTU. Today, the
        Ethernet MTU of 1,500 bytes is often the path MTU. The path MTU need not be the
        same in both directions between any two hosts because routing in the Internet is
        often asymmetric [Paxson 1996]. That is, the route from A to B can differ from the
        route from B to A.

       When an IP datagram is to be sent out an interface, if the size of the datagram
        exceeds the link MTU, fragmentation is performed by both IPv4 and IPv6. The
        fragments are not normally reassembled until they reach the final destination. IPv4
        hosts perform fragmentation on datagrams that they generate and IPv4 routers
        perform fragmentation on datagrams that they forward. But with IPv6, only hosts
        perform fragmentation on datagrams that they generate; IPv6 routers do not
        fragment datagrams that they are forwarding.

        We must be careful with our terminology. A box labeled as an IPv6 router may
        indeed perform fragmentation, but only on datagrams that the router itself
        generates, never on datagrams that it is forwarding. When this box generates IPv6
        datagrams, it is really acting as a host. For example, most routers support the
        Telnet protocol and this is used for router configuration by administrators. The IP
        datagrams generated by the router's Telnet server are generated by the router, not
        forwarded by the router.

        You may notice that fields exist in the IPv4 header (Figure A.1) to handle IPv4
        fragmentation, but there are no fields in the IPv6 header (Figure A.2) for
        fragmentation. Since fragmentation is the exception, rather than the rule, IPv6
        contains an option header with the fragmentation information.

        Certain firewalls, which usually act as routers, may reassemble fragmented packets

                                                                                                Page 86

        to allow inspection of the entire packet contents. This allows the prevention of
        certain attacks at the cost of additional complexity in the firewall device. It also
        requires the firewall device to be part of the only path to the network, reducing the
        opportunities for redundancy.

       If the "don't fragment" (DF) bit is set in the IPv4 header (Figure A.1), it specifies
        that this datagram must not be fragmented, either by the sending host or by any
        router. A router that receives an IPv4 datagram with the DF bit set whose size
        exceeds the outgoing link's MTU generates an ICMPv4 "destination unreachable,
        fragmentation needed but DF bit set" error message (Figure A.15).

        Since IPv6 routers do not perform fragmentation, there is an implied DF bit with
        every IPv6 datagram. When an IPv6 router receives a datagram whose size exceeds
        the outgoing link's MTU, it generates an ICMPv6 "packet too big" error message (
        Figure A.16).

        The IPv4 DF bit and its implied IPv6 counterpart can be used for path MTU discovery
        (RFC 1191 [Mogul and Deering 1990] for IPv4 and RFC 1981 [McCann, Deering, and
        Mogul 1996] for IPv6). For example, if TCP uses this technique with IPv4, then it
        sends all its datagrams with the DF bit set. If some intermediate router returns an
        ICMP "destination unreachable, fragmentation needed but DF bit set" error, TCP
        decreases the amount of data it sends per datagram and retransmits. Path MTU
        discovery is optional with IPv4, but IPv6 implementations all either support path
        MTU discovery or always send using the minimum MTU.

        Path MTU discovery is problematic in the Internet today; many firewalls drop all
        ICMP messages, including the fragmentation required message, meaning that TCP
        never gets the signal that it needs to decrease the amount of data it is sending. As
        of this writing, an effort is beginning in the IETF to define another method for path
        MTU discovery that does not rely on ICMP errors.

       IPv4 and IPv6 define a minimum reassembly buffer size, the minimum datagram
        size that we are guaranteed any implementation must support. For IPv4, this is 576
        bytes. IPv6 raises this to 1,500 bytes. With IPv4, for example, we have no idea
        whether a given destination can accept a 577-byte datagram or not. Therefore,
        many IPv4 applications that use UDP (e.g., DNS, RIP, TFTP, BOOTP, SNMP) prevent
        applications from generating IP datagrams that exceed this size.

       TCP has a maximum segment size (MSS) that announces to the peer TCP the
        maximum amount of TCP data that the peer can send per segment. We saw the
        MSS option on the SYN segments in Figure 2.5. The goal of the MSS is to tell the
        peer the actual value of the reassembly buffer size and to try to avoid
        fragmentation. The MSS is often set to the interface MTU minus the fixed sizes of
        the IP and TCP headers. On an Ethernet using IPv4, this would be 1,460, and on an
        Ethernet using IPv6, this would be 1,440. (The TCP header is 20 bytes for both, but
        the IPv4 header is 20 bytes and the IPv6 header is 40 bytes.)

        The MSS value in the TCP MSS option is a 16-bit field, limiting the value to 65,535.
        This is fine for IPv4, since the maximum amount of TCP data in an IPv4 datagram is
        65,495 (65,535 minus the 20-byte IPv4 header and minus the 20-byte TCP
        header). But with the IPv6 jumbo payload option, a different technique is used (RFC
        2675 [Borman, Deering, and Hinden 1999]). First, the maximum amount of TCP
        data in an IPv6 datagram without the jumbo payload option is 65,515 (65,535
        minus the 20-byte TCP header). Therefore, the MSS value of 65,535 is considered a
        special case that designates "infinity." This value is used only if the jumbo payload
        option is being used, which requires an MTU that exceeds 65,535. If TCP is using
        the jumbo payload option and receives an MSS announcement of 65,535 from the
        peer, the limit on the datagram sizes that it sends is just the interface MTU. If this
        turns out to be too large (i.e., there is a link in the path with a smaller MTU), then
        path MTU discovery will determine the smaller value.

                                                                                                 Page 87

       SCTP keeps a fragmentation point based on the smallest path MTU found to all the
        peer's addresses. This smallest MTU size is used to split large user messages into
        smaller pieces that can be sent in one IP datagram. The SCTP_MAXSEG socket option
        can influence this value, allowing the user to request a smaller fragmentation point.

TCP Output
Given all these terms and definitions, Figure 2.15 shows what happens when an application
writes data to a TCP socket.

 Figure 2.15. Steps and buffers involved when an application writes to
                             a TCP socket.

Every TCP socket has a send buffer and we can change the size of this buffer with the
SO_SNDBUF socket option (Section 7.5). When an application calls write, the kernel copies
all the data from the application buffer into the socket send buffer. If there is insufficient
room in the socket buffer for all the application's data (either the application buffer is
larger than the socket send buffer, or there is already data in the socket send buffer), the
process is put to sleep. This assumes the normal default of a blocking socket. (We will talk
about nonblocking sockets in Chapter 16.) The kernel will not return from the write until
the final byte in the application buffer has been copied into the socket send buffer.
Therefore, the successful return from a write to a TCP socket only tells us that we can
reuse our application buffer. It does not tell us that either the peer TCP has received the
data or that the peer application has received the data. (We will talk about this more with
the SO_LINGER socket option in Section 7.5.)

TCP takes the data in the socket send buffer and sends it to the peer TCP based on all the
rules of TCP data transmission (Chapter 19 and 20 of TCPv1). The peer TCP must
acknowledge the data, and as the ACKs arrive from the peer, only then can our TCP discard
the acknowledged data from the socket send buffer. TCP must keep a copy of our data until
it is acknowledged by the peer.

TCP sends the data to IP in MSS-sized or smaller chunks, prepending its TCP header to
each segment, where the MSS is the value announced by the peer, or 536 if the peer did
not send an MSS option. IP prepends its header, searches the routing table for the
destination IP address (the matching routing table entry specifies the outgoing interface),
and passes the datagram to the appropriate datalink. IP might perform fragmentation
before passing the datagram to the datalink, but as we said earlier, one goal of the MSS
option is to try to avoid fragmentation and newer implementations also use path MTU
discovery. Each datalink has an output queue, and if this queue is full, the packet is
discarded and an error is returned up the protocol stack: from the datalink to IP and then
from IP to TCP. TCP will note this error and try sending the segment later. The application

                                                                                                 Page 88

is not told of this transient condition.

UDP Output
Figure 2.16 shows what happens when an application writes data to a UDP socket.

 Figure 2.16. Steps and buffers involved when an application writes to
                             a UDP socket.

This time, we show the socket send buffer as a dashed box because it doesn't really exist.
A UDP socket has a send buffer size (which we can change with the SO_SNDBUF socket
option, Section 7.5), but this is simply an upper limit on the maximum-sized UDP
datagram that can be written to the socket. If an application writes a datagram larger than
the socket send buffer size, EMSGSIZE is returned. Since UDP is unreliable, it does not need
to keep a copy of the application's data and does not need an actual send buffer. (The
application data is normally copied into a kernel buffer of some form as it passes down the
protocol stack, but this copy is discarded by the datalink layer after the data is
transmitted.)

UDP simply prepends its 8-byte header and passes the datagram to IP. IPv4 or IPv6
prepends its header, determines the outgoing interface by performing the routing function,
and then either adds the datagram to the datalink output queue (if it fits within the MTU)
or fragments the datagram and adds each fragment to the datalink output queue. If a UDP
application sends large datagrams (say 2,000-byte datagrams), there is a much higher
probability of fragmentation than with TCP, because TCP breaks the application data into
MSS-sized chunks, something that has no counterpart in UDP.

The successful return from a write to a UDP socket tells us that either the datagram or all
fragments of the datagram have been added to the datalink output queue. If there is no
room on the queue for the datagram or one of its fragments, ENOBUFS is often returned to
the application.

Unfortunately, some implementations do not return this error, giving the application no
indication that the datagram was discarded without even being transmitted.

SCTP Output
Figure 2.17 shows what happens when an application writes data to an SCTP socket.

 Figure 2.17. Steps and buffers involved when an application writes to
                            an SCTP socket.

                                                                                               Page 89

SCTP, since it is a reliable protocol like TCP, has a send buffer. As with TCP, an application
can change the size of this buffer with the SO_SNDBUF socket option (Section 7.5). When
the application calls write, the kernel copies all the data from the application buffer into
the socket send buffer. If there is insufficient room in the socket buffer for all of the
application's data (either the application buffer is larger than the socket send buffer, or
there is already data in the socket send buffer), the process is put to sleep. This sleeping
assumes the normal default of a blocking socket. (We will talk about nonblocking sockets
in Chapter 16.) The kernel will not return from the write until the final byte in the
application buffer has been copied into the socket send buffer. Therefore, the successful
return from a write to an SCTP socket only tells the sender that it can reuse the
application buffer. It does not tell us that either the peer SCTP has received the data, or
that the peer application has received the data.

SCTP takes the data in the socket send buffer and sends it to the peer SCTP based on all
the rules of SCTP data transmission (for details of data transfer, see Chapter 5 of [Stewart
and Xie 2001]). The sending SCTP must await a SACK in which the cumulative
acknowledgment point passes the sent data before that data can be removed from the
socket buffer.

                                                                                                 Page 90

2.12 Standard Internet Services
Figure 2.18 lists several standard services that are provided by most implementations of
TCP/IP. Notice that all are provided using both TCP and UDP and the port number is the
same for both protocols.

         Figure 2.18. Standard TCP/IP services provided by most
                            implementations.

Often these services are provided by the inetd daemon on Unix hosts (Section 13.5).
These standard services provide an easy testing facility using the standard Telnet client.
For example, the following tests both the daytime and echo servers:

 aix % telnet freebsd daytime

 Trying 12.106.32.254...                   output by Telnet client

 Connected to freebsd.unpbook.com.         output by Telnet client

 Escape character is '^]'.                 output by Telnet client

 Mon Jul 28 11:56:22 2003                  output by daytime server

 Connection closed by foreign host.        output by Telnet client (server closes
                                           connection)

 aix % telnet freebsd echo

 Trying 12.106.32.254...                   output by Telnet client

 Connected to freebsd.unpbook.com.         output by Telnet client

 Escape character is '^]'.                 output by Telnet client

 hello, world                              we type this

 hello, world                              and it is echoed back by the server

 ^]                                        we type control and right bracket to talk to
                                           Telnet client

 telnet> quit                              and tell client we are done

                                                                                             Page 91

 aix % telnet freebsd daytime

 Connection closed.                        client closes the connection this time

In these two examples, we type the name of the host and the name of the service (
daytime and echo). These service names are mapped into the port numbers shown in
Figure 2.18 by the /etc/services file, as we will describe in Section 11.5.

Notice that when we connect to the daytime server, the server performs the active close,
while with the echo server, the client performs the active close. Recall from Figure 2.4 that
the end performing the active close is the end that goes through the TIME_WAIT state.

These "simple services" are often disabled by default on modern systems due to
denial-of-service and other resource utilization attacks against them.

                                                                                                Page 92

2.13 Protocol Usage by Common Internet Applications
Figure 2.19 summarizes the protocol usage of various common Internet applications.

 Figure 2.19. Protocol usage of various common Internet applications.

The first two applications, ping and traceroute, are diagnostic applications that use ICMP.
traceroute builds its own UDP packets to send and reads ICMP replies.

The three popular routing protocols demonstrate the variety of transport protocols used by
routing protocols. OSPF uses IP directly, employing a raw socket, while RIP uses UDP and
BGP uses TCP.

The next five are UDP-based applications, followed by seven TCP applications and four that
use both UDP and TCP. The final five are IP telephony applications that use SCTP
exclusively or optionally UDP, TCP, or SCTP.

                                                                                              Page 93

2.14 Summary
UDP is a simple, unreliable, connectionless protocol, while TCP is a complex, reliable,
connection-oriented protocol. SCTP combines some of the features of both protocols,
providing additional features beyond those found in TCP. While most applications on the
Internet use TCP (the Web, Telnet, FTP, and email), there is a need for all three transport
layers. In Section 22.4, we will discuss the reasons to choose UDP instead of TCP. In
Section 23.12, we will discuss the reasons to choose SCTP instead of TCP.

TCP establishes connections using a three-way handshake and terminates connections
using a four-packet exchange. When a TCP connection is established, it goes from the
CLOSED state to the ESTABLISHED state, and when it is terminated, it goes back to the
CLOSED state. There are 11 states in which a TCP connection can be, and a state transition
diagram gives the rules on how to go between the states. Understanding this diagram is
essential to diagnosing problems using the netstat command and understanding what
happens when an application calls functions such as connect, accept, and close.

TCP's TIME_WAIT state is a continual source of confusion with network programmers. This
state exists to implement TCP's full-duplex connection termination (i.e., to handle the case
of the final ACK being lost), and to allow old duplicate segments to expire in the network.

SCTP establishes an association by using a four-way handshake and terminates
connections using a three-packet exchange. When an SCTP association is established, it
goes from the CLOSED state to the ESTABLISHED state, and when it is terminated, it goes
back to the CLOSED state. There are eight states in which an SCTP association can be, and
a state transition diagram gives the rules on how to go between the states. SCTP does not
need the TIME_WAIT state as TCP does due to its use of verification tags.

                                                                                               Page 94

Exercises
     2.1 We have mentioned IP versions 4 and 6. What happened to version 5
         and what were versions 0, 1, 2, and 3? (Hint: Find the IANA's "Internet
         Protocol" registry. Feel free to skip ahead to the solution if you cannot
         visit http://www.iana.org.)

     2.2 Where would you look to find more information about the protocol that is
         assigned IP version 5?

     2.3 With Figure 2.15, we said that TCP assumes an MSS of 536 if it does not
         receive an MSS option from the peer. Why is this value used?

     2.4 Draw a figure like Figure 2.5 for the daytime client/server in Chapter 1,
         assuming the server returns the 26 bytes of data in a single TCP
         segment.

     2.5 A connection is established between a host on an Ethernet, whose TCP
         advertises an MSS of 1,460, and a host on a Token Ring, whose TCP
         advertises an MSS of 4,096. Neither host implements path MTU
         discovery. Watching the packets, we never see more than 1,460 bytes of
         data in either direction. Why?

     2.6 In Figure 2.19, we said that OSPF uses IP directly. What is the value of
         the protocol field in the IPv4 header (Figure A.1) for these OSPF
         datagrams?

     2.7 In discussing SCTP output, we said that the SCTP sender must wait for
         the cumulative acknowledgment point to pass sent data before the data
         could be freed from the socket buffer. If a selective acknowledgment
         shows that data is acknowledged beyond the cumulative
         acknowledgment point, why can't the data be freed?

                                                                                     Page 95
