
Chapter 4. Elementary TCP Sockets
       Section 4.1.?Introduction

       Section 4.2.?socket Function

       Section 4.3.?connect Function

       Section 4.4.?bind Function

       Section 4.5.?listen Function

       Section 4.6.?accept Function

       Section 4.7.?fork and exec Functions

       Section 4.8.?Concurrent Servers

       Section 4.9.?close Function

       Section 4.10.?getsockname and getpeername Functions

       Section 4.11.?Summary

       Exercises

4.1 Introduction
This chapter describes the elementary socket functions required to write a complete TCP
client and server. We will first describe all the elementary socket functions that we will be
using and then develop the client and server in the next chapter. We will work with this
client and server throughout the text, enhancing it many times (Figures 1.12 and 1.13).

We will also describe concurrent servers, a common Unix technique for providing
concurrency when numerous clients are connected to the same server at the same time.
Each client connection causes the server to fork a new process just for that client. In this
chapter, we consider only the one-process-per-client model using fork, but we will
consider a different one-thread-per-client model when we describe threads in Chapter 26.

Figure 4.1 shows a timeline of the typical scenario that takes place between a TCP client
and server. First, the server is started, then sometime later, a client is started that
connects to the server. We assume that the client sends a request to the server, the server
processes the request, and the server sends a reply back to the client. This continues until
the client closes its end of the connection, which sends an end-of-file notification to the
server. The server then closes its end of the connection and either terminates or waits for a
new client connection.

      Figure 4.1. Socket functions for elementary TCP client/server.

4.2 socket Function
To perform network I/O, the first thing a process must do is call the socket function,
specifying the type of communication protocol desired (TCP using IPv4, UDP using IPv6,
Unix domain stream protocol, etc.).

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 int socket (int family, int type, int protocol);

                                         Returns: non-negative descriptor if OK, -1 on error

family specifies the protocol family and is one of the constants shown in Figure 4.2. This
argument is often referred to as domain instead of family. The socket type is one of the
constants shown in Figure 4.3. The protocol argument to the socket function should be set
to the specific protocol type found in Figure 4.4, or 0 to select the system's default for the
given combination of family and type.

          Figure 4.2. Protocol family constants for socket function.

                 Figure 4.3. type of socket for socket function.

            Figure 4.4. protocol of sockets for AF_INET or AF_INET6.

Not all combinations of socket family and type are valid. Figure 4.5 shows the valid
combinations, along with the actual protocols that are valid for each pair. The boxes
marked "Yes" are valid but do not have handy acronyms. The blank boxes are not
supported.

   Figure 4.5. Combinations of family and type for the socket function.

You may also encounter the corresponding PF_xxx constant as the first argument to socket
. We will say more about this at the end of this section.

We note that you may encounter AF_UNIX (the historical Unix name) instead of AF_LOCAL
(the POSIX name), and we will say more about this in Chapter 15.

There are other values for the family and type arguments. For example, 4.4BSD supports
both AF_NS (the Xerox NS protocols, often called XNS) and AF_ISO (the OSI protocols).
Similarly, the type of SOCK_SEQPACKET, a sequenced-packet socket, is implemented by both
the Xerox NS protocols and the OSI protocols, and we will describe its use with SCTP in
Section 9.2. But, TCP is a byte stream protocol, and supports only SOCK_STREAM sockets.

Linux supports a new socket type, SOCK_PACKET, that provides access to the datalink,
similar to BPF and DLPI in Figure 2.1. We will say more about this in Chapter 29.

The key socket, AF_KEY, is newer than the others. It provides support for cryptographic
security. Similar to the way that a routing socket (AF_ROUTE) is an interface to the kernel's
routing table, the key socket is an interface into the kernel's key table. See Chapter 19 for
details.

On success, the socket function returns a small non-negative integer value, similar to a file
descriptor. We call this a socket descriptor, or a sockfd. To obtain this socket descriptor, all
we have specified is a protocol family (IPv4, IPv6, or Unix) and the socket type (stream,
datagram, or raw). We have not yet specified either the local protocol address or the
foreign protocol address.

AF_xxx Versus PF_xxx

The "AF_" prefix stands for "address family" and the "PF_" prefix stands for "protocol
family." Historically, the intent was that a single protocol family might support multiple
address families and that the PF_ value was used to create the socket and the AF_ value
was used in socket address structures. But in actuality, a protocol family supporting
multiple address families has never been supported and the <sys/socket.h> header
defines the PF_ value for a given protocol to be equal to the AF_ value for that protocol.
While there is no guarantee that this equality between the two will always be true, should
anyone change this for existing protocols, lots of existing code would break. To conform to
existing coding practice, we use only the AF_ constants in this text, although you may
encounter the PF_ value, mainly in calls to socket.

Looking at 137 programs that call socket in the BSD/OS 2.1 release shows 143 calls that
specify the AF_ value and only 8 that specify the PF_ value.

Historically, the reason for the similar sets of constants with the AF_ and PF_ prefixes goes
back to 4.1cBSD [Lanciani 1996] and a version of the socket function that predates the
one we are describing (which appeared with 4.2BSD). The 4.1cBSD version of socket took
four arguments, one of which was a pointer to a sockproto structure. The first member of
this structure was named sp_family and its value was one of the PF_ values. The second
member, sp_protocol, was a protocol number, similar to the third argument to socket
today. Specifying this structure was the only way to specify the protocol family. Therefore,
in this early system, the PF_ values were used as structure tags to specify the protocol
family in the sockproto structure, and the AF_ values were used as structure tags to
specify the address family in the socket address structures. The sockproto structure is still
in 4.4BSD (pp. 626 627 of TCPv2), but is only used internally by the kernel. The original
definition had the comment "protocol family" for the sp_family member, but this has been
changed to "address family" in the 4.4BSD source code.

To confuse this difference between the AF_ and PF_ constants even more, the Berkeley
kernel data structure that contains the value that is compared to the first argument to
socket (the dom_family member of the domain structure, p. 187 of TCPv2) has the
comment that it contains an AF_ value. But, some of the domain structures within the
kernel are initialized to the corresponding AF_ value (p. 192 of TCPv2) while others are

initialized to the PF_ value (p. 646 of TCPv2 and p. 229 of TCPv3).

As another historical note, the 4.2BSD man page for socket, dated July 1983, calls its first
argument af and lists the possible values as the AF_ constants.

Finally, we note that the POSIX standard specifies that the first argument to socket be a
PF_ value, and the AF_ value be used for a socket address structure. But, it then defines
only one family value in the addrinfo structure (Section 11.6), intended for use in either a
call to socket or in a socket address structure!

4.3 connect Function
The connect function is used by a TCP client to establish a connection with a TCP server.

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 int connect(int sockfd, const struct sockaddr *servaddr, socklen_t addrlen);

                                                                   Returns: 0 if OK, -1 on error

sockfd is a socket descriptor returned by the socket function. The second and third
arguments are a pointer to a socket address structure and its size, as described in Section
3.3. The socket address structure must contain the IP address and port number of the
server. We saw an example of this function in Figure 1.5.

The client does not have to call bind (which we will describe in the next section) before
calling connect: the kernel will choose both an ephemeral port and the source IP address if
necessary.

In the case of a TCP socket, the connect function initiates TCP's three-way handshake (
Section 2.6). The function returns only when the connection is established or an error
occurs. There are several different error returns possible.

    1.   If the client TCP receives no response to its SYN segment, ETIMEDOUT is returned.
         4.4BSD, for example, sends one SYN when connect is called, another 6 seconds
         later, and another 24 seconds later (p. 828 of TCPv2). If no response is received
         after a total of 75 seconds, the error is returned.

         Some systems provide administrative control over this timeout; see Appendix E of
         TCPv1.

    2.   If the server's response to the client's SYN is a reset (RST), this indicates that no
         process is waiting for connections on the server host at the port specified (i.e., the
         server process is probably not running). This is a hard error and the error
         ECONNREFUSED is returned to the client as soon as the RST is received.

         An RST is a type of TCP segment that is sent by TCP when something is wrong.
         Three conditions that generate an RST are: when a SYN arrives for a port that has
         no listening server (what we just described), when TCP wants to abort an existing
         connection, and when TCP receives a segment for a connection that does not exist.
         (TCPv1 [pp. 246 250] contains additional information.)

    3.   If the client's SYN elicits an ICMP "destination unreachable" from some intermediate
         router, this is considered a soft error. The client kernel saves the message but keeps
         sending SYNs with the same time between each SYN as in the first scenario. If no
         response is received after some fixed amount of time (75 seconds for 4.4BSD), the
         saved ICMP error is returned to the process as either EHOSTUNREACH or ENETUNREACH.
         It is also possible that the remote system is not reachable by any route in the local
         system's forwarding table, or that the connect call returns without waiting at all.

         Many earlier systems, such as 4.2BSD, incorrectly aborted the connection
         establishment attempt when the ICMP "destination unreachable" was received. This
         is wrong because this ICMP error can indicate a transient condition. For example, it
         could be that the condition is caused by a routing problem that will be corrected.

         Notice that ENETUNREACH is not listed in Figure A.15, even when the error indicates

       that the destination network is unreachable. Network unreachables are considered
       obsolete, and applications should just treat ENETUNREACH and EHOSTUNREACH as the
       same error.

We can see these different error conditions with our simple client from Figure 1.5. We first
specify the local host (127.0.0.1), which is running the daytime server, and see the output.

         solaris % daytimetcpcli 127.0.0.1
         Sun Jul 27 22:01:51 2003

To see a different format for the returned reply, we specify a different machine's IP address
(in this example, the IP address of the HP-UX machine).

         solaris % daytimetcpcli 192.6.38.100
         Sun Jul 27 22:04:59 PDT 2003

Next, we specify an IP address that is on the local subnet (192.168.1/24) but the host ID
(100) is nonexistent. That is, there is no host on the subnet with a host ID of 100, so when
the client host sends out ARP requests (asking for that host to respond with its hardware
address), it will never receive an ARP reply.

         solaris % daytimetcpcli 192.168.1.100
         connect error: Connection timed out

We only get the error after the connect times out (around four minutes with Solaris 9).
Notice that our err_sys function prints the human-readable string associated with the
ETIMEDOUT error.

Our next example is to specify a host (a local router) that is not running a daytime server.

         solaris % daytimetcpcli 192.168.1.5
         connect error: Connection refused

The server responds immediately with an RST.

Our final example specifies an IP address that is not reachable on the Internet. If we watch
the packets with tcpdump, we see that a router six hops away returns an ICMP host
unreachable error.

         solaris % daytimetcpcli 192.3.4.5
         connect error: No route to host

As with the ETIMEDOUT error, in this example, connect returns the EHOSTUNREACH error only
after waiting its specified amount of time.

In terms of the TCP state transition diagram (Figure 2.4), connect moves from the CLOSED

state (the state in which a socket begins when it is created by the socket function) to the
SYN_SENT state, and then, on success, to the ESTABLISHED state. If connect fails, the
socket is no longer usable and must be closed. We cannot call connect again on the socket.
In Figure 11.10, we will see that when we call connect in a loop, trying each IP address for
a given host until one works, each time connect fails, we must close the socket descriptor
and call socket again.

4.4 bind Function
The bind function assigns a local protocol address to a socket. With the Internet protocols,
the protocol address is the combination of either a 32-bit IPv4 address or a 128-bit IPv6
address, along with a 16-bit TCP or UDP port number.

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 int bind (int sockfd, const struct sockaddr *myaddr, socklen_t addrlen);

                                                                  Returns: 0 if OK,-1 on error

Historically, the man page description of bind has said "bind assigns a name to an
unnamed socket." The use of the term "name" is confusing and gives the connotation of
domain names (Chapter 11) such as foo.bar.com. The bind function has nothing to do
with names. bind assigns a protocol address to a socket, and what that protocol address
means depends on the protocol.

The second argument is a pointer to a protocol-specific address, and the third argument is
the size of this address structure. With TCP, calling bind lets us specify a port number, an
IP address, both, or neither.

       Servers bind their well-known port when they start. We saw this in Figure 1.9. If a
        TCP client or server does not do this, the kernel chooses an ephemeral port for the
        socket when either connect or listen is called. It is normal for a TCP client to let
        the kernel choose an ephemeral port, unless the application requires a reserved port
        (Figure 2.10), but it is rare for a TCP server to let the kernel choose an ephemeral
        port, since servers are known by their well-known port.

        Exceptions to this rule are Remote Procedure Call (RPC) servers. They normally let
        the kernel choose an ephemeral port for their listening socket since this port is then
        registered with the RPC port mapper. Clients have to contact the port mapper to
        obtain the ephemeral port before they can connect to the server. This also applies
        to RPC servers using UDP.

       A process can bind a specific IP address to its socket. The IP address must belong
        to an interface on the host. For a TCP client, this assigns the source IP address that
        will be used for IP datagrams sent on the socket. For a TCP server, this restricts the
        socket to receive incoming client connections destined only to that IP address.

        Normally, a TCP client does not bind an IP address to its socket. The kernel chooses
        the source IP address when the socket is connected, based on the outgoing
        interface that is used, which in turn is based on the route required to reach the
        server (p. 737 of TCPv2).

        If a TCP server does not bind an IP address to its socket, the kernel uses the
        destination IP address of the client's SYN as the server's source IP address (p. 943
        of TCPv2).

As we said, calling bind lets us specify the IP address, the port, both, or neither. Figure 4.6
summarizes the values to which we set sin_addr and sin_port, or sin6_addr and
sin6_port, depending on the desired result.

 Figure 4.6. Result when specifying IP address and/or port number to
                                  bind.

If we specify a port number of 0, the kernel chooses an ephemeral port when bind is
called. But if we specify a wildcard IP address, the kernel does not choose the local IP
address until either the socket is connected (TCP) or a datagram is sent on the socket
(UDP).

With IPv4, the wildcard address is specified by the constant INADDR_ANY, whose value is
normally 0. This tells the kernel to choose the IP address. We saw the use of this in Figure
1.9 with the assignment

         struct sockaddr_in   servaddr;
         servaddr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl (INADDR_ANY);              /* wildcard */

While this works with IPv4, where an IP address is a 32-bit value that can be represented
as a simple numeric constant (0 in this case), we cannot use this technique with IPv6,
since the 128-bit IPv6 address is stored in a structure. (In C we cannot represent a
constant structure on the right-hand side of an assignment.) To solve this problem, we
write

         struct sockaddr_in6        serv;

         serv.sin6_addr = in6addr_any;           /* wildcard */

The system allocates and initializes the in6addr_any variable to the constant
IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT. The <netinet/in.h> header contains the extern declaration for
in6addr_any.

The value of INADDR_ANY (0) is the same in either network or host byte order, so the use of
htonl is not really required. But, since all the INADDR_constants defined by the
<netinet/in.h> header are defined in host byte order, we should use htonl with any of
these constants.

If we tell the kernel to choose an ephemeral port number for our socket, notice that bind
does not return the chosen value. Indeed, it cannot return this value since the second
argument to bind has the const qualifier. To obtain the value of the ephemeral port
assigned by the kernel, we must call getsockname to return the protocol address.

A common example of a process binding a non-wildcard IP address to a socket is a host
that provides Web servers to multiple organizations (Section 14.2 of TCPv3). First, each
organization has its own domain name, such as www.organization.com. Next, each
organization's domain name maps into a different IP address, but typically on the same
subnet. For example, if the subnet is 198.69.10, the first organization's IP address could
be 198.69.10.128, the next 198.69.10.129, and so on. All these IP addresses are then
aliased onto a single network interface (using the alias option of the ifconfig command
on 4.4BSD, for example) so that the IP layer will accept incoming datagrams destined for
any of the aliased addresses. Finally, one copy of the HTTP server is started for each
organization and each copy binds only the IP address for that organization.

An alternative technique is to run a single server that binds the wildcard address. When a
connection arrives, the server calls getsockname to obtain the destination IP address from
the client, which in our discussion above could be 198.69.10.128, 198.69.10.129, and so
on. The server then handles the client request based on the IP address to which the
connection was issued.

One advantage in binding a non-wildcard IP address is that the demultiplexing of a given
destination IP address to a given server process is then done by the kernel.

We must be careful to distinguish between the interface on which a packet arrives versus
the destination IP address of that packet. In Section 8.8, we will talk about the weak end
system model and the strong end system model. Most implementations employ the former,
meaning it is okay for a packet to arrive with a destination IP address that identifies an
interface other than the interface on which the packet arrives. (This assumes a multihomed
host.) Binding a non-wildcard IP address restricts the datagrams that will be delivered to
the socket based only on the destination IP address. It says nothing about the arriving
interface, unless the host employs the strong end system model.

A common error from bind is EADDRINUSE ("Address already in use"). We will say more
about this in Section 7.5 when we talk about the SO_REUSEADDR and SO_REUSEPORT socket
options.

4.5 listen Function
The listen function is called only by a TCP server and it performs two actions:

    1.   When a socket is created by the socket function, it is assumed to be an active
         socket, that is, a client socket that will issue a connect. The listen function
         converts an unconnected socket into a passive socket, indicating that the kernel
         should accept incoming connection requests directed to this socket. In terms of the
         TCP state transition diagram (Figure 2.4), the call to listen moves the socket from
         the CLOSED state to the LISTEN state.

    2.   The second argument to this function specifies the maximum number of connections
         the kernel should queue for this socket.

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 #int listen (int sockfd, int backlog);

                                                                Returns: 0 if OK, -1 on error

This function is normally called after both the socket and bind functions and must be
called before calling the accept function.

To understand the backlog argument, we must realize that for a given listening socket, the
kernel maintains two queues:

    1.   An incomplete connection queue, which contains an entry for each SYN that has
         arrived from a client for which the server is awaiting completion of the TCP
         three-way handshake. These sockets are in the SYN_RCVD state (Figure 2.4).

    2.   A completed connection queue, which contains an entry for each client with whom
         the TCP three-way handshake has completed. These sockets are in the
         ESTABLISHED state (Figure 2.4).

Figure 4.7 depicts these two queues for a given listening socket.

 Figure 4.7. The two queues maintained by TCP for a listening socket.

When an entry is created on the incomplete queue, the parameters from the listen socket
are copied over to the newly created connection. The connection creation mechanism is
completely automatic; the server process is not involved. Figure 4.8 depicts the packets
exchanged during the connection establishment with these two queues.

        Figure 4.8. TCP three-way handshake and the two queues for a
                               listening socket.

When a SYN arrives from a client, TCP creates a new entry on the incomplete queue and
then responds with the second segment of the three-way handshake: the server's SYN with
an ACK of the client's SYN (Section 2.6). This entry will remain on the incomplete queue
until the third segment of the three-way handshake arrives (the client's ACK of the server's
SYN), or until the entry times out. (Berkeley-derived implementations have a timeout of 75
seconds for these incomplete entries.) If the three-way handshake completes normally, the
entry moves from the incomplete queue to the end of the completed queue. When the
process calls accept, which we will describe in the next section, the first entry on the
completed queue is returned to the process, or if the queue is empty, the process is put to
sleep until an entry is placed onto the completed queue.

There are several points to consider regarding the handling of these two queues.

        The backlog argument to the listen function has historically specified the
         maximum value for the sum of both queues.

         There has never been a formal definition of what the backlog means. The 4.2BSD
         man page says that it "defines the maximum length the queue of pending
         connections may grow to." Many man pages and even the POSIX specification copy
         this definition verbatim, but this definition does not say whether a pending
         connection is one in the SYN_RCVD state, one in the ESTABLISHED state that has
         not yet been accepted, or either. The historical definition in this bullet is the
         Berkeley implementation, dating back to 4.2BSD, and copied by many others.

        Berkeley-derived implementations add a fudge factor to the backlog: It is multiplied
         by 1.5 (p. 257 of TCPv1 and p. 462 of TCPV2). For example, the commonly
         specified backlog of 5 really allows up to 8 queued entries on these systems, as we
         show in Figure 4.10.

         The reason for adding this fudge factor appears lost to history [Joy 1994]. But if we
         consider the backlog as specifying the maximum number of completed connections
         that the kernel will queue for a socket ([Borman 1997b], as discussed shortly), then
         the reason for the fudge factor is to take into account incomplete connections on the
         queue.

        Do not specify a backlog of 0, as different implementations interpret this differently
         (Figure 4.10). If you do not want any clients connecting to your listening socket,
         close the listening socket.

        Assuming the three-way handshake completes normally (i.e., no lost segments and
         no retransmissions), an entry remains on the incomplete connection queue for one
         RTT, whatever that value happens to be between a particular client and server.
         Section 14.4 of TCPv3 shows that for one Web server, the median RTT between
         many clients and the server was 187 ms. (The median is often used for this
         statistic, since a few large values can noticeably skew the mean.)

        Historically, sample code always shows a backlog of 5, as that was the maximum

        value supported by 4.2BSD. This was adequate in the 1980s when busy servers
        would handle only a few hundred connections per day. But with the growth of the
        World Wide Web (WWW), where busy servers handle millions of connections per
        day, this small number is completely inadequate (pp. 187 192 of TCPv3). Busy
        HTTP servers must specify a much larger backlog, and newer kernels must support
        larger values.

        Many current systems allow the administrator to modify the maximum value for the
        backlog.

       A problem is: What value should the application specify for the backlog, since 5 is
        often inadequate? There is no easy answer to this. HTTP servers now specify a larger
        value, but if the value specified is a constant in the source code, to increase the
        constant requires recompiling the server. Another method is to assume some
        default but allow a command-line option or an environment variable to override the
        default. It is always acceptable to specify a value that is larger than supported by
        the kernel, as the kernel should silently truncate the value to the maximum value
        that it supports, without returning an error (p. 456 of TCPv2).

        We can provide a simple solution to this problem by modifying our wrapper function
        for the listen function. Figure 4.9 shows the actual code. We allow the environment
        variable LISTENQ to override the value specified by the caller.

        Figure 4.9 Wrapper function for listen that allows an
        environment variable to specify backlog.
        lib/wrapsock.c

        137 void
        138 Listen (int fd, int backlog)
        139 {
        140      char   *ptr;

        141          /* can override 2nd argument with environment variable */
        142      if ( (ptr = getenv("LISTENQ")) != NULL)
        143          backlog = atoi (ptr);

        144      if (listen (fd, backlog) < 0)
        145          err_sys ("listen error");
        146 }
       Manuals and books have historically said that the reason for queuing a fixed number
        of connections is to handle the case of the server process being busy between
        successive calls to accept. This implies that of the two queues, the completed
        queue should normally have more entries than the incomplete queue. Again, busy
        Web servers have shown that this is false. The reason for specifying a large backlog
        is because the incomplete connection queue can grow as client SYNs arrive, waiting
        for completion of the three-way handshake.

       If the queues are full when a client SYN arrives, TCP ignores the arriving SYN (pp.
        930 931 of TCPv2); it does not send an RST. This is because the condition is
        considered temporary, and the client TCP will retransmit its SYN, hopefully finding
        room on the queue in the near future. If the server TCP immediately responded with
        an RST, the client's connect would return an error, forcing the application to handle
        this condition instead of letting TCP's normal retransmission take over. Also, the
        client could not differentiate between an RST in response to a SYN meaning "there
        is no server at this port" versus "there is a server at this port but its queues are
        full."

        Some implementations do send an RST when the queue is full. This behavior is

        incorrect for the reasons stated above, and unless your client specifically needs to
        interact with such a server, it's best to ignore this possibility. Coding to handle this
        case reduces the robustness of the client and puts more load on the network in the
        normal RST case, where the port really has no server listening on it.

       Data that arrives after the three-way handshake completes, but before the server
        calls accept, should be queued by the server TCP, up to the size of the connected
        socket's receive buffer.

Figure 4.10 shows the actual number of queued connections provided for different values
of the backlog argument for the various operating systems in Figure 1.16. For seven
different operating systems there are five distinct columns, showing the variety of
interpretations about what backlog means!

    Figure 4.10. Actual number of queued connections for values of
                               backlog.

AIX and MacOS have the traditional Berkeley algorithm, and Solaris seems very close to
that algorithm as well. FreeBSD just adds one to backlog.

The program to measure these values is shown in the solution for Exercise 15.4.

As we said, historically the backlog has specified the maximum value for the sum of both
queues. During 1996, a new type of attack was launched on the Internet called SYN
flooding [CERT 1996b]. The hacker writes a program to send SYNs at a high rate to the
victim, filling the incomplete connection queue for one or more TCP ports. (We use the
term hacker to mean the attacker, as described in [Cheswick, Bellovin, and Rubin 2003].)
Additionally, the source IP address of each SYN is set to a random number (this is called IP
spoofing) so that the server's SYN/ACK goes nowhere. This also prevents the server from
knowing the real IP address of the hacker. By filling the incomplete queue with bogus
SYNs, legitimate SYNs are not queued, providing a denial of service to legitimate clients.
There are two commonly used methods of handling these attacks, summarized in [Borman
1997b]. But what is most interesting in this note is revisiting what the listen backlog
really means. It should specify the maximum number of completed connections for a given
socket that the kernel will queue. The purpose of having a limit on these completed
connections is to stop the kernel from accepting new connection requests for a given
socket when the application is not accepting them (for whatever reason). If a system
implements this interpretation, as does BSD/OS 3.0, then the application need not specify
huge backlog values just because the server handles lots of client requests (e.g., a busy
Web server) or to provide protection against SYN flooding. The kernel handles lots of
incomplete connections, regardless of whether they are legitimate or from a hacker. But
even with this interpretation, scenarios do occur where the traditional value of 5 is
inadequate.

4.6 accept Function
accept is called by a TCP server to return the next completed connection from the front of
the completed connection queue (Figure 4.7). If the completed connection queue is empty,
the process is put to sleep (assuming the default of a blocking socket).

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 int accept (int sockfd, struct sockaddr *cliaddr, socklen_t *addrlen);

                                         Returns: non-negative descriptor if OK, -1 on error

The cliaddr and addrlen arguments are used to return the protocol address of the
connected peer process (the client). addrlen is a value-result argument (Section 3.3):
Before the call, we set the integer value referenced by *addrlen to the size of the socket
address structure pointed to by cliaddr; on return, this integer value contains the actual
number of bytes stored by the kernel in the socket address structure.

If accept is successful, its return value is a brand-new descriptor automatically created by
the kernel. This new descriptor refers to the TCP connection with the client. When
discussing accept, we call the first argument to accept the listening socket (the descriptor
created by socket and then used as the first argument to both bind and listen), and we
call the return value from accept the connected socket. It is important to differentiate
between these two sockets. A given server normally creates only one listening socket,
which then exists for the lifetime of the server. The kernel creates one connected socket for
each client connection that is accepted (i.e., for which the TCP three-way handshake
completes). When the server is finished serving a given client, the connected socket is
closed.

This function returns up to three values: an integer return code that is either a new socket
descriptor or an error indication, the protocol address of the client process (through the
cliaddr pointer), and the size of this address (through the addrlen pointer). If we are not
interested in having the protocol address of the client returned, we set both cliaddr and
addrlen to null pointers.

Figure 1.9 shows these points. The connected socket is closed each time through the loop,
but the listening socket remains open for the life of the server. We also see that the second
and third arguments to accept are null pointers, since we were not interested in the
identity of the client.

Example: Value-Result Arguments
We will now show how to handle the value-result argument to accept by modifying the
code from Figure 1.9 to print the IP address and port of the client. We show this in Figure
4.11.

Figure 4.11 Daytime server that prints client IP address and port
intro/daytimetcpsrv1.c

 1 #include       "unp.h" 2
 2 #include       <time.h>

 3 int
 4 main(int argc, char **argv)

 5 {
 6      int     listenfd, connfd;
 7      socklen_t len;
 8      struct sockaddr_in servaddr, cliaddr;
 9      char    buff[MAXLINE];
10      time_t ticks;

11      listenfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

12      bzero(&servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
13      servaddr.sin_family = AF_INET;
14      servaddr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl(INADDR_ANY);
15      servaddr.sin_port = htons(13); /* daytime server */

16      Bind(listenfd, (SA *) &servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));

17      Listen(listenfd, LISTENQ);

18      for ( ; ; ) {
19          len = sizeof(cliaddr);
20          connfd = Accept(listenfd, (SA *) &cliaddr, &len);
21          printf("connection from %s, port %d\n",
22                 Inet_ntop(AF_INET, &cliaddr.sin_addr, buff, sizeof(buff)),
23                 ntohs(cliaddr.sin_port));

24           ticks = time(NULL);
25           snprintf(buff, sizeof(buff), "%.24s\r\n", ctime(&ticks));
26           Write(connfd, buff, strlen(buff));

27           Close(connfd);
28      }
29 }
New declarations

7 8 We define two new variables: len, which will be a value-result variable, and cliaddr,
which will contain the client's protocol address.

Accept connection and print client's address

19 23 We initialize len to the size of the socket address structure and pass a pointer to
the cliaddr structure and a pointer to len as the second and third arguments to accept.
We call inet_ntop (Section 3.7) to convert the 32-bit IP address in the socket address
structure to a dotted-decimal ASCII string and call ntohs (Section 3.4) to convert the
16-bit port number from network byte order to host byte order.

Calling sock_ntop instead of inet_ntop would make our server more protocol-independent,
but this server is already dependent on IPv4. We will show a protocol-independent version
of this server in Figure 11.13.

If we run our new server and then run our client on the same host, connecting to our
server twice in a row, we have the following output from the client:

         solaris % daytimetcpcli 127.0.0.1
         Thu Sep 11 12:44:00 2003
         solaris % daytimetcpcli 192.168.1.20
         Thu Sep 11 12:44:09 2003

We first specify the server's IP address as the loopback address (127.0.0.1) and then as its
own IP address (192.168.1.20). Here is the corresponding server output:

         solaris # daytimetcpsrv1
         connection from 127.0.0.1, port 43388
         connection from 192.168.1.20, port 43389

Notice what happens with the client's IP address. Since our daytime client (Figure 1.5)
does not call bind, we said in Section 4.4 that the kernel chooses the source IP address
based on the outgoing interface that is used. In the first case, the kernel sets the source IP
address to the loopback address; in the second case, it sets the address to the IP address
of the Ethernet interface. We can also see in this example that the ephemeral port chosen
by the Solaris kernel is 43388, and then 43389 (recall Figure 2.10).

As a final point, our shell prompt for the server script changes to the pound sign (#), the
commonly used prompt for the superuser. Our server must run with superuser privileges
to bind the reserved port of 13. If we do not have superuser privileges, the call to bind will
fail:

         solaris % daytimetcpsrv1
         bind error: Permission denied

4.7 fork and exec Functions
Before describing how to write a concurrent server in the next section, we must describe
the Unix fork function. This function (including the variants of it provided by some
systems) is the only way in Unix to create a new process.

 #include <unistd.h>

 pid_t fork(void);

                                 Returns: 0 in child, process ID of child in parent, -1 on error

If you have never seen this function before, the hard part in understanding fork is that it
is called once but it returns twice. It returns once in the calling process (called the parent)
with a return value that is the process ID of the newly created process (the child). It also
returns once in the child, with a return value of 0. Hence, the return value tells the process
whether it is the parent or the child.

The reason fork returns 0 in the child, instead of the parent's process ID, is because a
child has only one parent and it can always obtain the parent's process ID by calling
getppid. A parent, on the other hand, can have any number of children, and there is no
way to obtain the process IDs of its children. If a parent wants to keep track of the process
IDs of all its children, it must record the return values from fork.

All descriptors open in the parent before the call to fork are shared with the child after
fork returns. We will see this feature used by network servers: The parent calls accept and
then calls fork. The connected socket is then shared between the parent and child.
Normally, the child then reads and writes the connected socket and the parent closes the
connected socket.

There are two typical uses of fork:

    1.   A process makes a copy of itself so that one copy can handle one operation while
         the other copy does another task. This is typical for network servers. We will see
         many examples of this later in the text.

    2.   A process wants to execute another program. Since the only way to create a new
         process is by calling fork, the process first calls fork to make a copy of itself, and
         then one of the copies (typically the child process) calls exec (described next) to
         replace itself with the new program. This is typical for programs such as shells.

The only way in which an executable program file on disk can be executed by Unix is for an
existing process to call one of the six exec functions. (We will often refer generically to
"the exec function" when it does not matter which of the six is called.) exec replaces the
current process image with the new program file, and this new program normally starts at
the main function. The process ID does not change. We refer to the process that calls exec
as the calling process and the newly executed program as the new program.

Older manuals and books incorrectly refer to the new program as the new process, which is
wrong, because a new process is not created.

The differences in the six exec functions are: (a) whether the program file to execute is
specified by a filename or a pathname; (b) whether the arguments to the new program are
listed one by one or referenced through an array of pointers; and (c) whether the
environment of the calling process is passed to the new program or whether a new
environment is specified.

 #include <unistd.h>

 int execl (const char *pathname, const char *arg0, ... /* (char *) 0 */ );

 int execv (const char *pathname, char *const argv[]);

 int execle (const char *pathname, const char *arg0, ...

                         /* (char *) 0, char *const envp[] */ );

 int execve (const char *pathname, char *const argv[], char *const envp[]);

 int execlp (const char *filename, const char *arg0, ... /* (char *) 0 */ );

 int execvp (const char *filename, char *const argv[]);

                                              All six return: -1 on error, no return on success

These functions return to the caller only if an error occurs. Otherwise, control passes to the
start of the new program, normally the main function.

The relationship among these six functions is shown in Figure 4.12. Normally, only execve
is a system call within the kernel and the other five are library functions that call execve.

            Figure 4.12. Relationship among the six exec functions.

Note the following differences among these six functions:

    1.   The three functions in the top row specify each argument string as a separate
         argument to the exec function, with a null pointer terminating the variable number
         of arguments. The three functions in the second row have an argv array, containing
         pointers to the argument strings. This argv array must contain a null pointer to
         specify its end, since a count is not specified.

    2.   The two functions in the left column specify a filename argument. This is converted
         into a pathname using the current PATH environment variable. If the filename
         argument to execlp or execvp contains a slash (/) anywhere in the string, the PATH
         variable is not used. The four functions in the right two columns specify a fully
         qualified pathname argument.

    3.   The four functions in the left two columns do not specify an explicit environment
         pointer. Instead, the current value of the external variable environ is used for
         building an environment list that is passed to the new program. The two functions
         in the right column specify an explicit environment list. The envp array of pointers
         must be terminated by a null pointer.

Descriptors open in the process before calling exec normally remain open across the exec.
We use the qualifier "normally" because this can be disabled using fcntl to set the
FD_CLOEXEC descriptor flag. The inetd server uses this feature, as we will describe in

Section 13.5.

4.8 Concurrent Servers
The server in Figure 4.11 is an iterative server. For something as simple as a daytime
server, this is fine. But when a client request can take longer to service, we do not want to
tie up a single server with one client; we want to handle multiple clients at the same time.
The simplest way to write a concurrent server under Unix is to fork a child process to
handle each client. Figure 4.13 shows the outline for a typical concurrent server.

Figure 4.13 Outline for typical concurrent server.

pid_t pid;
int   listenfd,     connfd;

listenfd = Socket( ... );

    /* fill in sockaddr_in{} with server's well-known port */
Bind(listenfd, ... );
Listen(listenfd, LISTENQ);

for ( ; ; ) {
    connfd = Accept (listenfd, ... );            /* probably blocks */

     if( (pid = Fork()) == 0) {
        Close(listenfd);    /* child closes listening socket */
        doit(connfd);       /* process the request */
        Close(connfd);      /* done with this client */
        exit(0);            /* child terminates */
     }

     Close(connfd);             /* parent closes connected socket */
}
When a connection is established, accept returns, the server calls fork, and the child
process services the client (on connfd, the connected socket) and the parent process waits
for another connection (on listenfd, the listening socket). The parent closes the
connected socket since the child handles the new client.

In Figure 4.13, we assume that the function doit does whatever is required to service the
client. When this function returns, we explicitly close the connected socket in the child.
This is not required since the next statement calls exit, and part of process termination is
to close all open descriptors by the kernel. Whether to include this explicit call to close or
not is a matter of personal programming taste.

We said in Section 2.6 that calling close on a TCP socket causes a FIN to be sent, followed
by the normal TCP connection termination sequence. Why doesn't the close of connfd in
Figure 4.13 by the parent terminate its connection with the client? To understand what's
happening, we must understand that every file or socket has a reference count. The
reference count is maintained in the file table entry (pp. 57 60 of APUE). This is a count of
the number of descriptors that are currently open that refer to this file or socket. In Figure
4.13, after socket returns, the file table entry associated with listenfd has a reference
count of 1. After accept returns, the file table entry associated with connfd has a reference
count of 1. But, after fork returns, both descriptors are shared (i.e., duplicated) between
the parent and child, so the file table entries associated with both sockets now have a
reference count of 2. Therefore, when the parent closes connfd, it just decrements the
reference count from 2 to 1 and that is all. The actual cleanup and de-allocation of the
socket does not happen until the reference count reaches 0. This will occur at some time

later when the child closes connfd.

We can also visualize the sockets and connection that occur in Figure 4.13 as follows.
First, Figure 4.14 shows the status of the client and server while the server is blocked in
the call to accept and the connection request arrives from the client.

     Figure 4.14. Status of client/server before call to accept returns.

Immediately after accept returns, we have the scenario shown in Figure 4.15. The
connection is accepted by the kernel and a new socket, connfd, is created. This is a
connected socket and data can now be read and written across the connection.

        Figure 4.15. Status of client/server after return from accept.

The next step in the concurrent server is to call fork. Figure 4.16 shows the status after
fork returns.

            Figure 4.16. Status of client/server after fork returns.

Notice that both descriptors, listenfd and connfd, are shared (duplicated) between the
parent and child.

The next step is for the parent to close the connected socket and the child to close the
listening socket. This is shown in Figure 4.17.

     Figure 4.17. Status of client/server after parent and child close
                           appropriate sockets.

This is the desired final state of the sockets. The child is handling the connection with the
client and the parent can call accept again on the listening socket, to handle the next
client connection.

4.9 close Function
The normal Unix close function is also used to close a socket and terminate a TCP
connection.

 #include <unistd.h>

 int close (int sockfd);

                                                                Returns: 0 if OK, -1 on error

The default action of close with a TCP socket is to mark the socket as closed and return to
the process immediately. The socket descriptor is no longer usable by the process: It
cannot be used as an argument to read or write. But, TCP will try to send any data that is
already queued to be sent to the other end, and after this occurs, the normal TCP
connection termination sequence takes place (Section 2.6).

In Section 7.5, we will describe the SO_LINGER socket option, which lets us change this
default action with a TCP socket. In that section, we will also describe what a TCP
application must do to be guaranteed that the peer application has received any
outstanding data.

Descriptor Reference Counts
At the end of Section 4.8, we mentioned that when the parent process in our concurrent
server closes the connected socket, this just decrements the reference count for the
descriptor. Since the reference count was still greater than 0, this call to close did not
initiate TCP's four-packet connection termination sequence. This is the behavior we want
with our concurrent server with the connected socket that is shared between the parent
and child.

If we really want to send a FIN on a TCP connection, the shutdown function can be used (
Section 6.6) instead of close. We will describe the motivation for this in Section 6.5.

We must also be aware of what happens in our concurrent server if the parent does not
call close for each connected socket returned by accept. First, the parent will eventually
run out of descriptors, as there is usually a limit to the number of descriptors that any
process can have open at any time. But more importantly, none of the client connections
will be terminated. When the child closes the connected socket, its reference count will go
from 2 to 1 and it will remain at 1 since the parent never closes the connected socket.
This will prevent TCP's connection termination sequence from occurring, and the
connection will remain open.

4.10 getsockname and getpeername Functions
These two functions return either the local protocol address associated with a socket (
getsockname) or the foreign protocol address associated with a socket (getpeername).

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 int getsockname(int sockfd, struct sockaddr *localaddr, socklen_t *addrlen);

 int getpeername(int sockfd, struct sockaddr *peeraddr, socklen_t *addrlen);

                                                              Both return: 0 if OK, -1 on error

Notice that the final argument for both functions is a value-result argument. That is, both
functions fill in the socket address structure pointed to by localaddr or peeraddr.

We mentioned in our discussion of bind that the term "name" is misleading. These two
functions return the protocol address associated with one of the two ends of a network
connection, which for IPV4 and IPV6 is the combination of an IP address and port number.
These functions have nothing to do with domain names (Chapter 11).

These two functions are required for the following reasons:

       After connect successfully returns in a TCP client that does not call bind,
        getsockname returns the local IP address and local port number assigned to the
        connection by the kernel.

       After calling bind with a port number of 0 (telling the kernel to choose the local port
        number), getsockname returns the local port number that was assigned.

       getsockname can be called to obtain the address family of a socket, as we show in
        Figure 4.19.

       In a TCP server that binds the wildcard IP address (Figure 1.9), once a connection
        is established with a client (accept returns successfully), the server can call
        getsockname to obtain the local IP address assigned to the connection. The socket
        descriptor argument in this call must be that of the connected socket, and not the
        listening socket.

       When a server is execed by the process that calls accept, the only way the server
        can obtain the identity of the client is to call getpeername. This is what happens
        whenever inetd (Section 13.5) forks and execs a TCP server. Figure 4.18 shows
        this scenario. inetd calls accept (top left box) and two values are returned: the
        connected socket descriptor, connfd, is the return value of the function, and the
        small box we label "peer's address" (an Internet socket address structure) contains
        the IP address and port number of the client. fork is called and a child of inetd is
        created. Since the child starts with a copy of the parent's memory image, the socket
        address structure is available to the child, as is the connected socket descriptor
        (since the descriptors are shared between the parent and child). But when the child
        execs the real server (say the Telnet server that we show), the memory image of
        the child is replaced with the new program file for the Telnet server (i.e., the socket
        address structure containing the peer's address is lost), and the connected socket
        descriptor remains open across the exec. One of the first function calls performed by
        the Telnet server is getpeername to obtain the IP address and port number of the
        client.

                   Figure 4.18. Example of inetd spawning a server.

Obviously the Telnet server in this final example must know the value of connfd when it
starts. There are two common ways to do this. First, the process calling exec can format
the descriptor number as a character string and pass it as a command-line argument to
the newly execed program. Alternately, a convention can be established that a certain
descriptor is always set to the connected socket before calling exec. The latter is what
inetd does, always setting descriptors 0, 1, and 2 to be the connected socket.

Example: Obtaining the Address Family of a Socket
The sockfd_to_family function shown in Figure 4.19 returns the address family of a
socket.

Figure 4.19 Return the address family of a socket.
lib/sockfd_to_family.c

 1 #include    "unp.h"
 2 int
 3 sockfd_to_family(int sockfd)
 4 {
 5     struct sockaddr_storage ss;
 6     socklen_t len;

 7      len = sizeof(ss);
 8      if (getsockname(sockfd, (SA *) &ss, &len) < 0)
 9          return (-1);
10      return (ss.ss_family);
11 }
Allocate room for largest socket address structure

5 Since we do not know what type of socket address structure to allocate, we use a
sockaddr_storage value, since it can hold any socket address structure supported by the
system.

Call getsockname

7 10 We call getsockname and return the address family.

Since the POSIX specification allows a call to getsockname on an unbound socket, this
function should work for any open socket descriptor.

4.11 Summary
All clients and servers begin with a call to socket, returning a socket descriptor. Clients
then call connect, while servers call bind, listen, and accept. Sockets are normally closed
with the standard close function, although we will see another way to do this with the
shutdown function (Section 6.6), and we will also examine the effect of the SO_LINGER
socket option (Section 7.5).

Most TCP servers are concurrent, with the server calling fork for every client connection
that it handles. We will see that most UDP servers are iterative. While these two models
have been used successfully for many years, in Chapter 30 we will look at other server
design options that use threads and processes.

Exercises
     4.1 In Section 4.4, we stated that the INADDR_ constants defined by the
         <netinet/in.h> header are in host byte order. How can we tell this?

     4.2 Modify Figure 1.5 to call getsockname after connect returns successfully.
         Print the local IP address and local port assigned to the TCP socket using
         sock_ntop. In what range (Figure 2.10) are your system's ephemeral
         ports?

     4.3 In a concurrent server, assume the child runs first after the call to fork.
         The child then completes the service of the client before the call to fork
         returns to the parent. What happens in the two calls to close in Figure
         4.13?

     4.4 In Figure 4.11, first change the server's port from 13 to 9999 (so that we
         do not need super-user privileges to start the program). Remove the call
         to listen. What happens?

     4.5 Continue the previous exercise. Remove the call to bind, but allow the
         call to listen. What happens?

