
Chapter 8. Elementary UDP Sockets
       Section 8.1.?Introduction

       Section 8.2.?recvfrom and sendto Functions

       Section 8.3.?UDP Echo Server: main Function

       Section 8.4.?UDP Echo Server: dg_echo Function

       Section 8.5.?UDP Echo Client: main Function

       Section 8.6.?UDP Echo Client: dg_cli Function

       Section 8.7.?Lost Datagrams

       Section 8.8.?Verifying Received Response

       Section 8.9.?Server Not Running

       Section 8.10.?Summary of UDP Example

       Section 8.11.?connect Function with UDP

       Section 8.12.?dg_cli Function (Revisited)

       Section 8.13.?Lack of Flow Control with UDP

       Section 8.14.?Determining Outgoing Interface with UDP

       Section 8.15.?TCP and UDP Echo Server Using select

       Section 8.16.?Summary

       Exercises

                                                                                Page 286

8.1 Introduction
There are some fundamental differences between applications written using TCP versus
those that use UDP. These are because of the differences in the two transport layers: UDP
is a connectionless, unreliable, datagram protocol, quite unlike the connection-oriented,
reliable byte stream provided by TCP. Nevertheless, there are instances when it makes
sense to use UDP instead of TCP, and we will go over this design choice in Section 22.4.
Some popular applications are built using UDP: DNS, NFS, and SNMP, for example.

Figure 8.1 shows the function calls for a typical UDP client/server. The client does not
establish a connection with the server. Instead, the client just sends a datagram to the
server using the sendto function (described in the next section), which requires the
address of the destination (the server) as a parameter. Similarly, the server does not
accept a connection from a client. Instead, the server just calls the recvfrom function,
which waits until data arrives from some client. recvfrom returns the protocol address of
the client, along with the datagram, so the server can send a response to the correct client.

               Figure 8.1. Socket functions for UDP client/server.

Figure 8.1 shows a timeline of the typical scenario that takes place for a UDP client/server
exchange. We can compare this to the typical TCP exchange that was shown in Figure 4.1.

In this chapter, we will describe the new functions that we use with UDP sockets, recvfrom
and sendto, and redo our echo client/server to use UDP. We will also describe the use of
the connect function with a UDP socket, and the concept of asynchronous errors.

                                                                                                Page 287

8.2 recvfrom and sendto Functions
These two functions are similar to the standard read and write functions, but three
additional arguments are required.

 #include <sys/socket.h>

 ssize_t recvfrom(int sockfd, void *buff, size_t nbytes, int flags, struct sockaddr *
 from, socklen_t *addrlen);

 ssize_t sendto(int sockfd, const void *buff, size_t nbytes, int flags, const struct
 sockaddr *to, socklen_t addrlen);

                            Both return: number of bytes read or written if OK,    1 on error

The first three arguments, sockfd, buff, and nbytes, are identical to the first three
arguments for read and write: descriptor, pointer to buffer to read into or write from, and
number of bytes to read or write.

We will describe the flags argument in Chapter 14 when we discuss the recv, send,
recvmsg, and sendmsg functions, since we do not need them with our simple UDP
client/server example in this chapter. For now, we will always set the flags to 0.

The to argument for sendto is a socket address structure containing the protocol address
(e.g., IP address and port number) of where the data is to be sent. The size of this socket
address structure is specified by addrlen. The recvfrom function fills in the socket address
structure pointed to by from with the protocol address of who sent the datagram. The
number of bytes stored in this socket address structure is also returned to the caller in the
integer pointed to by addrlen. Note that the final argument to sendto is an integer value,
while the final argument to recvfrom is a pointer to an integer value (a value-result
argument).

The final two arguments to recvfrom are similar to the final two arguments to accept: The
contents of the socket address structure upon return tell us who sent the datagram (in the
case of UDP) or who initiated the connection (in the case of TCP). The final two arguments
to sendto are similar to the final two arguments to connect: We fill in the socket address
structure with the protocol address of where to send the datagram (in the case of UDP) or
with whom to establish a connection (in the case of TCP).

Both functions return the length of the data that was read or written as the value of the
function. In the typical use of recvfrom, with a datagram protocol, the return value is the
amount of user data in the datagram received.

Writing a datagram of length 0 is acceptable. In the case of UDP, this results in an IP
datagram containing an IP header (normally 20 bytes for IPv4 and 40 bytes for IPv6), an
8-byte UDP header, and no data. This also means that a return value of 0 from recvfrom is
acceptable for a datagram protocol: It does not mean that the peer has closed the
connection, as does a return value of 0 from read on a TCP socket. Since UDP is
connectionless, there is no such thing as closing a UDP connection.

If the from argument to recvfrom is a null pointer, then the corresponding length
argument (addrlen) must also be a null pointer, and this indicates that we are not
interested in knowing the protocol address of who sent us data.

Both recvfrom and sendto can be used with TCP, although there is normally no reason to

                                                                                                Page 288

do so.

                                                                                Page 289

8.3 UDP Echo Server: main Function
We will now redo our simple echo client/server from Chapter 5 using UDP. Our UDP client
and server programs follow the function call flow that we diagrammed in Figure 8.1. Figure
8.2 depicts the functions that are used. Figure 8.3 shows the server main function.

               Figure 8.2. Simple echo client/server using UDP.

Figure 8.3 UDP echo server.
udpcliserv/udpserv01.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"

 2 int
 3 main(int argc, char **argv)
 4 {
 5     int     sockfd;
 6     struct sockaddr_in servaddr, cliaddr;

 7      sockfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, 0);

 8      bzero(&servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
 9      servaddr.sin_family = AF_INET;
10      servaddr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl(INADDR_ANY);
11      servaddr.sin_port = htons(SERV_PORT);

12      Bind(sockfd, (SA *) &servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));

13      dg_echo(sockfd, (SA *) &cliaddr, sizeof(cliaddr));
14 }

Create UDP socket, bind server's well-known port
7 12 We create a UDP socket by specifying the second argument to socket as SOCK_DGRAM
(a datagram socket in the IPv4 protocol). As with the TCP server example, the IPv4
address for the bind is specified as INADDR_ANY and the server's well-known port is the
constant SERV_PORT from the unp.h header.

13 The function dg_echo is called to perform server processing.

                                                                                             Page 290

8.4 UDP Echo Server: dg_echo Function
Figure 8.4 shows the dg_echo function.

Figure 8.4 dg_echo function: echo lines on a datagram socket.
lib/dg_echo.c

 1 #include         "unp.h"

 2 void
 3 dg_echo(int sockfd, SA *pcliaddr, socklen_t clilen)
 4 {
 5      int     n;
 6      socklen_t len;
 7      char    mesg[MAXLINE];

 8      for ( ; ; ) {
 9          len = clilen;
10          n = Recvfrom(sockfd, mesg, MAXLINE, 0, pcliaddr, &len);

11             Sendto(sockfd, mesg, n, 0, pcliaddr, len);
12      }
13 }

Read datagram, echo back to sender
8 12 This function is a simple loop that reads the next datagram arriving at the server's
port using recvfrom and sends it back using sendto.

Despite the simplicity of this function, there are numerous details to consider. First, this
function never terminates. Since UDP is a connectionless protocol, there is nothing like an
EOF as we have with TCP.

Next, this function provides an iterative server, not a concurrent server as we had with
TCP. There is no call to fork, so a single server process handles any and all clients. In
general, most TCP servers are concurrent and most UDP servers are iterative.

There is implied queuing taking place in the UDP layer for this socket. Indeed, each UDP
socket has a receive buffer and each datagram that arrives for this socket is placed in that
socket receive buffer. When the process calls recvfrom, the next datagram from the buffer
is returned to the process in a first-in, first-out (FIFO) order. This way, if multiple
datagrams arrive for the socket before the process can read what's already queued for the
socket, the arriving datagrams are just added to the socket receive buffer. But, this buffer
has a limited size. We discussed this size and how to increase it with the SO_RCVBUF socket
option in Section 7.5.

Figure 8.5 summarizes our TCP client/server from Chapter 5 when two clients establish
connections with the server.

        Figure 8.5. Summary of TCP client/server with two clients.

                                                                                               Page 291

There are two connected sockets and each of the two connected sockets on the server host
has its own socket receive buffer.

Figure 8.6 shows the scenario when two clients send datagrams to our UDP server.

        Figure 8.6. Summary of UDP client/server with two clients.

There is only one server process and it has a single socket on which it receives all arriving
datagrams and sends all responses. That socket has a receive buffer into which all arriving
datagrams are placed.

The main function in Figure 8.3 is protocol-dependent (it creates a socket of protocol
AF_INET and allocates and initializes an IPv4 socket address structure), but the dg_echo
function is protocol-independent. The reason dg_echo is protocol-independent is because
the caller (the main function in our case) must allocate a socket address structure of the
correct size, and a pointer to this structure, along with its size, are passed as arguments
to dg_echo. The function dg_echo never looks inside this protocol-dependent structure: It
simply passes a pointer to the structure to recvfrom and sendto. recvfrom fills this
structure with the IP address and port number of the client, and since the same pointer (
pcliaddr) is then passed to sendto as the destination address, this is how the datagram is
echoed back to the client that sent the datagram.

                                                                                                Page 292

8.5 UDP Echo Client: main Function
The UDP client main function is shown in Figure 8.7.

Figure 8.7 UDP echo client.
udpcliserv/udpcli01.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"

 2 int
 3 main(int argc, char **argv)
 4 {
 5     int     sockfd;
 6     struct sockaddr_in servaddr;

 7      if(argc != 2)
 8         err_quit("usage: udpcli <IPaddress>");

 9      bzero(&servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
10      servaddr.sin_family = AF_INET;
11      servaddr.sin_port = htons(SERV_PORT);
12      Inet_pton(AF_INET, argv[1], &servaddr.sin_addr);

13      sockfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, 0);

14      dg_cli(stdin, sockfd, (SA *) &servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));

15      exit(0);
16 }

Fill in socket address structure with server's address
9 12 An IPv4 socket address structure is filled in with the IP address and port number of
the server. This structure will be passed to dg_cli, specifying where to send datagrams.

13 14 A UDP socket is created and the function dg_cli is called.

                                                                                            Page 293

8.6 UDP Echo Client: dg_cli Function
Figure 8.8 shows the function dg_cli, which performs most of the client processing.

Figure 8.8 dg_cli function: client processing loop.
lib/dg_cli.c

 1 #include         "unp.h"

 2 void
 3 dg_cli(FILE *fp, int sockfd, const SA *pservaddr, socklen_t servlen)
 4 {
 5      int    n;
 6      char   sendline[MAXLINE], recvline[MAXLINE + 1];

 7      while (Fgets(sendline, MAXLINE, fp) != NULL) {

 8             Sendto(sockfd, sendline, strlen(sendline), 0, pservaddr, servlen);

 9             n = Recvfrom(sockfd, recvline, MAXLINE, 0, NULL, NULL);

10             recvline[n] = 0;         /* null terminate */
11             Fputs(recvline, stdout);
12      }
13 }
7 12 There are four steps in the client processing loop: read a line from standard input
using fgets, send the line to the server using sendto, read back the server's echo using
recvfrom, and print the echoed line to standard output using fputs.

Our client has not asked the kernel to assign an ephemeral port to its socket. (With a TCP
client, we said the call to connect is where this takes place.) With a UDP socket, the first
time the process calls sendto, if the socket has not yet had a local port bound to it, that is
when an ephemeral port is chosen by the kernel for the socket. As with TCP, the client can
call bind explicitly, but this is rarely done.

Notice that the call to recvfrom specifies a null pointer as the fifth and sixth arguments.
This tells the kernel that we are not interested in knowing who sent the reply. There is a
risk that any process, on either the same host or some other host, can send a datagram to
the client's IP address and port, and that datagram will be read by the client, who will
think it is the server's reply. We will address this in Section 8.8.

As with the server function dg_echo, the client function dg_cli is protocol-independent,
but the client main function is protocol-dependent. The main function allocates and
initializes a socket address structure of some protocol type and then passes a pointer to
this structure, along with its size, to dg_cli.

                                                                                                 Page 294

8.7 Lost Datagrams
Our UDP client/server example is not reliable. If a client datagram is lost (say it is
discarded by some router between the client and server), the client will block forever in its
call to recvfrom in the function dg_cli, waiting for a server reply that will never arrive.
Similarly, if the client datagram arrives at the server but the server's reply is lost, the
client will again block forever in its call to recvfrom. A typical way to prevent this is to
place a timeout on the client's call to recvfrom. We will discuss this in Section 14.2.

Just placing a timeout on the recvfrom is not the entire solution. For example, if we do
time out, we cannot tell whether our datagram never made it to the server, or if the
server's reply never made it back. If the client's request was something like "transfer a
certain amount of money from account A to account B" (instead of our simple echo server),
it would make a big difference as to whether the request was lost or the reply was lost. We
will talk more about adding reliability to a UDP client/server in Section 22.5.

                                                                                                Page 295

8.8 Verifying Received Response
At the end of Section 8.6, we mentioned that any process that knows the client's
ephemeral port number could send datagrams to our client, and these would be intermixed
with the normal server replies. What we can do is change the call to recvfrom in Figure 8.8
to return the IP address and port of who sent the reply and ignore any received datagrams
that are not from the server to whom we sent the datagram. There are a few pitfalls with
this, however, as we will see.

First, we change the client main function (Figure 8.7) to use the standard echo server (
Figure 2.18). We just replace the assignment

servaddr.sin_port = htons(SERV_PORT);

with

servaddr.sin_port = htons(7);

We do this so we can use any host running the standard echo server with our client.

We then recode the dg_cli function to allocate another socket address structure to hold
the structure returned by recvfrom. We show this in Figure 8.9.

Allocate another socket address structure
9 We allocate another socket address structure by calling malloc. Notice that the dg_cli
function is still protocol-independent; because we do not care what type of socket address
structure we are dealing with, we use only its size in the call to malloc.

Compare returned address
12 18 In the call to recvfrom, we tell the kernel to return the address of the sender of the
datagram. We first compare the length returned by recvfrom in the value-result argument
and then compare the socket address structures themselves using memcmp.

Section 3.2 says that even if the socket address structure contains a length field, we need
never set it or examine it. However, memcmp compares every byte of data in the two socket
address structures, and the length field is set in the socket address structure that the
kernel returns; so in this case we must set it when constructing the sockaddr. If we don't,
the memcmp will compare a 0 (since we didn't set it) with a 16 (assuming sockaddr_in) and
will not match.

Figure 8.9 Version of dg_cli that verifies returned socket address.
udpcliserv/dgcliaddr.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"

 2 void
 3 dg_cli(FILE *fp, int sockfd, const SA *pservaddr, socklen_t servlen)
 4 {

                                                                                               Page 296

 5       int     n;
 6       char    sendline[MAXLINE], recvline[MAXLINE + 1];
 7       socklen_t len;
 8       struct sockaddr *preply_addr;

 9       preply_addr = Malloc(servlen);

10       while (Fgets(sendline, MAXLINE, fp) != NULL) {

11           Sendto(sockfd, sendline, strlen(sendline), 0, pservaddr, servlen);

12           len = servlen;
13           n = Recvfrom(sockfd, recvline, MAXLINE, 0, preply_addr, &len);
14           if (len != servlen || memcmp(pservaddr, preply_addr, len) != 0) {
15               printf("reply from %s (ignored)\n", Sock_ntop(preply_addr,
len));
16                continue;
17           }

18           recvline[n] = 0;      /* null terminate */
19           Fputs(recvline, stdout);
20       }
21 }
This new version of our client works fine if the server is on a host with just a single IP
address. But this program can fail if the server is multihomed. We run this program to our
host freebsd4, which has two interfaces and two IP addresses.

macosx % host freebsd4
freebsd4.unpbook.com has address 172.24.37.94
freebsd4.unpbook.com has address 135.197.17.100
macosx % udpcli02 135.197.17.100
hello
reply from 172.24.37.94:7 (ignored)
goodbye
reply from 172.24.37.94:7 (ignored)

We specified the IP address that does not share the same subnet as the client.

This is normally allowed. Most IP implementations accept an arriving IP datagram that is
destined for any of the host's IP addresses, regardless of the interface on which the
datagram arrives (pp. 217 219 of TCPv2). RFC 1122 [Braden 1989] calls this the weak
end system model. If a system implemented what this RFC calls the strong end system
model, it would accept an arriving datagram only if that datagram arrived on the interface
to which it was addressed.

The IP address returned by recvfrom (the source IP address of the UDP datagram) is not
the IP address to which we sent the datagram. When the server sends its reply, the
destination IP address is 172.24.37.78. The routing function within the kernel on freebsd4
chooses 172.24.37.94 as the outgoing interface. Since the server has not bound an IP
address to its socket (the server has bound the wildcard address to its socket, which is
something we can verify by running netstat on freebsd), the kernel chooses the source
address for the IP datagram. It is chosen to be the primary IP address of the outgoing
interface (pp. 232 233 of TCPv2). Also, since it is the primary IP address of the interface,
if we send our datagram to a nonprimary IP address of the interface (i.e., an alias), this
will also cause our test in Figure 8.9 to fail.

One solution is for the client to verify the responding host's domain name instead of its IP

                                                                                               Page 297

address by looking up the server's name in the DNS (Chapter 11), given the IP address
returned by recvfrom. Another solution is for the UDP server to create one socket for every
IP address that is configured on the host, bind that IP address to the socket, use select
across all these sockets (waiting for any one to become readable), and then reply from the
socket that is readable. Since the socket used for the reply was bound to the IP address
that was the destination address of the client's request (or the datagram would not have
been delivered to the socket), this guaranteed that the source address of the reply was the
same as the destination address of the request. We will show an example of this in Section
22.6.

On a multihomed Solaris system, the source IP address for the server's reply is the
destination IP address of the client's request. The scenario described in this section is for
Berkeley-derived implementations that choose the source IP address based on the
outgoing interface.

                                                                                                Page 298

8.9 Server Not Running
The next scenario to examine is starting the client without starting the server. If we do so
and type in a single line to the client, nothing happens. The client blocks forever in its call
to recvfrom, waiting for a server reply that will never appear. But, this is an example
where we need to understand more about the underlying protocols to understand what is
happening to our networking application.

First we start tcpdump on the host macosx, and then we start the client on the same host,
specifying the host freebsd4 as the server host. We then type a single line, but the line is
not echoed.

 macosx % udpcli01 172.24.37.94

 hello, world

                                                 we type this line but nothing is echoed back

Figure 8.10 shows the tcpdump output.

Figure 8.10 tcpdump output when server process not started on server
host.

1 0.0                         arp who-has freebsd4 tell macosx
2 0.003576 ( 0.0036)          arp reply freebsd4 is-at 0:40:5:42:d6:de

3 0.003601 ( 0.0000)          macosx.51139 > freebsd4.9877: udp 13
4 0.009781 ( 0.0062)          freebsd4 > macosx: icmp: freebsd4 udp port 9877
unreachable
First we notice that an ARP request and reply are needed before the client host can send
the UDP datagram to the server host. (We left this exchange in the output to reiterate the
potential for an ARP request-reply before an IP datagram can be sent to another host or
router on the local network.)

In line 3, we see the client datagram sent but the server host responds in line 4 with an
ICMP "port unreachable." (The length of 13 accounts for the 12 characters and the
newline.) This ICMP error, however, is not returned to the client process, for reasons that
we will describe shortly. Instead, the client blocks forever in the call to recvfrom in Figure
8.8. We also note that ICMPv6 has a "port unreachable" error, similar to ICMPv4 (Figures
A.15 and A.16), so the results described here are similar for IPv6.

We call this ICMP error an asynchronous error. The error was caused by sendto, but sendto
returned successfully. Recall from Section 2.11 that a successful return from a UDP output
operation only means there was room for the resulting IP datagram on the interface output
queue. The ICMP error is not returned until later (4 ms later in Figure 8.10), which is why
it is called asynchronous.

The basic rule is that an asynchronous error is not returned for a UDP socket unless the
socket has been connected. We will describe how to call connect for a UDP socket in
Section 8.11. Why this design decision was made when sockets were first implemented is
rarely understood. (The implementation implications are discussed on pp. 748 749 of
TCPv2.)

Consider a UDP client that sends three datagrams in a row to three different servers (i.e.,
three different IP addresses) on a single UDP socket. The client then enters a loop that

                                                                                                  Page 299

calls recvfrom to read the replies. Two of the datagrams are correctly delivered (that is,
the server was running on two of the three hosts) but the third host was not running the
server. This third host responds with an ICMP port unreachable. This ICMP error message
contains the IP header and UDP header of the datagram that caused the error. (ICMPv4
and ICMPv6 error messages always contain the IP header and all of the UDP header or part
of the TCP header to allow the receiver of the ICMP error to determine which socket caused
the error. We will show this in Figures 28.21 and 28.22.) The client that sent the three
datagrams needs to know the destination of the datagram that caused the error to
distinguish which of the three datagrams caused the error. But how can the kernel return
this information to the process? The only piece of information that recvfrom can return is
an errno value; recvfrom has no way of returning the destination IP address and
destination UDP port number of the datagram in error. The decision was made, therefore,
to return these asynchronous errors to the process only if the process connected the UDP
socket to exactly one peer.

Linux returns most ICMP "destination unreachable" errors even for unconnected sockets, as
long as the SO_BSDCOMPAT socket option is not enabled. All the ICMP "destination
unreachable" errors from Figure A.15 are returned, except codes 0, 1, 4, 5, 11, and 12.

We return to this problem of asynchronous errors with UDP sockets in Section 28.7 and
show an easy way to obtain these errors on unconnected sockets using a daemon of our
own.

                                                                                             Page 300

8.10 Summary of UDP Example
Figure 8.11 shows as bullets the four values that must be specified or chosen when the
client sends a UDP datagram.

 Figure 8.11. Summary of UDP client/server from client's perspective.

The client must specify the server's IP address and port number for the call to sendto.
Normally, the client's IP address and port are chosen automatically by the kernel, although
we mentioned that the client can call bind if it so chooses. If these two values for the client
are chosen by the kernel, we also mentioned that the client's ephemeral port is chosen
once, on the first sendto, and then it never changes. The client's IP address, however, can
change for every UDP datagram that the client sends, assuming the client does not bind a
specific IP address to the socket. The reason is shown in Figure 8.11: If the client host is
multihomed, the client could alternate between two destinations, one going out the
datalink on the left, and the other going out the datalink on the right. In this worst-case
scenario, the client's IP address, as chosen by the kernel based on the outgoing datalink,
would change for every datagram.

What happens if the client binds an IP address to its socket, but the kernel decides that an
outgoing datagram must be sent out some other datalink? In this case the IP datagram
will contain a source IP address that is different from the IP address of the outgoing
datalink (see Exercise 8.6).

Figure 8.12 shows the same four values, but from the server's perspective.

 Figure 8.12. Summary of UDP client/server from server's perspective.

                                                                                                  Page 301

There are at least four pieces of information that a server might want to know from an
arriving IP datagram: the source IP address, destination IP address, source port number,
and destination port number. Figure 8.13 shows the function calls that return this
information for a TCP server and a UDP server.

       Figure 8.13. Information available to server from arriving IP
                                datagram.

A TCP server always has easy access to all four pieces of information for a connected
socket, and these four values remain constant for the lifetime of a connection. With a UDP
socket, however, the destination IP address can only be obtained by setting the
IP_RECVDSTADDR socket option for IPv4 or the IPV6_PKTINFO socket option for IPv6 and
then calling recvmsg instead of recvfrom. Since UDP is connectionless, the destination IP
address can change for each datagram that is sent to the server. A UDP server can also
receive datagrams destined for one of the host's broadcast addresses or for a multicast
address, as we will discuss in Chapters 20 and 21. We will show how to determine the
destination address of a UDP datagram in Section 22.2, after we cover the recvmsg
function.

                                                                                             Page 302

8.11 connect Function with UDP
We mentioned at the end of Section 8.9 that an asynchronous error is not returned on a
UDP socket unless the socket has been connected. Indeed, we are able to call connect (
Section 4.3) for a UDP socket. But this does not result in anything like a TCP connection:
There is no three-way handshake. Instead, the kernel just checks for any immediate errors
(e.g., an obviously unreachable destination), records the IP address and port number of
the peer (from the socket address structure passed to connect), and returns immediately
to the calling process.

Overloading the connect function with this capability for UDP sockets is confusing. If the
convention that sockname is the local protocol address and peername is the foreign protocol
address is used, then a better name would have been setpeername. Similarly, a better
name for the bind function would be setsockname.

With this capability, we must now distinguish between

        An unconnected UDP socket, the default when we create a UDP socket

        A connected UDP socket, the result of calling connect on a UDP socket

With a connected UDP socket, three things change, compared to the default unconnected
UDP socket:

    1.   We can no longer specify the destination IP address and port for an output
         operation. That is, we do not use sendto, but write or send instead. Anything
         written to a connected UDP socket is automatically sent to the protocol address
         (e.g., IP address and port) specified by connect.

         Similar to TCP, we can call sendto for a connected UDP socket, but we cannot
         specify a destination address. The fifth argument to sendto (the pointer to the
         socket address structure) must be a null pointer, and the sixth argument (the size
         of the socket address structure) should be 0. The POSIX specification states that
         when the fifth argument is a null pointer, the sixth argument is ignored.

    2.   We do not need to use recvfrom to learn the sender of a datagram, but read, recv,
         or recvmsg instead. The only datagrams returned by the kernel for an input
         operation on a connected UDP socket are those arriving from the protocol address
         specified in connect. Datagrams destined to the connected UDP socket's local
         protocol address (e.g., IP address and port) but arriving from a protocol address
         other than the one to which the socket was connected are not passed to the
         connected socket. This limits a connected UDP socket to exchanging datagrams with
         one and only one peer.

         Technically, a connected UDP socket exchanges datagrams with only one IP address,
         because it is possible to connect to a multicast or broadcast address.

    3.   Asynchronous errors are returned to the process for connected UDP sockets.

         The corollary, as we previously described, is that unconnected UDP sockets do not
         receive asynchronous errors.

Figure 8.14 summarizes the first point in the list with respect to 4.4BSD.

 Figure 8.14. TCP and UDP sockets: can a destination protocol address
                            be specified?

                                                                                              Page 303

The POSIX specification states that an output operation that does not specify a destination
address on an unconnected UDP socket should return ENOTCONN, not EDESTADDRREQ.

Figure 8.15 summarizes the three points that we made about a connected UDP socket.

                       Figure 8.15. Connected UDP socket.

The application calls connect, specifying the IP address and port number of its peer. It
then uses read and write to exchange data with the peer.

Datagrams arriving from any other IP address or port (which we show as "???" in Figure
8.15) are not passed to the connected socket because either the source IP address or
source UDP port does not match the protocol address to which the socket is connected.
These datagrams could be delivered to some other UDP socket on the host. If there is no
other matching socket for the arriving datagram, UDP will discard it and generate an ICMP
"port unreachable" error.

In summary, we can say that a UDP client or server can call connect only if that process
uses the UDP socket to communicate with exactly one peer. Normally, it is a UDP client
that calls connect, but there are applications in which the UDP server communicates with a
single client for a long duration (e.g., TFTP); in this case, both the client and server can
call connect.

The DNS provides another example, as shown in Figure 8.16.

     Figure 8.16. Example of DNS clients and servers and the connect
                               function.

A DNS client can be configured to use one or more servers, normally by listing the IP
addresses of the servers in the file /etc/resolv.conf. If a single server is listed (the
leftmost box in the figure), the client can call connect, but if multiple servers are listed
(the second box from the right in the figure), the client cannot call connect. Also, a DNS
server normally handles any client request, so the servers cannot call connect.

Calling connect Multiple Times for a UDP Socket

                                                                                               Page 304

A process with a connected UDP socket can call connect again for that socket for one of two
reasons:

       To specify a new IP address and port

       To unconnect the socket

The first case, specifying a new peer for a connected UDP socket, differs from the use of
connect with a TCP socket: connect can be called only one time for a TCP socket.

To unconnect a UDP socket, we call connect but set the family member of the socket
address structure (sin_family for IPv4 or sin6_family for IPv6) to AF_UNSPEC. This might
return an error of EAFNOSUPPORT (p. 736 of TCPv2), but that is acceptable. It is the process
of calling connect on an already connected UDP socket that causes the socket to become
unconnected (pp. 787 788 of TCPv2).

The Unix variants seem to differ on exactly how to unconnect a socket, and you may
encounter approaches that work on some systems and not others. For example, calling
connect with NULL for the address works only on some systems (and on some, it only
works if the third argument, the length, is nonzero). The POSIX specification and BSD man
pages are not much help here, only mentioning that a null address should be used and not
mentioning the error return (even on success) at all. The most portable solution is to zero
out an address structure, set the family to AF_UNSPEC as mentioned above, and pass it to
connect.

Another area of disagreement is around the local binding of a socket during the unconnect
process. AIX keeps both the chosen local IP address and the port, even from an implicit
bind. FreeBSD and Linux set the local IP address back to all zeros, even if you previously
called bind, but leave the port number intact. Solaris sets the local IP address back to all
zeros if it was assigned by an implicit bind; but if the program called bind explicitly, then
the IP address remains unchanged.

Performance
When an application calls sendto on an unconnected UDP socket, Berkeley-derived kernels
temporarily connect the socket, send the datagram, and then unconnect the socket (pp.
762 763 of TCPv2). Calling sendto for two datagrams on an unconnected UDP socket then
involves the following six steps by the kernel:

       Connect the socket

       Output the first datagram

       Unconnect the socket

       Connect the socket

       Output the second datagram

       Unconnect the socket

Another consideration is the number of searches of the routing table. The first temporary
connect searches the routing table for the destination IP address and saves (caches) that
information. The second temporary connect notices that the destination address equals the
destination of the cached routing table information (we are assuming two sendtos to the
same destination) and we do not need to search the routing table again (pp. 737 738 of
TCPv2).

When the application knows it will be sending multiple datagrams to the same peer, it is
more efficient to connect the socket explicitly. Calling connect and then calling write two

                                                                                                Page 305

times involves the following steps by the kernel:

       Connect the socket

       Output first datagram

       Output second datagram

In this case, the kernel copies only the socket address structure containing the destination
IP address and port one time, versus two times when sendto is called twice. [Partridge and
Pink 1993] note that the temporary connecting of an unconnected UDP socket accounts for
nearly one-third of the cost of each UDP transmission.

                                                                                               Page 306

8.12 dg_cli Function (Revisited)
We now return to the dg_cli function from Figure 8.8 and recode it to call connect. Figure
8.17 shows the new function.

Figure 8.17 dg_cli function that calls connect.
udpcliserv/dgcliconnect.c

 1 #include         "unp.h"

 2 void
 3 dg_cli(FILE *fp, int sockfd, const SA *pservaddr, socklen_t servlen)
 4 {
 5      int    n;
 6      char   sendline[MAXLINE], recvline[MAXLINE + 1];

 7      Connect(sockfd, (SA *) pservaddr, servlen);

 8      while (Fgets(sendline, MAXLINE, fp) != NULL) {

 9             Write(sockfd, sendline, strlen(sendline));

10             n = Read(sockfd, recvline, MAXLINE);

11             recvline[n] = 0;         /* null terminate */
12             Fputs(recvline, stdout);
13      }
14 }
The changes are the new call to connect and replacing the calls to sendto and recvfrom
with calls to write and read. This function is still protocol-independent since it doesn't look
inside the socket address structure that is passed to connect. Our client main function,
Figure 8.7, remains the same.

If we run this program on the host macosx, specifying the IP address of the host freebsd4
(which is not running our server on port 9877), we have the following output:

macosx % udpcli04 172.24.37.94
hello, world
read error: Connection refused

The first point we notice is that we do not receive the error when we start the client
process. The error occurs only after we send the first datagram to the server. It is sending
this datagram that elicits the ICMP error from the server host. But when a TCP client calls
connect, specifying a server host that is not running the server process, connect returns
the error because the call to connect causes the TCP three-way handshake to happen, and
the first packet of that handshake elicits an RST from the server TCP (Section 4.3).

Figure 8.18 shows the tcpdump output.

Figure 8.18 tcpdump output when running Figure 8.17.

macosx % tcpdump

                                                                                                  Page 307

1 0.0                          macosx.51139 > freebsd4.9877: udp 13
2 0.006180 ( 0.0062)           freebsd4 > macosx: icmp: freebsd4 udp port 9877
unreachable
We also see in Figure A.15 that this ICMP error is mapped by the kernel into the error
ECONNREFUSED, which corresponds to the message string output by our err_sys function:
"Connection refused."

Unfortunately, not all kernels return ICMP messages to a connected UDP socket, as we have
shown in this section. Normally, Berkeley-derived kernels return the error, while System V
kernels do not. For example, if we run the same client on a Solaris 2.4 host and connect to
a host that is not running our server, we can watch with tcpdump and verify that the ICMP
"port unreachable" error is returned by the server host, but the client's call to read never
returns. This bug was fixed in Solaris 2.5. UnixWare does not return the error, while AIX,
Digital Unix, HP-UX, and Linux all return the error.

                                                                                               Page 308

8.13 Lack of Flow Control with UDP
We now examine the effect of UDP not having any flow control. First, we modify our dg_cli
function to send a fixed number of datagrams. It no longer reads from standard input.
Figure 8.19 shows the new version. This function writes 2,000 1,400-byte UDP datagrams
to the server.

We next modify the server to receive datagrams and count the number received. This
server no longer echoes datagrams back to the client. Figure 8.20 shows the new dg_echo
function. When we terminate the server with our terminal interrupt key (SIGINT), it prints
the number of received datagrams and terminates.

Figure 8.19 dg_cli function that writes a fixed number of datagrams to
the server.
udpcliserv/dgcliloop1.c

 1 #include         "unp.h"

 2 #define NDG            2000          /*   datagrams to send */
 3 #define DGLEN          1400          /*   length of each datagram */

 4 void
 5 dg_cli(FILE *fp, int sockfd, const SA *pservaddr, socklen_t servlen)
 6 {
 7      int    i;
 8      char   sendline[DGLEN];

 9      for (i = 0; i < NDG; i++) {
10          Sendto(sockfd, sendline, DGLEN, 0, pservaddr, servlen);
11      }
12 }

Figure 8.20 dg_echo function that counts received datagrams.
udpcliserv/dgecholoop1.c

 1 #include         "unp.h"

 2 static void recvfrom_int(int);
 3 static int count;

 4 void
 5 dg_echo(int sockfd, SA *pcliaddr, socklen_t clilen)
 6 {
 7      socklen_t len;
 8      char    mesg[MAXLINE];

 9      Signal(SIGINT, recvfrom_int);

10      for ( ; ; ) {
11          len = clilen;
12          Recvfrom(sockfd, mesg, MAXLINE, 0, pcliaddr, &len);

13             count++;
14      }
15 }

                                                                                             Page 309

16 static void
17 recvfrom_int(int signo)
18 {
19     printf("\nreceived %d datagrams\n", count);
20     exit(0);
21 }
We now run the server on the host freebsd, a slow SPARCStation. We run the client on the
RS/6000 system aix, connected directly with 100Mbps Ethernet. Additionally, we run
netstat -s on the server, both before and after, as the statistics that are output tell us
how many datagrams were lost. Figure 8.21 shows the output on the server.

Figure 8.21 Output on server host.

freebsd % netstat -s -p udp
udp:
        71208 datagrams received
        0 with incomplete header
        0 with bad data length field
        0 with bad checksum
        0 with no checksum
        832 dropped due to no socket
        16 broadcast/multicast datagrams dropped due to no socket
        1971 dropped due to full socket buffers
        0 not for hashed pcb
        68389 delivered
        137685 datagrams output
freebsd % udpserv06              start our server
                                                                        we run
the client here
     ^C                              we type our interrupt key after the client
is finished
received 30 datagrams
freebsd % netstat -s -p udp
udp:
        73208 datagrams received
        0 with incomplete header
        0 with bad data length field
        0 with bad checksum
        0 with no checksum
        832 dropped due to no socket
        16 broadcast/multicast datagrams dropped due to no socket
        3941 dropped due to full socket buffers
        0 not for hashed pcb
        68419 delivered
        137685 datagrams output
The client sent 2,000 datagrams, but the server application received only 30 of these, for a
98% loss rate. There is no indication whatsoever to the server application or to the client
application that these datagrams were lost. As we have said, UDP has no flow control and it
is unreliable. It is trivial, as we have shown, for a UDP sender to overrun the receiver.

If we look at the netstat output, the total number of datagrams received by the server
host (not the server application) is 2,000 (73,208 - 71,208). The counter "dropped due to
full socket buffers" indicates how many datagrams were received by UDP but were
discarded because the receiving socket's receive queue was full (p. 775 of TCPv2). This
value is 1,970 (3,491 - 1,971), which when added to the counter output by the application
(30), equals the 2,000 datagrams received by the host. Unfortunately, the netstat counter
of the number dropped due to a full socket buffer is systemwide. There is no way to

                                                                                               Page 310

determine which applications (e.g., which UDP ports) are affected.

The number of datagrams received by the server in this example is not predictable. It
depends on many factors, such as the network load, the processing load on the client host,
and the processing load on the server host.

If we run the same client and server, but this time with the client on the slow Sun and the
server on the faster RS/6000, no datagrams are lost.

 aix % udpserv06

 ^?                                     we type our interrupt key after the client is finished

 received 2000 datagrams

UDP Socket Receive Buffer
The number of UDP datagrams that are queued by UDP for a given socket is limited by the
size of that socket's receive buffer. We can change this with the SO_RCVBUF socket option,
as we described in Section 7.5. The default size of the UDP socket receive buffer under
FreeBSD is 42,080 bytes, which allows room for only 30 of our 1,400-byte datagrams. If
we increase the size of the socket receive buffer, we expect the server to receive additional
datagrams. Figure 8.22 shows a modification to the dg_echo function from Figure 8.20 that
sets the socket receive buffer to 240 KB.

Figure 8.22 dg_echo function that increases the size of the socket
receive queue.
udpcliserv/dgecholoop2.c

 1 #include       "unp.h"

 2 static void recvfrom_int(int);
 3 static int count;

 4 void
 5 dg_echo(int sockfd, SA *pcliaddr, socklen_t clilen)
 6 {
 7      int     n;
 8      socklen_t len;
 9      char    mesg[MAXLINE];

10      Signal(SIGINT, recvfrom_int);

11      n = 220 * 1024;
12      Setsockopt(sockfd, SOL_SOCKET, SO_RCVBUF, &n, sizeof(n));

13      for ( ; ; ) {
14          len = clilen;
15          Recvfrom(sockfd, mesg, MAXLINE, 0, pcliaddr, &len);

16           count++;
17      }
18 }

19 static void
20 recvfrom_int(int signo)
21 {
22     printf("\nreceived %d datagrams\n", count);

                                                                                                 Page 311

23      exit(0);
24 }
If we run this server on the Sun and the client on the RS/6000, the count of received
datagrams is now 103. While this is slightly better than the earlier example with the
default socket receive buffer, it is no panacea.

Why do we set the receive socket buffer size to 220 x 1,024 in Figure 8.22? The maximum
size of a socket receive buffer in FreeBSD 5.1 defaults to 262,144 bytes (256 x 1,024), but
due to the buffer allocation policy (described in Chapter 2 of TCPv2), the actual limit is
233,016 bytes. Many earlier systems based on 4.3BSD restricted the size of a socket buffer
to around 52,000 bytes.

                                                                                              Page 312

8.14 Determining Outgoing Interface with UDP
A connected UDP socket can also be used to determine the outgoing interface that will be
used to a particular destination. This is because of a side effect of the connect function
when applied to a UDP socket: The kernel chooses the local IP address (assuming the
process has not already called bind to explicitly assign this). This local IP address is chosen
by searching the routing table for the destination IP address, and then using the primary
IP address for the resulting interface.

Figure 8.23 shows a simple UDP program that connects to a specified IP address and then
calls getsockname, printing the local IP address and port.

Figure 8.23 UDP program that uses connect to determine outgoing
interface.
udpcliserv/udpcli09.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"

 2 int
 3 main(int argc, char **argv)
 4 {
 5     int     sockfd;
 6     socklen_t len;
 7     struct sockaddr_in cliaddr, servaddr;

 8      if (argc != 2)
 9          err_quit("usage: udpcli <IPaddress>");

10      sockfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, 0);

11      bzero(&servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
12      servaddr.sin_family = AF_INET;
13      servaddr.sin_port = htons(SERV_PORT);
14      Inet_pton(AF_INET, argv[1], &servaddr.sin_addr);

15      Connect(sockfd, (SA *) &servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));

16      len = sizeof(cliaddr);
17      Getsockname(sockfd, (SA *) &cliaddr, &len);
18      printf("local address %s\n", Sock_ntop((SA *) &cliaddr, len));

19      exit(0);
20 }
If we run the program on the multihomed host freebsd, we have the following output:

freebsd % udpcli09 206.168.112.96
local address 12.106.32.254:52329

freebsd % udpcli09 192.168.42.2
local address 192.168.42.1:52330

freebsd % udpcli09 127.0.0.1
local address 127.0.0.1:52331

                                                                                                  Page 313

The first time we run the program, the command-line argument is an IP address that
follows the default route. The kernel assigns the local IP address to the primary address of
the interface to which the default route points. The second time, the argument is the IP
address of a system connected to a second Ethernet interface, so the kernel assigns the
local IP address to the primary address of this second interface. Calling connect on a UDP
socket does not send anything to that host; it is entirely a local operation that saves the
peer's IP address and port. We also see that calling connect on an unbound UDP socket
also assigns an ephemeral port to the socket.

Unfortunately, this technique does not work on all implementations, mostly SVR4-derived
kernels. For example, this does not work on Solaris 2.5, but it works on AIX, HP-UX 11,
MacOS X, FreeBSD, Linux, and Solaris 2.6 and later.

                                                                                               Page 314

8.15 TCP and UDP Echo Server Using select
We now combine our concurrent TCP echo server from Chapter 5 with our iterative UDP
echo server from this chapter into a single server that uses select to multiplex a TCP and
UDP socket. Figure 8.24 is the first half of this server.

Create listening TCP socket
14 22 A listening TCP socket is created that is bound to the server's well-known port. We
set the SO_REUSEADDR socket option in case connections exist on this port.

Create UDP socket
23 29 A UDP socket is also created and bound to the same port. Even though the same
port is used for TCP and UDP sockets, there is no need to set the SO_REUSEADDR socket
option before this call to bind, because TCP ports are independent of UDP ports.

Figure 8.25 shows the second half of our server.

Establish signal handler for SIGCHLD

30 A signal handler is established for SIGCHLD because TCP connections will be handled by
a child process. We showed this signal handler in Figure 5.11.

Prepare for select

31 32 We initialize a descriptor set for select and calculate the maximum of the two
descriptors for which we will wait.

Figure 8.24 First half of echo server that handles TCP and UDP using
select.

udpcliserv/udpservselect01.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"

 2 int
 3 main(int argc, char **argv)
 4 {
 5     int     listenfd, connfd, udpfd, nready, maxfdp1;
 6     char    mesg[MAXLINE];
 7     pid_t   childpid;
 8     fd_set rset;
 9     ssize_t n;
10     socklen_t len;
11     const int on = 1;
12     struct sockaddr_in cliaddr, servaddr;
13     void    sig_chld(int);

14          /* create listening TCP socket */
15      listenfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, 0);

16      bzero(&servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
17      servaddr.sin_family = AF_INET;
18      servaddr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl(INADDR_ANY);
19      servaddr.sin_port = htons(SERV_PORT);

                                                                                             Page 315

20      Setsockopt(listenfd, SOL_SOCKET, SO_REUSEADDR, &on, sizeof(on));
21      Bind(listenfd, (SA *) &servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));

22      Listen(listenfd, LISTENQ);

23           /* create UDP socket */
24      udpfd = Socket(AF_INET, SOCK_DGRAM, 0);

25      bzero(&servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
26      servaddr.sin_family = AF_INET;
27      servaddr.sin_addr.s_addr = htonl(INADDR_ANY);
28      servaddr.sin_port = htons(SERV_PORT);

29      Bind(udpfd, (SA *) &servaddr, sizeof(servaddr));
Call select

34 41 We call select, waiting only for readability on the listening TCP socket or readability
on the UDP socket. Since our sig_chld handler can interrupt our call to select, we handle
an error of EINTR.

Handle new client connection

42 51 We accept a new client connection when the listening TCP socket is readable, fork a
child, and call our str_echo function in the child. This is the same sequence of steps we
used in Chapter 5.

Figure 8.25 Second half of echo server that handles TCP and UDP
using select.
udpcliserv/udpservselect01.c

30      Signal(SIGCHLD, sig_chld);           /* must call waitpid() */

31      FD_ZERO(&rset);
32      maxfdp1 = max(listenfd, udpfd) + 1;
33      for ( ; ; ) {
34          FD_SET(listenfd, &rset);
35          FD_SET(udpfd, &rset);
36          if ( (nready = select(maxfdp1, &rset, NULL, NULL, NULL)) < 0) {
37              if (errno == EINTR)
38                   continue;     /* back to for() */
39              else
40                   err_sys("select error");
41           }

42            if (FD_ISSET(listenfd, &rset)) {
43                len = sizeof(cliaddr);
44                connfd = Accept(listenfd, (SA *) &cliaddr, &len);

45                 if ( (childpid = Fork()) == 0) { /* child process */
46                     Close(listenfd);      /* close listening socket */
47                     str_echo(connfd);     /* process the request */
48                     exit(0);
49                  }
50                  Close(connfd);      /* parent closes connected socket */
51            }

52            if (FD_ISSET(udpfd, &rset)) {
53                len = sizeof(cliaddr);

                                                                                                Page 316

54                 n = Recvfrom(udpfd, mesg, MAXLINE, 0, (SA *) &cliaddr, &len);

55                 Sendto(udpfd, mesg, n, 0, (SA *) &cliaddr, len);
56             }
57      }
58 }
Handle arrival of datagram

52 57 If the UDP socket is readable, a datagram has arrived. We read it with recvfrom and
send it back to the client with sendto.

                                                                                            Page 317

8.16 Summary
Converting our echo client/server to use UDP instead of TCP was simple. But lots of
features provided by TCP are missing: detecting lost packets and retransmitting, verifying
responses as being from the correct peer, and the like. We will return to this topic in
Section 22.5 and see what it takes to add some reliability to a UDP application.

UDP sockets can generate asynchronous errors, that is, errors that are reported some time
after a packet is sent. TCP sockets always report these errors to the application, but with
UDP, the socket must be connected to receive these errors.

UDP has no flow control, and this is easy to demonstrate. Normally, this is not a problem,
because many UDP applications are built using a request-reply model, and not for
transferring bulk data.

There are still more points to consider when writing UDP applications, but we will save
these until Chapter 22, after covering the interface functions, broadcasting, and
multicasting.

                                                                                              Page 318

Exercises
     8.1 We have two applications, one using TCP and the other using UDP. 4,096
         bytes are in the receive buffer for the TCP socket and two 2,048-byte
         datagrams are in the receive buffer for the UDP socket. The TCP
         application calls read with a third argument of 4,096 and the UDP
         application calls recvfrom with a third argument of 4,096. Is there any
         difference?

     8.2 What happens in Figure 8.4 if we replace the final argument to sendto
         (which we show as len) with clilen?

     8.3 Compile and run the UDP server in Figures 8.3 and 8.4 and then the UDP
         client in Figures 8.7 and 8.8. Verify that the client and server work
         together.

     8.4 Run the ping program in one window, specifying the -i 60 option (send
         one packet every 60 seconds; some systems use -I instead of -i), the
         -v option (print all received ICMP errors), and the loopback address
         (normally 127.0.0.1). We will use this program to see the ICMP port
         unreachable returned by the server host. Next, run our client from the
         previous exercise in another window, specifying the IP address of some
         host that is not running the server. What happens?

     8.5 We said with Figure 8.5 that each connected TCP socket has its own
         socket receive buffer. What about the listening socket; do you think it
         has its own socket receive buffer?

     8.6 Use the sock program (Section C.3) and a tool such as tcpdump (Section
         C.5) to test what we claimed in Section 8.10: If the client binds an IP
         address to its socket but sends a datagram that goes out some other
         interface, the resulting IP datagram still contains the IP address that was
         bound to the socket, even though this does not correspond to the
         outgoing interface.

     8.7 Compile the programs from Section 8.13 and run the client and server on
         different hosts. Put a printf in the client each time a datagram is
         written to the socket. Does this change the percentage of received
         packets? Why? Put a printf in the server each time a datagram is read
         from the socket. Does this change the percentage of received packets?
         Why?

     8.8 What is the largest length that we can pass to sendto for a UDP/IPv4
         socket, that is, what is the largest amount of data that can fit into a
         UDP/IPv4 datagram? What changes with UDP/IPv6?

          Modify Figure 8.8 to send one maximum-size UDP datagram, read it
          back, and print the number of bytes returned by recvfrom.

                                                                                       Page 319

     8.9 Modify Figure 8.25 to conform to RFC 1122 by using IP_RECVDSTADDR for
         the UDP socket.

                                                                                 Page 320
