
Chapter 13. Daemon Processes and the
inetd Superserver

       Section 13.1.?Introduction

       Section 13.2.?syslogd Daemon

       Section 13.3.?syslog Function

       Section 13.4.?daemon_init Function

       Section 13.5.?inetd Daemon

       Section 13.6.?daemon_inetd Function

       Section 13.7.?Summary

       Exercises

13.1 Introduction
A daemon is a process that runs in the background and is not associated with a controlling
terminal. Unix systems typically have many processes that are daemons (on the order of
20 to 50), running in the background, performing different administrative tasks.

The lack of a controlling terminal is typically a side effect of being started by a system
initialization script (e.g., at boot-time). But if a daemon is started by a user typing to a
shell prompt, it is important for the daemon to disassociate itself from the controlling
terminal to avoid any unwanted interraction with job control, terminal session
management, or simply to avoid unexpected output to the terminal from the daemon as it
runs in the background.

There are numerous ways to start a daemon:

    1.   During system startup, many daemons are started by the system initialization
         scripts. These scripts are often in the directory /etc or in a directory whose name
         begins with /etc/rc, but their location and contents are
         implementation-dependent. Daemons started by these scripts begin with superuser
         privileges.

         A few network servers are often started from these scripts: the inetd superserver
         (covered later in this chapter), a Web server, and a mail server (often sendmail).
         The syslogd daemon that we will describe in Section 13.2 is normally started by
         one of these scripts.

    2.   Many network servers are started by the inetd superserver. inetd itself is started
         from one of the scripts in Step 1. inetd listens for network requests (Telnet, FTP,
         etc.), and when a request arrives, it invokes the actual server (Telnet server, FTP
         server, etc.).

    3.   The execution of programs on a regular basis is performed by the cron daemon, and
         programs that it invokes run as daemons. The cron daemon itself is started in Step
         1 during system startup.

    4.   The execution of a program at one time in the future is specified by the at
         command. The cron daemon normally initiates these programs when their time
         arrives, so these programs run as daemons.

    5.   Daemons can be started from user terminals, either in the foreground or in the
         background. This is often done when testing a daemon, or restarting a daemon that
         was terminated for some reason.

Since a daemon does not have a controlling terminal, it needs some way to output
messages when something happens, either normal informational messages or emergency
messages that need to be handled by an administrator. The syslog function is the
standard way to output these messages, and it sends the messages to the syslogd
daemon.

13.2 syslogd Daemon
Unix systems normally start a daemon named syslogd from one of the system
initializations scripts, and it runs as long as the system is up. Berkeley-derived
implementations of syslogd perform the following actions on startup:

    1.   The configuration file, normally /etc/syslog.conf, is read, specifying what to do
         with each type of log message that the daemon can receive. These messages can be
         appended to a file (a special case of which is the file /dev/console, which writes the
         message to the console), written to a specific user (if that user is logged in), or
         forwarded to the syslogd daemon on another host.

    2.   A Unix domain socket is created and bound to the pathname /var/run/log (
         /dev/log on some systems).

    3.   A UDP socket is created and bound to port 514 (the syslog service).

    4.   The pathname /dev/klog is opened. Any error messages from within the kernel
         appear as input on this device.

The syslogd daemon runs in an infinite loop that calls select, waiting for any one of its
three descriptors (from Steps 2, 3, and 4) to be readable; it reads the log message and
does what the configuration file says to do with that message. If the daemon receives the
SIGHUP signal, it rereads its configuration file.

We could send log messages to the syslogd daemon from our daemons by creating a Unix
domain datagram socket and sending our messages to the pathname that the daemon has
bound, but an easier interface is the syslog function that we will describe in the next
section. Alternately, we could create a UDP socket and send our log messages to the
loopback address and port 514.

Newer implementations disable the creation of the UDP socket, unless specified by the
administrator, as allowing anyone to send UDP datagrams to this port opens the system up
to denial-of-service attacks, where someone could fill up the filesystem (e.g., by filling up
log files) or cause log messages to be dropped (e.g., by overflowing syslog's socket
receive buffer).

Differences exist between the various implementations of syslogd. For example, Unix
domain sockets are used by Berkeley-derived implementations, but System V
implementations use a STREAMS log driver. Different Berkeley-derived implementations use
different pathnames for the Unix domain socket. We can ignore all these details if we use
the syslog function.

13.3 syslog Function
Since a daemon does not have a controlling terminal, it cannot just fprintf to stderr. The
common technique for logging messages from a daemon is to call the syslog function.

 #include <syslog.h>

 void syslog(int priority, const char *message, ... );

Although this function was originally developed for BSD systems, it is provided by virtually
all Unix vendors today. The description of syslog in the POSIX specification is consistent
with what we describe here. RFC 3164 provides documentation of the BSD syslog protocol.

The priority argument is a combination of a level and a facility, which we show in Figures
13.1 and 13.2. Additional detail on the priority may be found in RFC 3164. The message is
like a format string to printf, with the addition of a %m specification, which is replaced with
the error message corresponding to the current value of errno. A newline can appear at the
end of the message, but is not mandatory.

                        Figure 13.1. level of log messages.

                      Figure 13.2. facility of log messages.

Log messages have a level between 0 and 7, which we show in Figure 13.1. These are
ordered values. If no level is specified by the sender, LOG_NOTICE is the default.

Log messages also contain a facility to identify the type of process sending the message.

We show the different values in Figure 13.2. If no facility is specified, LOG_USER is the
default.

For example, the following call could be issued by a daemon when a call to the rename
function unexpectedly fails:

syslog(LOG_INFO|LOG_LOCAL2, "rename(%s, %s): %m", file1, file2);

The purpose of facility and level is to allow all messages from a given facility to be handled
the same in the /etc/syslog.conf file, or to allow all messages of a given level to be
handled the same. For example, the configuration file could contain the lines

kern.*              /dev/console
local7.debug        /var/log/cisco.log

to specify that all kernel messages get logged to the console and all debug messages from
the local7 facility get appended to the file /var/log/cisco.log.

When the application calls syslog the first time, it creates a Unix domain datagram socket
and then calls connect to the well-known pathname of the socket created by the syslogd
daemon (e.g., /var/run/log). This socket remains open until the process terminates.
Alternately, the process can call openlog and closelog.

 #include <syslog.h>

 void openlog(const char *ident, int options, int facility);

 void closelog(void);

openlog can be called before the first call to syslog and closelog can be called when the
application is finished sending log messages.

ident is a string that will be prepended to each log message by syslog. Often this is the
program name.

The options argument is formed as the logical OR of one or more of the constants in Figure
13.3.

                          Figure 13.3. options for openlog.

Normally the Unix domain socket is not created when openlog is called. Instead, it is
opened during the first call to syslog. The LOG_NDELAY option causes the socket to be
created when openlog is called.

The facility argument to openlog specifies a default facility for any subsequent calls to
syslog that do not specify a facility. Some daemons call openlog and specify the facility
(which normally does not change for a given daemon). They then specify only the level in

each call to syslog (since the level can change depending on the error).

Log messages can also be generated by the logger command. This can be used from
within shell scripts, for example, to send messages to syslogd.

13.4 daemon_init Function
Figure 13.4 shows a function named daemon_init that we can call (normally from a server)
to daemonize the process. This function should be suitable for use on all variants of Unix,
but some offer a C library function called daemon that provides similar features. BSD offers
the daemon function, as does Linux.

Figure 13.4 daemon_init function: daemonizes the process.
daemon_init.c

 1 #include       "unp.h"
 2 #include       <syslog.h>

 3 #define MAXFD      64

 4 extern int daemon_proc;               /* defined in error.c */

 5 int
 6 daemon_init(const char *pname, int facility)
 7 {
 8     int     i;
 9     pid_t      pid;

10      if ( (pid = Fork()) < 0)
11          return (-1);
12      else if (pid)
13          _exit(0);                    /* parent terminates */

14      /* child 1 continues... */

15      if (setsid() < 0)                /* become session leader */
16          return (-1);

17      Signal(SIGHUP, SIG_IGN);
18      if ( (pid = Fork()) < 0)
19          return (-1);
20      else if (pid)
21          _exit(0);                    /* child 1 terminates */

22      /* child 2 continues... */

23      daemon_proc = 1;                 /* for err_XXX() functions */

24      chdir("/");                      /* change working directory */

25      /* close off file descriptors */
26      for (i = 0; i < MAXFD; i++)
27          close(i);

28      /* redirect stdin, stdout, and stderr to /dev/null */
29      open("/dev/null", O_RDONLY);
30      open("/dev/null", O_RDWR);
31      open("/dev/null", O_RDWR);

32      openlog(pname, LOG_PID, facility);

33       return (0);                     /* success */
34 }

fork
10 13 We first call fork and then the parent terminates, and the child continues. If the
process was started as a shell command in the foreground, when the parent terminates,
the shell thinks the command is done. This automatically runs the child process in the
background. Also, the child inherits the process group ID from the parent but gets its own
process ID. This guarantees that the child is not a process group leader, which is required
for the next call to setsid.

setsid

15 16 setsid is a POSIX function that creates a new session. (Chapter 9 of APUE talks
about process relationships and sessions in detail.) The process becomes the session leader
of the new session, becomes the process group leader of a new process group, and has no
controlling terminal.

Ignore SIGHUP and Fork Again
17 21 We ignore SIGHUP and call fork again. When this function returns, the parent is
really the first child and it terminates, leaving the second child running. The purpose of
this second fork is to guarantee that the daemon cannot automatically acquire a
controlling terminal should it open a terminal device in the future. When a session leader
without a controlling terminal opens a terminal device (that is not currently some other
session's controlling terminal), the terminal becomes the controlling terminal of the session
leader. But by calling fork a second time, we guarantee that the second child is no longer
a session leader, so it cannot acquire a controlling terminal. We must ignore SIGHUP
because when the session leader terminates (the first child), all processes in the session
(our second child) receive the SIGHUP signal.

Set Flag for Error Functions
23 We set the global daemon_proc to nonzero. This external is defined by our err_XXX
functions (Section D.3), and when its value is nonzero, this tells them to call syslog
instead of doing an fprintf to standard error. This saves us from having to go through all
our code and call one of our error functions if the server is not being run as a daemon (i.e.,
when we are testing the server), but call syslog if it is being run as a daemon.

Change Working Directory
24 We change the working directory to the root directory, although some daemons might
have a reason to change to some other directory. For example, a printer daemon might
change to the printer's spool directory, where it does all its work. Should the daemon ever
generate a core file, that file is generated in the current working directory. Another reason
to change the working directory is that the daemon could have been started in any
filesystem, and if it remains there, that filesystem cannot be unmounted (at least not
without using some potentially destructive, forceful measures).

Close any open descriptors
25 27 We close any open descriptors that are inherited from the process that executed the
daemon (normally a shell). The problem is determining the highest descriptor in use:
There is no Unix function that provides this value. There are ways to determine the
maximum number of descriptors that the process can open, but even this gets complicated
(see p. 43 of APUE) because the limit can be infinite. Our solution is to close the first 64
descriptors, even though most of these are probably not open.

Solaris provides a function called closefrom for use by daemons to solve this problem.

Redirect stdin, stdout, and stderr to /dev/null
29 31 We open/dev/null for standard input, standard output, and standard error. This
guarantees that these common descriptors are open, and a read from any of these
descriptors returns 0 (EOF), and the kernel just discards anything written to them. The
reason for opening these descriptors is so that any library function called by the daemon
that assumes it can read from standard input or write to either standard output or standard
error will not fail. Such a failure is potentially dangerous. If the daemon ends up opening a
socket to a client, that socket descriptor ends up as stdout or stderr and some erroneous
call to something like perror then sends unexpected data to a client.

Use syslogd for Errors
32 Openlog is called. The first argument is from the caller and is normally the name of the
program (e.g., argv[0]). We specify that the process ID should be added to each log
message. The facility is also specified by the caller, as one of the values from Figure 13.2
or 0 if the default of LOG_USER is acceptable.

We note that since a daemon runs without a controlling terminal, it should never receive
the SIGHUP signal from the kernel. Therefore, many daemons use this signal as a
notification from the administrator that the daemon's configuration file has changed, and
the daemon should reread the file. Two other signals that a daemon should never receive
are SIGINT and SIGWINCH, so daemons can safely use these signals as another way for
administrators to indicate some change that the daemon should react to.

Example: Daytime Server as a Daemon
Figure 13.5 is a modification of our protocol-independent daytime server from Figure 11.14
that calls our daemon_init function to run as daemons.

There are only two changes: We call our daemon_init function as soon as the program
starts, and we call our err_msg function, instead of printf, to print the client's IP address
and port. Indeed, if we want our programs to be able to run as a daemon, we must avoid
calling the printf and fprintf functions and use our err_msg function instead.

Note how we check argc and issue the appropriate usage message before calling
daemon_init. This allows the user starting the daemon to get immediate feedback if the
command has the incorrect number of arguments. After calling daemon_init, all
subsequent error messages go to syslog.

If we run this program on our Linux host linux and then check the /var/log/messages file
(where we send all LOG_USER messages) after connecting from the same machine (e.g.,
localhost), we have

Jun 10 09:54:37 linux daytimetcpsrv2[24288]:
connection from 127.0.0.1.55862

(We have wrapped the one long line.) The date, time, and hostname are prefixed
automatically by the syslogd daemon.

Figure 13.5 Protocol-independent daytime server that runs as a
daemon.
inetd/daytimetcpsrv2.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"

 2 #include         <time.h>

 3 int
 4 main(int argc, char **argv)
 5 {
 6     int     listenfd, connfd;
 7     socklen_t addrlen, len;
 8     struct sockaddr *cliaddr;
 9     char     buff[MAXLINE];
10     time_t ticks;

11      if (argc < 2 || argc > 3)
12          err_quit("usage: daytimetcpsrv2 [ <host> ] <service or port>");

13      daemon_init(argv[0], 0);

14      if (argc == 2)
15           listenfd = Tcp_listen(NULL, argv[1], &addrlen);
16      else
17           listenfd = Tcp_listen(argv[1], argv[2], &addrlen);

18      cliaddr = Malloc(addrlen);

19      for ( ; ; ) {
20          len = addrlen;
21          connfd = Accept(listenfd, cliaddr, &len);
22          err_msg("connection from %s", Sock_ntop(cliaddr, len));

23             ticks = time(NULL);
24             snprintf(buff, sizeof(buff), "%.24s/r/n", ctime(&ticks));
25             Write(connfd, buff, strlen(buff));

26             Close(connfd);
27      }
28 }

13.5 inetd Daemon
On a typical Unix system, there could be many servers in existence, just waiting for a client
request to arrive. Examples are FTP, Telnet, Rlogin, TFTP, and so on. With systems before
4.3BSD, each of these services had a process associated with it. This process was started
at boot-time from the file /etc/rc, and each process did nearly identical startup tasks:
create a socket, bind the server's well-known port to the socket, wait for a connection (if
TCP) or a datagram (if UDP), and then fork. The child process serviced the client and the
parent waited for the next client request. There are two problems with this model:

    1.   All these daemons contained nearly identical startup code, first with respect to
         socket creation, and also with respect to becoming a daemon process (similar to
         our daemon_init function).

    2.   Each daemon took a slot in the process table, but each daemon was asleep most of
         the time.

The 4.3BSD release simplified this by providing an Internet superserver: the inetd
daemon. This daemon can be used by servers that use either TCP or UDP. It does not
handle other protocols, such as Unix domain sockets. This daemon fixes the two problems
just mentioned:

    1.   It simplifies writing daemon processes since most of the startup details are handled
         by inetd. This obviates the need for each server to call our daemon_init function.

    2.   It allows a single process (inetd) to be waiting for incoming client requests for
         multiple services, instead of one process for each service. This reduces the total
         number of processes in the system.

The inetd process establishes itself as a daemon using the techniques that we described
with our daemon_init function. It then reads and processes its configuration file, typically
/etc/inetd.conf. This file specifies the services that the superserver is to handle, and
what to do when a service request arrives. Each line contains the fields shown in Figure
13.6.

                          Figure 13.6. Fields in inetd.conf file.

Some sample lines are

ftp        stream   tcp   nowait    root      /usr/bin/ftpd          ftpd -1
telnet     stream   tcp   nowait    root      /usr/bin/telnetd       telnetd
login      stream   tcp   nowait    root      /usr/bin/rlogind       rlogind -s
tftp       dgram    udp   wait      nobody    /usr/bin/tftpd         tftpd -s /tftpboot

The actual name of the server is always passed as the first argument to a program when it
is execed.

This figure and the sample lines are just examples. Most vendors have added their own
features to inetd. Examples are the ability to handle RPC servers, in addition to TCP and
UDP servers, and the ability to handle protocols other than TCP and UDP. Also, the
pathname to exec and the command-line arguments to the server obviously depend on the
implementation.

The wait-flag field can be a bit confusing. In general, it specifies whether the daemon
started by inetd intends to take over the listening socket associated with the service. UDP
services don't have separate listening and accepting sockets, and are virtually always
configured as wait. TCP services could be handled either way, at the discretion of the
person writing the daemon, but nowait is most common.

The interaction of IPv6 with /etc/inetd.conf depends on the vendor and special attention
to detail is required to get what you want. Some use a protocol of tcp6 or udp6 to indicate
that an IPv6 socket should be created for a service. Some allow protocol values of tcp46 or
udp46 indicate the daemon wants sockets that allow both IPv6 and IPv4 connections. These
special protocol names do not typically appear in the /etc/protocols file.

A picture of what the inetd daemon does is shown in Figure 13.7.

                      Figure 13.7. Steps performed by inetd.

    1.   On startup, it reads the /etc/inetd.conf file and creates a socket of the
         appropriate type (stream or datagram) for all the services specified in the file. The
         maximum number of servers that inetd can handle depends on the maximum
         number of descriptors that inetd can create. Each new socket is added to a
         descriptor set that will be used in a call to select.

    2.   bind is called for the socket, specifying the port for the server and the wildcard IP
         address. This TCP or UDP port number is obtained by calling getservbyname with
         the service-name and protocol fields from the configuration file as arguments.

    3.   For TCP sockets, listen is called so that incoming connection requests are
         accepted. This step is not done for datagram sockets.

    4.   After all the sockets are created, select is called to wait for any of the sockets to
         become readable. Recall from Section 6.3 that a listening TCP socket becomes
         readable when a new connection is ready to be accepted and a UDP socket becomes
         readable when a datagram arrives. inetd spends most of its time blocked in this call
         to select, waiting for a socket to be readable.

    5.   When select returns that a socket is readable, if the socket is a TCP socket and the
         nowait flag is given, accept is called to accept the new connection.

    6.   The inetd daemon forks and the child process handles the service request. This is
         similar to a standard concurrent server (Section 4.8).

         The child closes all descriptors except the socket descriptor it is handling: the new
         connected socket returned by accept for a TCP server or the original UDP socket.
         The child calls dup2 three times, duplicating the socket onto descriptors 0, 1, and 2
         (standard input, standard output, and standard error). The original socket descriptor
         is then closed. By doing this, the only descriptors that are open in the child are 0, 1,
         and 2. If the child reads from standard input, it is reading from the socket and
         anything it writes to standard output or standard error is written to the socket. The
         child calls getpwnam to get the password file entry for the login-name specified in
         the configuration file. If this field is not root, then the child becomes the specified
         user by executing the setgid and setuid function calls. (Since the inetd process is
         executing with a user ID of 0, the child process inherits this user ID across the fork
         , and is able to become any user that it chooses.)

         The child process now does an exec to execute the appropriate server-program to
         handle the request, passing the arguments specified in the configuration file.

    7.   If the socket is a stream socket, the parent process must close the connected socket
         (like our standard concurrent server). The parent calls select again, waiting for the
         next socket to become readable.

If we look in more detail at the descriptor handling that is taking place, Figure 13.8 shows
the descriptors in inetd when a new connection request arrives from an FTP client.

Figure 13.8. inetd descriptors when connection request arrives for TCP
                                port 21.

The connection request is directed to TCP port 21, but a new connected socket is created
by accept.

Figure 13.9 shows the descriptors in the child, after the call to fork, after the child has
closed all the descriptors except the connected socket.

                      Figure 13.9. inetd descriptors in child.

The next step is for the child to duplicate the connected socket to descriptors 0, 1, and 2
and then close the connected socket. This gives us the descriptors shown in Figure 13.10.

                    Figure 13.10. inetd descriptors after dup2.

The child then calls exec. Recall from Section 4.7 that all descriptors normally remain open
across an exec, so the real server that is execed uses any of the descriptors, 0, 1, or 2, to
communicate with the client. These should be the only descriptors open in the server.

The scenario we have described handles the case where the configuration file specifies
nowait for the server. This is typical for all TCP services and it means that inetd need not
wait for its child to terminate before accepting another connection for that service. If
another connection request arrives for the same service, it is returned to the parent
process as soon as it calls select again. Steps 4, 5, and 6 listed earlier are executed again,
and another child process handles this new request.

Specifying the wait flag for a datagram service changes the steps done by the parent
process. This flag says that inetd must wait for its child to terminate before selecting on
this socket again. The following changes occur:

    1.   When fork returns in the parent, the parent saves the process ID of the child. This
         allows the parent to know when this specific child process terminates, by looking at
         the value returned by waitpid.

    2.   The parent disables the socket from future selects by using the FD_CLR macro to
         turn off the bit in its descriptor set. This means that the child process takes over the
         socket until it terminates.

    3.   When the child terminates, the parent is notified by a SIGCHLD signal, and the
         parent's signal handler obtains the process ID of the terminating child. It reenables
         select for the corresponding socket by turning on the bit in its descriptor set for
         this socket.

The reason that a datagram server must take over the socket until it terminates,
preventing inetd from selecting on that socket for readability (awaiting another client
datagram), is because there is only one socket for a datagram server, unlike a TCP server
that has a listening socket and one connected socket per client. If inetd did not turn off
readability for the datagram socket, and if the parent (inetd) executed before the child,
then the datagram from the client would still be in the socket receive buffer, causing
select to return readable again, causing inetd to fork another (unneeded) child. inetd
must ignore the datagram socket until it knows that the child has read the datagram from
the socket receive queue. The way that inetd knows when that child is finished with the
socket is by receiving SIGCHLD, indicating that the child has terminated. We will show an
example of this in Section 22.7.

The five standard Internet services that we described in Figure 2.18 are handled internally
by inetd (see Exercise 13.2).

Since inetd is the process that calls accept for a TCP server, the actual server that is
invoked by inetd normally calls getpeername to obtain the IP address and port number of
the client. Recall Figure 4.18 where we showed that after a fork and an exec (which is
what inetd does), the only way for the actual server to obtain the identify of the client is to
call getpeername.

inetd is normally not used for high-volume servers, notably mail and Web servers.
sendmail, for example, is normally run as a standard concurrent server, as we described in
Section 4.8. In this mode, the process control cost for each client connection is just a fork,
while the cost for a TCP server invoked by inetd is a fork and an exec. Web servers use a
variety of techniques to minimize the process control overhead for each client connection,
as we will discuss in Chapter 30.

It is now common to find an extended Internet services daemon, called xinetd, on Linux
and other systems. xinetd provides the same basic function as inetd, but also includes a
long list of other interesting features. Those features include options for logging, accepting
or rejecting connections based on the client's address, configuring services one-per-file
instead of a single monolithic configuration, and many more. It is not described further
here since the basic superserver idea behind them both is the same.

13.6 daemon_inetd Function
Figure 13.11 shows a function named daemon_inetd that we can call from a server we
know is invoked by inetd.

Figure 13.11 daemon_inetd function: daemonizes process run by inetd.
daemon_inetd.c

1 #include        "unp.h"
2 #include        <syslog.h>

3 extern int daemon_proc;               /* defined in error.c */

4 void
5 daemon_inetd(const char *pname, int facility)
6 {
7      daemon_proc = 1;            /* for our err_XXX() functions */
8      openlog(pname, LOG_PID, facility);
9 }
This function is trivial compared to daemon_init, because all of the daemonization steps
are performed by inetd when it starts. All that we do is set the daemon_proc flag for our
error functions (Figure D.3) and call openlog with the same arguments as the call in Figure
13.4.

Example: Daytime Server as a Daemon Invoked by inetd
Figure 13.12 is a modification of our daytime server from Figure 13.5 that can be invoked
by inetd.

Figure 13.12 Protocol-independent daytime server that can be invoked
by inetd.
inetd/daytimetcpsrv3.c

 1 #include        "unp.h"
 2 #include        <time.h>

 3 int
 4 main(int argc, char **argv)
 5 {
 6     socklen_t len;
 7     struct sockaddr *cliaddr;
 8     char    buff[MAXLINE];
 9     time_t ticks;

10      daemon_inetd(argv[0], 0);

11      cliaddr = Malloc(sizeof(struct sockaddr_storage));
12      len = sizeof(struct sockaddr_storage);
13      Getpeername(0, cliaddr, &len);
14      err_msg("connection from %s", Sock_ntop(cliaddr, len));

15      ticks = time(NULL);
16      snprintf(buff, sizeof(buff), "%.24s\r\n", ctime(&ticks));

17      Write(0, buff, strlen(buff));

18      Close(0);                         /* close TCP connection */
19      exit(0);
20 }
There are two major changes in this program. First, all the socket creation code is gone:
the calls to tcp_listen and to accept. Those steps are done by inetd and we reference the
TCP connection using descriptor 0 (standard input). Second, the infinite for loop is gone
because we are invoked once per client connection. After servicing this client, we
terminate.

Call getpeername

11 14 Since we do not call tcp_listen, we do not know the size of the socket address
structure it returns, and since we do not call accept, we do not know the client's protocol
address. Therefore, we allocate a buffer for the socket address structure using
sizeof(struct sockaddr_storage) and call getpeername with descriptor 0 as the first
argument.

To run this example on our Solaris system, we first assign the service a name and port,
adding the following line to /etc/services:

mydaytime        9999/tcp

We then add the following line to /etc/inetd.conf:

mydaytime stream tcp nowait andy
      /home/andy/daytimetcpsrv3 daytimetcpsrv3

(We have wrapped the long line.) We place the executable in the specified location and
send the SIGHUP signal to inetd, telling it to reread its configuration file. The next step is
to execute netstat to verify that a listening socket has been created on TCP port 9999.

solaris % netstat -na | grep 9999
      *.9999               *.*                        0        0   49152       0   LISTEN

We then invoke the server from another host.

linux % telnet solaris 9999
Trying 192.168.1.20...
Connected to solaris.
Escape character is '^]'.
Tue Jun 10 11:04:02 2003
Connection closed by foreign host.

The /var/adm/messages file (where we have directed the LOG_USER facility messages to be
logged in our /etc/syslog.conf file) contains the following entry:

Jun 10 11:04:02 solaris daytimetcpsrv3[28724]: connection from
192.168.1.10.58145

13.7 Summary
Daemons are processes that run in the background independent of control from all
terminals. Many network servers run as daemons. All output from a daemon is normally
sent to the syslogd daemon by calling the syslog function. The administrator then has
complete control over what happens to these messages, based on the daemon that sent
the message and the severity of the message.

To start an arbitrary program and have it run as a daemon requires a few steps: Call fork
to run in the background, call setsid to create a new POSIX session and become the
session leader, fork again to avoid obtaining a new controlling terminal, change the
working directory and the file mode creation mask, and close all unneeded files. Our
daemon_init function handles all these details.

Many Unix servers are started by the inetd daemon. It handles all the required
daemonization steps, and when the actual server is started, the socket is open on standard
input, standard output, and standard error. This lets us omit calls to socket, bind, listen,
and accept, since all these steps are handled by inetd.

Exercises
     13.1 What happens in Figure 13.5 if we move the call to daemon_init before
          the command-line arguments have been checked, so that the call to
          err_quit comes after it?

     13.2 For the five services handled internally by inetd (Figure 2.18),
          considering the TCP version and the UDP version of each service, which
          of the 10 servers do you think are implemented with a call to fork, and
          which do not require a fork?

     13.3 What happens if we create a UDP socket, bind port 7 to the socket (the
          standard echo server in Figure 2.18), and send a UDP datagram to a
          chargen server?

     13.4 The Solaris 2.x man page for inetd describes a -t flag that causes
          inetd to call syslog (with a facility of LOG_DAEMON and a level of
          LOG_NOTICE) to log the client's IP address and port for any TCP service
          that inetd handles. How does inetd obtain this information?

            This man page also says that inetd cannot do this for a UDP service.
            Why?

            Is there a way around this limitation for UDP services?

