
Appendix A. IPv4, IPv6, ICMPv4, and
ICMPv6
       Section A.1.?Introduction

       Section A.2.?IPv4 Header

       Section A.3.?IPv6 Header

       Section A.4.?IPv4 Addresses

       Section A.5.?IPv6 Addresses

       Section A.6.?Internet Control Message Protocols (ICMPv4 and ICMPv6)

A.1 Introduction
This appendix is an overview of IPv4, IPv6, ICMPv4, and ICMPv6. This material provides
additional background that may be helpful in understanding the discussion of TCP and UDP
in Chapter 2. Some features of IP and ICMP are also used in some of the later chapters: IP
options (Chapter 27), along with the ping and traceroute programs (Chapter 28), for
example.

A.2 IPv4 Header
The IP layer provides a connectionless best-effort datagram delivery service (RFC 791
[Postel 1981a]). IP makes its best effort to deliver an IP datagram to the specified
destination, but there is no guarantee that the datagram will arrive, will arrive in order
relative to other packets, or will arrive only once. Any desired reliability, ordering, and
duplicate suppression must be added by the upper layers. In the case of a TCP or SCTP
application, this is performed by the transport layer. In the case of a UDP application, this
must be done by the application since UDP is unreliable; we show an example of this in
Section 22.5.

One of the most important functions of the IP layer is routing. Every IP datagram contains
a source and destination address. Figure A.1 shows the format of an IPv4 header.

                      Figure A.1. Format of the IPv4 header.

       The 4-bit version field is 4. This has been the version of IP in use since the early
        1980s.

       The header length field is the length of the entire IP header, including any options,
        in whole 32-bit words. The maximum value for this 4-bit field is 15 (0xf), giving a
        maximum IP header length of 60 bytes. Therefore, with the fixed portion of the
        header occupying 20 bytes, this allows for up to 40 bytes of options.

       The 6-bit Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) field (RFC 2474 [Nichols et al.
        1998]) and the 2-bit Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) field (RFC 3168
        [Ramakrishnan, Floyd, and Black 2001]) replace the historical 8-bit type-of-service
        (TOS) field, which was described in RFC 1349 [Almquist 1992]. We can set all 8 bits
        of this field with the IP_TOS socket option (Section 7.6), although the kernel may
        overwrite any value we set to enforce Diffserv policy or implement ECN.

       The 16-bit total length field is the total length in bytes of the IP datagram, including
        the IPv4 header. The amount of data in the datagram is this field minus 4 times the
        header length (recall that the header length is in units of whole 32-bit words, or 4
        bytes). This field is required because some datalinks pad the frame to some
        minimum length (e.g., Ethernet) and it is possible for the size of a valid IP
        datagram to be less than the datalink minimum.

       The 16-bit identification field is set to a different value for each IP datagram and
        enables fragmentation and reassembly (Section 2.11). The value must be unique for
        the packet's source, destination, and protocol, for the length of time that the

        datagram could be in transit. If there is no chance that the packet will be
        fragmented, for instance, the DF bit is set, there is no need to set this field.

       The DF (don't fragment) bit, the MF (more fragments) bit, and the 13-bit fragment
        offset field are also used with fragmentation and reassembly. The DF bit is also used
        with path MTU discovery (Section 2.11).

       The 8-bit time-to-live (TTL) field is set by the sender and then decremented by 1
        each time a router forwards the datagram. The datagram is discarded by any router
        that decrements the value to 0. This limits the lifetime of any IP datagram to 255
        hops. A common default for this field is 64, but we can query and change this
        default with the IP_TTL and IP_MULTICAST_TTL socket options (Section 7.6).

       The 8-bit protocol field specifies the next layer protocol contained in the IP
        datagram. Typical values are 1 (ICMPv4), 2 (IGMPv4), 6 (TCP), and 17 (UDP). These
        values are specified in the IANA's "Protocol Numbers" registry [IANA].

       The 16-bit header checksum is calculated over just the IP header (including any
        options). The algorithm is the standard Internet checksum algorithm, a simple
        16-bit one's-complement addition, which we show in Figure 28.15.

       The source IPv4 address and the destination IPv4 address are both 32-bit fields.

       We describe the options field in Section 27.2 and show an example of the IPv4
        source route option in Section 27.3.

A.3 IPv6 Header
Figure A.2 shows the format of an IPv6 header (RFC 2460 [Deering and Hinden 1998]).

                       Figure A.2. Format of the IPv6 header.

       The 4-bit version field is 6. Since this field occupies the first 4 bits of the first byte
        of the header (just like the IPv4 version, Figure A.1), it allows a receiving IP stack
        to differentiate between the two versions. This differentiation is already done by
        most link layers by using different encapsulation for IPv4 and IPv6.

        During the development of IPv6 in the early 1990s, before the version number of 6
        was assigned, the protocol was called IPng, for "IP next generation." You may still
        encounter references to IPng.

       The 6-bit DSCP field (RFC 2474 [Nichols et al. 1998]) and the 2-bit ECN field (RFC
        3168 [Ramakrishnan, Floyd, and Black 2001]) replace the historical 8-bit traffic
        class field, which was described in RFC 2460. We can set all 8 bits of this field with
        the IPV6_TCLASS socket option (Section 22.8), although the kernel may overwrite
        any value we set to enforce Diffserv policy or implement ECN.

       The 20-bit flow label field can be chosen by the application or kernel for a given
        socket. A flow is a sequence of packets from a particular source to a particular
        destination for which the source desires special handling by intervening routers. For
        a given flow, once the flow label is chosen by the source, it does not change. A flow
        label of 0 (the default) identifies packets that do not belong to a flow. The flow label
        does not change while flowing through the network. [Rajahalme et al. 2003]
        describes the usage of the flow label more completely.

        The interface for the flow label is yet to be completely defined. The sin6_flowinfo
        member of the sockaddr_in6 socket address structure (Figure 3.4) is reserved for
        future use. Some systems copy the lower 28 bits from the sin6_flowinfo directly
        into the IPv6 packet header, overwriting the DSCP and ECN fields.

       The 16-bit payload length field is the length in bytes of everything following the
        40-byte IPv6 header. Note that unlike IPv4, the payload length field does not
        include the IPv6 header. A value of 0 means the length requires more than 16 bits

        to describe and is contained in a jumbo payload option (Figure 27.9). This is called
        a jumbogram.

       The 8-bit next header field is similar to the IPv4 protocol field. Indeed, when the
        upper layer protocol is basically unchanged from IPv4 to IPv6, the same values are
        used, such as 6 for TCP and 17 for UDP. There were so many changes from ICMPv4
        to ICMPv6 that the latter was assigned a new value of 58.

        An IPv6 datagram can have numerous headers following the 40-byte IPv6 header.
        That is why the field is called the "next header" and not the "protocol."

       The 8-bit hop limit field is similar to the IPv4 TTL field. The hop limit is decremented
        by 1 each time a router forwards the datagram and the datagram is discarded by
        any router that decrements the value to 0. The default value for this field can be set
        and fetched with the IPV6_UNICAST_HOPS and IPV6_MULTICAST_HOPS (Sections 7.8
        and 21.6) socket options. The IPV6_HOPLIMIT socket option also lets us set this field
        and the IPV6_RECVHOPLIMIT socket option lets us obtain its value from a received
        datagram.

        Early specifications of IPv4 had routers decrement the TTL by either one or the
        number of seconds that the router held the datagram, whichever was greater. Hence
        the name "time-to-live." In reality, however, the field was always decremented by
        one. IPv6 calls for its hop limit field to always be decremented by one, hence the
        name change from IPv4.

       The source IPv6 address and the destination IPv6 address are both 128-bit fields.

The most significant change from IPv4 to IPv6 is, of course, the larger IPv6 address fields.
Another change is simplifying the IPv6 header as follows, to facilitate faster processing as a
datagram traverses the network:

       There is no IPv6 header length field since the IPv6 header length is fixed at 40
        bytes. Optional headers may follow the fixed 40-byte IPv6 header, but each of these
        has its own length field.

       The two IPv6 addresses end up aligned on a 64-bit boundary when the header itself
        is 64-bit aligned. This can speed up processing on 64-bit architectures. IPv4
        addresses are only 32-bit aligned in a 64-bit aligned IPv4 header.

       There are no fragmentation fields in the IPv6 header because there is a separate
        fragmentation header for this purpose. This design decision was made because
        fragmentation is the exception, and exceptions should not slow down normal
        processing.

       The IPv6 header does not include its own checksum. This is because all the upper
        layers TCP, UDP, and ICMPv6 have their own checksum that includes the
        upper-layer header, the upper-layer data, and the following fields from the IPv6
        header: IPv6 source address, IPv6 destination address, payload length, and next
        header (RFC 2460 [Deering and Hinden 1998]). By omitting the checksum from the
        header, routers that forward the datagram need not recalculate a header checksum
        after they modify the hop limit. Again, speed of forwarding by routers is the key
        point.

In case this is your first encounter with IPv6, we also note the following major differences
from IPv4 to IPv6:

       There is no broadcasting with IPv6 (Chapter 20). Multicasting (Chapter 21), which is
        optional with IPv4, is mandatory with IPv6. The case of sending to all systems on a
        subnet is handled with the all-nodes multicast group.

       IPv6 routers do not fragment packets they forward. If fragmentation is required, the

        router drops the packet and sends an ICMPv6 error (Section A.6). Fragmentation is
        performed only by the originating host with IPv6.

       IPv6 requires support for path MTU discovery (Section 2.11). Technically, this
        support is optional and could be omitted from minimal implementations such as
        bootstrap loaders, but if a node does not implement this feature, it must not send
        datagrams larger than the IPv6 minimum link MTU (1280 bytes). Section 22.9
        describes socket options to control path MTU discovery behavior.

       IPv6 requires support for authentication and security options. These options appear
        after the fixed header.

A.4 IPv4 Addresses
IPv4 addresses are 32 bits long and are usually written as 4 decimal numbers, separated
by dots ("."). This is called dotted-decimal notation, and each decimal number represents
one of the 4 bytes of the 32-bit address. The first of the 4 decimal numbers identifies the
address type, as shown in Figure A.3. Although historically IPv4 addresses were divided
into five classes, as shown in Figure A.3, the three classes used for unicast addresses are
functionally equivalent, so we show them as one range.

   Figure A.3. Ranges for the five different classes of IPv4 addresses.

Whenever we talk about an IPv4 network or subnet address, we talk about a 32-bit
network address and a corresponding 32-bit mask. Bits of 1 in the mask cover the network
address and bits of 0 in the mask cover the host. Since the bits of 1 in the mask are
usually contiguous from the leftmost bit, and the bits of 0 in the mask are always
contiguous from the rightmost bit, this address mask can also be specified as a prefix
length that denotes the number of contiguous bits of 1 starting from the left. For example,
a mask of 255.255.255.0 corresponds with a prefix length of 24. These are known as
classless addresses, so called because the mask is explicitly specified instead of being
implied by the address class. IPv4 network addresses are normally written as a
dotted-decimal number, followed by a slash, followed by the prefix length. Figure 1.16
showed examples of this.

Discontiguous subnet masks were never ruled out by any RFC, but they are confusing and
cannot be represented in prefix notation. BGP4, the Internet interdomain routing protocol,
cannot represent discontiguous masks. IPv6 also requires that all address masks be
contiguous starting at the leftmost bit.

Using classless addresses requires classless routing, and this is normally called classless
interdomain routing (CIDR) (RFC 1519 [Fuller et al. 1993]). CIDR usage decreases the size
of the Internet backbone routing tables and reduces the rate of IPv4 address depletion. All
routes in CIDR must be accompanied by a mask or a prefix length. The class of the address
no longer implies the mask. Section 10.8 of TCPv1 talks more about CIDR.

Subnet Addresses
IPv4 addresses are often subnetted (RFC 950 [Mogul and Postel 1985]). This adds another
level to the address hierarchy:

       Network ID (assigned to site)

       Subnet ID (chosen by site)

       Host ID (chosen by site)

The boundary between the network ID and the subnet ID is fixed by the prefix length of
the assigned network address. This prefix length is normally assigned by the organization's
Internet service provider (ISP). But, the boundary between the subnet ID and the host ID
is chosen by the site. All the hosts on a given subnet share a common subnet mask, and
this mask specifies the boundary between the subnet ID and the host ID. Bits of 1 in the
subnet mask cover the network ID and subnet ID, and bits of 0 cover the host ID.

As an example, consider a site that is assigned the prefix 192.168.42.0/24 by its ISP. If it

chooses to use a 3-bit subnet ID, 5 bits are left for the host ID, as shown in Figure A.4.

Figure A.4. 24-bit network address with 3-bit subnet ID and 5-bit host
                                 ID.

This division results in the subnets shown in Figure A.5.

       Figure A.5. Subnet list for 3-bit subnet ID and 5-bit host ID.

This gives us 6 to 8 subnets (subnet IDs 1 6 or 0 7), each supporting 30 systems (host
IDs 1 30). RFC 950 recommends not using the two subnets with a subnet ID of all zero
bits or all one bits (the ones marked with a dagger in Figure A.5. Most systems today
support these two forms of subnet IDs. The highest host ID (31, in this case) is reserved
for the broadcast address. The host ID 0 is reserved for identifying the network and to
avoid problems with old systems that used host ID 0 as the broadcast address. However,
on controlled networks with no such systems, it may be possible to use host ID 0. In
general, network programs need not care about specific subnet or host IDs and should
treat IP addresses as opaque values.

Loopback Addresses
By convention, the address 127.0.0.1 is assigned to the loopback interface. Anything sent
to this IP address loops around and becomes IP input without ever leaving the machine.
We often use this address when testing a client and server on the same host. This address
is normally known by the name INADDR_LOOPBACK.

Any address on the network 127/8 can be assigned to the loopback interface, but
127.0.0.1 is and is often configured automatically by the IP stack.

Unspecified Address
The address consisting of 32 zero bits is the IPv4 unspecified address. In an IPv4 packet, it
is only permitted to appear as the source address in packets sent by a node that is
bootstrapping before the node learns its IP address. In the sockets API, this address is
called the wildcard address and is normally known by the name INADDR_ANY. Also,
specifying it in the sockets API, for example, to bind for a listening TCP socket, indicates
that the socket will accept client connections destined to any of the node's IPv4 addresses.

Private Addresses

RFC 1918 [Rekhter et al. 1996] sets aside three address ranges for "private Internets,"
that is, networks that do not connect to the public Internet without a NAT or proxies in
between. These address ranges are shown in Figure A.6:

                Figure A.6. Ranges for private IPv4 addresses.

These addresses must never appear on the Internet; they are reserved for use in private
networks. Many small sites use these private addresses and NAT to a single public IP
address visible to the Internet.

Multihoming and Address Aliases
Traditionally, the definition of a multihomed host has been a host with multiple interfaces:
two Ethernets, for example, or an Ethernet and a point-to-point link. Each interface must
generally have a unique IPv4 address. When counting interfaces to determine if a host is
multihomed, the loopback interface does not count.

A router, by definition, is multihomed since it forwards packets that arrive on one interface
out another interface. But, a multihomed host is not a router unless it forwards packets.
Indeed, a multihomed host must not assume it is a router just because the host has
multiple interfaces; it must not act as a router unless it has been configured to do so
(typically by the administrator enabling a configuration option).

The term "multihoming," however, is more general and covers two different scenarios
(Section 3.3.4 of RFC 1122 [Braden 1989]):

       A host with multiple interfaces is multihomed and each interface must in general
        have its own IP address. ("Unnumbered" interfaces need not have IP addresses, but
        we mostly encounter these on routers.) This is the traditional definition.

       Newer hosts have the capability of assigning multiple IP addresses to a given
        physical interface. Each additional IP address, after the first (primary), is called an
        alias or logical interface. Often, aliased IP addresses share the same subnet address
        as the primary address but have different host IDs. But, it is also possible for aliases
        to have a completely different network address or subnet addresses from the
        primary. We show an example of aliased addresses in Section 17.6.

Hence, the definition of a multihomed host is one with multiple interfaces visible to the IP
layer, regardless of whether those interfaces are physical or logical.

It is common to give a high-usage server multiple connections to the same Ethernet
switch, and to aggregate these connections to appear as one higher bandwidth interface.
Although such a system has multiple physical interfaces, it is not considered to be
multihomed since only one logical interface is visible to IP.

The term "multihoming" is also used in another context. A network that has multiple
connections to the Internet is also called multihomed. For example, some sites have two
connections to the Internet instead of one, providing a backup capability. The SCTP
transport protocol can potentially take advantage of these multiple connections by
communicating that the site is multihomed to its peer.

A.5 IPv6 Addresses
IPv6 addresses are 128 bits long and are usually written as eight 16-bit hexadecimal
numbers. The high-order bits of the 128-bit address imply the type of address (RFC 3513
[Hinden and Deering 2003]). Figure A.7 shows the different values of the high-order bits
and what type of address these bits imply.

         Figure A.7. Meaning of high-order bits of IPv6 addresses.

These high-order bits are called the format prefix. For example, if the high-order 3 bits are
001, the address is called a global unicast address. If the high-order 8 bits are 11111111 (
0xff), it is a multicast address.

Global Unicast Addresses
The IPv6 addressing architecture has evolved based on lessons learned from deployment
and from IPv4. The original definition of aggregatable global unicast addresses, which in
Figure A.7 begin with a 3-bit prefix of 001, had a fixed structure built into the address. This
structure was removed by RFC 3587 [Hinden, Deering, and Nordmark 2003], and while the
addresses beginning with the 001 prefix will be the first ones assigned, there is no
difference between them and any other global address. These addresses will be used where
IPv4 unicast addresses are used today.

The format of aggregation-based unicast addresses is defined in RFC 3513 [Hinden and
Deering 2003] and RFC 3587 [Hinden, Deering, and Nordmark 2003] and contains the
following fields, starting at the leftmost bit and going right:

       Global routing prefix (n bits)

       Subnet ID (64    n bits)

       Interface identifier (64 bits)

Figure A.8 illustrates the format of a global unicast address.

          Figure A.8. IPv6 aggregatable global unicast addresses.

The interface ID must be constructed in modified EUI-64 format. This is a variation of IEEE
EUI-64 format [IEEE 1997], which is a superset of the 48-bit IEEE 802 MAC addresses that
are assigned to most LAN interface cards. This identifier should be automatically assigned
for an interface based on its hardware MAC address when possible. Details for constructing

modified EUI-64-based interface identifiers are in Appendix A of RFC 3513 [Hinden and
Deering 2003].

Since a modified EUI-64 can be a globally unique identifier for a given interface, and an
interface can identify a user, the modified EUI-64 format raises certain privacy concerns. It
may be possible to track the actions and movements of a given user, for example, where
they bring their roaming laptop, just from the modified EUI-64 value in their IPv6 address.
RFC 3041 [Narten and Draves 2001] describes privacy extensions to generate interface
identifiers that change several times per day to avoid this privacy concern.

6 bone Test Addresses
The 6bone is a virtual network used for early testing of the IPv6 protocols (Section B.3).
Although aggregatable global unicast addresses are being assigned, sites that do not
qualify for address space based on the rules used by regional registries can use a special
format of these addresses on the 6bone (RFC 2471 [Hinden, Fink, and Postel 1998]), as
shown in Figure A.9.

                   Figure A.9. IPv6 test addresses for 6bone.

These addresses are considered temporary, and nodes using these addresses will have to
renumber when aggregatable global unicast addresses are assigned.

The high-order two bytes are 0x3ffe. The 6bone site ID is assigned by the chair of the
6bone activity. These assignments are meant to reflect how IPv6 addresses would be
assigned in real-world environments. 6bone activity is winding down [Fink and Hinden
2003] now that IPv6 production deployment is well underway (in 2002, more production
address allocations were made than the 6bone had allocated in eight years). The subnet ID
and interface ID are used as above for subnet and node identification.

In Section 11.2, we showed the IPv6 address for the host freebsd in Figure 1.16 as
3ffe:b80:1f8d:1:a00:20ff:fea7:686b. The 6bone site ID is 0x0b801f8d and the subnet
ID is 0x1. The low-order 64 bits are the modified EUI-64 constructed from the MAC address
of the host's Ethernet card.

IPv4-Mapped IPv6 Addresses
IPv4-mapped IPv6 addresses allow IPv6 applications on hosts supporting both IPv4 and
IPv6 to communicate with IPv4-only hosts during the transition of the Internet to IPv6.
These addresses are automatically created by DNS resolvers (Figure 11.8) when a query is
made by an IPv6 application for the IPv6 addresses of a host that has only IPv4 addresses.

We saw in Figure 12.4 that using this type of address with an IPv6 socket causes an IPv4
datagram to be sent to the IPv4 host. These addresses are not stored in any DNS data
files; they are created when needed by a resolver.

Figure A.10 shows the format of these addresses The low-order 32 bits contain an IPv4
address.

                    Figure A.10. IPv4-mapped IPv6 address.

When writing an IPv6 address, a consecutive string of zeros can be abbreviated with two
colons. Also, the embedded IPv4 address is written using dotted-decimal notation. For
example, we can abbreviate the IPv4-mapped IPv6 address

0:0:0:0:0:FFFF:12.106.32.254 as ::FFFF:12.106.32.254.

IPv4-Compatible IPv6 Addresses
IPv4-compatible IPv6 addresses were also planned to be used during the transition from
IPv4 to IPv6 (RFC 2893 [Gilligan and Nordmark 2000]). The administrator for a host
supporting both IPv4 and IPv6 that does not have a neighbor IPv6 router should create a
DNS AAAA record containing an IPv4-compatible IPv6 address. Any other IPv6 host with
an IPv6 datagram to send to an IPv4-compatible IPv6 address will then encapsulate the
IPv6 datagram with an IPv4 header; this is called an automatic tunnel. However,
deployment concerns have reduced the usage of this feature. We will talk more about
tunneling in Section B.3 and show an example of this type of IPv6 datagram encapsulated
within an IPv4 header in Figure B.2.

Figure A.11 shows the format of an IPv4-compatible IPv6 address.

                  Figure A.11. IPv4-compatible IPv6 address.

An example of this type of address is ::12.106.32.254.

IPv4-compatible IPv6 addresses can also appear in the source or destination of
nontunnelled IPv6 packets when using the SIIT IPv4/IPv6 transition mechanism (RFC
2765 [Nordmark 2000]).

Loopback Address
An IPv6 address consisting of 127 zero bits and a single one bit, written as ::1, is the IPv6
loopback address. In the sockets API, it is referenced as in6addr_loopback or
IN6ADDR_LOOPBACK_INIT.

Unspecified Address
An IPv6 address consisting of 128 zero bits, written as 0::0, or just ::, is the IPv6
unspecified address. In an IPv6 packet, the unspecified address can appear only as the
source address in packets sent by a node that is bootstrapping, before the node learns its
IPv6 address.

In the sockets API, this address is called the wildcard address. Specifying it, for example,
to bind for a listening TCP socket, indicates that the socket will accept client connections
destined to any of the node's addresses. It is referenced as in6addr_any or
IN6ADDR_ANY_INIT.

Link-Local Address
A link-local address is used on a single link when it is known that the datagram will not be
forwarded beyond the local network. Example uses are automatic address configuration at
bootstrap time and neighbor discovery (similar to IPv4's ARP). Figure A.12 shows the
format of these addresses.

                       Figure A.12. IPv6 link-local address.

These addresses always begin with 0xfe80. An IPv6 router must not forward a datagram
with a link-local source or destination address to another link. In Section 11.2, we show

the link-local address associated with the name aix-6ll.

Site-Local Address
As of this writing, the IETF IPv6 working group has decided to deprecate site-local
addresses in their current form. The forthcoming replacement may or may not finally use
the same address range as was originally defined for site-local addresses (fec0/10).
Site-local addresses were meant to be used for addressing within a site without the need
for a global prefix. Figure A.13 shows the originally defined format of these addresses.

                       Figure A.13. IPv6 site-local address.

An IPv6 router must not forward a datagram with a site-local source or destination address
outside of that site.

A.6 Internet Control Message Protocols (ICMPv4 and
ICMPv6)
ICMP is a required and integral part of any IPv4 or IPv6 implementation. ICMP is normally
used to communicate error or informational messages between IP nodes, both routers and
hosts, but it is occasionally used by applications. The ping and traceroute applications (
Chapter 28), for example, both use ICMP.

The first 32 bits of both ICMPv4 and ICMPv6 messages are the same and are shown in
Figure A.14. RFC 792 [Postel 1981b] documents ICMPv4 and RFC 2463 [Conta and Deering
1998] documents ICMPv6.

           Figure A.14. Format of ICMPv4 and ICMPv6 messages.

The 8-bit type is the type of the ICMPv4 or ICMPv6 message and some types have an
8-bit code with additional information. The checksum is the standard Internet checksum,
although in ICMPv4, the checksum covers only the ICMP payload starting with the type
field, while the ICMPv6 checksum also includes the IPv6 pseudoheader.

From a network programming perspective, we need to understand which ICMP messages
can be returned to an application, what causes an error, and how an error is returned to
the application. Figure A.15 lists all the ICMPv4 messages and how they are handled by
FreeBSD. Figure A.16 lists the ICMPv6 messages. The third column indicates the errno
value returned by those messages that trigger an error to be returned to the application.
When using TCP, the error is noted but is not immediately returned. If TCP later gives up
on the connection due to a timeout, any ICMP error indication is then returned. When using
UDP, the next send or receive operation receives the error, but only when using a
connected socket, as described in Section 8.9.

      Figure A.15. Handling of the ICMP message types by FreeBSD.

*-"port unreachable" is only used by transport protocols that do not have their own
mechanism for signalling that no process is listening on a port. For example, TCP sends an
RST message so it does not need the "port unreachable" message.

 -redirects are ignored by systems acting as routers by forwarding packets.

                          Figure A.16. ICMPv6 messages.

**-"RFC2463bis" designates the revision in progress of RFC 2463      [Conta and Deering
2001].

The notation "user process" means that the kernel does not process the message and it is
up to a user process with a raw socket to handle the message. No error return is triggered

for these messages. We must also note that different implementations may handle certain
messages differently. For example, although Unix systems normally handle router
solicitations and router advertisements in a user process, other implementations might
handle these messages in the kernel.

ICMPv6 clears the high-order bit of the type field for the error messages (types 1   4) and
sets this bit for the informational messages (types 128 137).

