
Appendix B. Virtual Networks
       Section B.1.?Introduction

       Section B.2.?The MBone

       Section B.3.?The 6bone

       Section B.4.?IPv6 Transition: 6to4

                                                                                Page 998

B.1 Introduction
When a new feature is added to TCP, such as the long fat pipe support defined in RFC
1323, support is required only in the hosts using TCP; no changes are required in the
routers. These RFC 1323 changes, for example, are slowly appearing in host
implementations of TCP, and when a new TCP connection is established, each end can
determine if the other end supports the new feature. If both hosts support the feature, it
can be used.

This differs from changes being made to the IP layer, such as multicasting at the end of
the 1980s and IPv6 in the mid-1990s, because these new features require changes in all
the hosts and all the routers. But, what if people want to start using the new features
without having to wait for all the systems to be upgraded? To do this, a virtual network is
established on top of the existing IPv4 Internet using tunnels.

                                                                                              Page 999

B.2 The MBone
Our first example of a virtual network that is built using tunnels is the MBone, which
started around 1992 [Eriksson 1994]. If two or more hosts on a LAN support multicasting,
multicast applications can be run on all these hosts and communicate with each other. To
connect this LAN to some other LAN that also has multicast-capable hosts, a tunnel is
configured between one host on each of the LANs, as shown in Figure B.1. We show the
following numbered steps in this figure:

           Figure B.1. IPv4-in-IPv4 encapsulation used on MBone.

    1.   An application on the source host, MH1, sends a multicast datagram to a class D
         address.

    2.   We show this as a UDP datagram, since most multicast applications use UDP. We
         talk more about multicasting and how to send and receive multicast datagrams in
         Chapter 21.

    3.   The datagram is received by all the multicast-capable hosts on the LAN, including
         MR2. We note that MR2 is also functioning as a multicast router, running the
         mrouted program, which performs multicast routing.

    4.   MR2 prepends another IPv4 header at the front of the datagram with the destination
         IPv4 address of this new header set to the unicast address of the tunnel endpoint,
         MR5. This unicast address is configured by the administrator of MR2 and is read by
         the mrouted program when it starts up. Similarly, the unicast address of MR2 is
         configured for MR5, the other end of the tunnel. The protocol field in the new IPv4
         header is set to 4, which is the value for IPv4-in-IPv4 encapsulation. The datagram
         is sent to the next-hop router, UR3, which we explicitly denote as a unicast router.
         That is, UR3 does not understand multicasting, which is the whole reason why we
         are using a tunnel. The shaded portion of the IPv4 datagram has not changed from
         what was sent in Step 1, other than the decrementing of the TTL field in the shaded
         IPv4 header.

    5.   UR3 looks at the destination IPv4 address in the outermost IPv4 header and
         forwards the datagram to the next-hop router, UR4, another unicast router.

    6.   UR4 delivers the datagram to its destination, MR5, the tunnel endpoint.

    7.   MR5 receives the datagram, and since the protocol field indicates IPv4-in-IPv4

                                                                                                Page 1000

         encapsulation, it removes the first IPv4 header and then outputs the remainder of
         the datagram (a copy of what was multicast on the top LAN) as a multicast
         datagram on its LAN.

    8.   All the multicast-capable hosts on the lower LAN receive the multicast datagram.

The result is that the multicast datagram sent on the top LAN also gets transmitted as a
multicast datagram on the lower LAN. This occurs even though the two routers that we
show attached to these two LANs, and all the Internet routers between these two routers,
are not multicast-capable.

In this example, we show the multicast routing function being performed by the mrouted
program running on one host on each LAN. This is how the MBone started. But around
1996, multicast routing functionality started appearing in the routers from most major
router vendors. If the two unicast routers UR3 and UR4 in Figure B.1 were
multicast-capable, then we would not need to run mrouted at all, and UR3 and UR4 would
function as multicast routers. But if there are still other routers between UR3 and UR4 that
are not multicast-capable, then a tunnel is required. The tunnel endpoints would then be
MR3 (a multicast-capable replacement for UR3) and MR4 (a multicast-capable replacement
for UR4), not MR2 and MR5.

In the scenario that we show in Figure B.1, every multicast packet appears twice on the
top LAN and twice on the bottom LAN: once as a multicast packet, and again as a unicast
packet within the tunnel as the packet goes between the host running mrouted and the
next-hop unicast router (e.g., between MR2 and UR3, and between UR4 and MR5). This
extra copy is the cost of tunneling. The advantage in replacing the two unicast routers UR3
and UR4 in Figure B.1 with multicast-capable routers (what we called MR3 and MR4) is to
avoid this extra copy of every multicast packet from appearing on the LANs. Even if MR3
and MR4 must establish a tunnel between themselves because some intermediate routers
between them (that we do not show) are not multicast-capable, this is still advantageous
since it avoids the duplicate copies on each LAN.

In fact, the MBone is virtually nonexistent at this point, having been replaced with native
multicast in this manner. There are probably still tunnels present in the Internet's
multicast infrastructure, but they are commonly between native multicast routers inside a
service provider's network and are invisible to the end-user.

                                                                                               Page 1001

B.3 The 6bone
The 6bone is a virtual network that was created in 1996 for reasons similar to the MBone:
users with islands of IPv6-capable hosts wanted to connect them together using a virtual
network without waiting for all the intermediate routers to become IPv6-capable. As of this
writing, it is being phased out in favor of native IPv6 deployment; it is expected that the
6bone will cease to operate by June 2006 [Fink and Hinden 2003]. We cover the 6bone
here because the examples still demonstrate configured tunnels. We will expand the
example to include dynamic tunnels in Section B.4.

Figure B.2 shows an example of two IPv6-capable LANs connected with a tunnel across
IPv4-only routers. We show the following numbered steps in this figure:

               Figure B.2. IPv6-in-IPv4 encapsulation on 6bone.

    1.   Host H1 on the top LAN sends an IPv6 datagram containing a TCP segment to host
         H4 on the bottom LAN. We designate these two hosts as "IPv6 hosts," but both
         probably run IPv4 also. The IPv6 routing table on H1 specifies that host HR2 is the
         next-hop router and an IPv6 datagram is sent to this host.

    2.   Host HR2 has a configured tunnel to host HR3. This configured tunnel allows IPv6
         datagrams to be sent between the two tunnel endpoints across an IPv4 Internet by
         encapsulating the IPv6 datagram in an IPv4 datagram (called "IPv6-in-IPv4
         encapsulation"). The IPv4 protocol field has a value of 41. We note that the two
         IPv4/IPv6 hosts at the ends of the tunnel, HR2 and HR3, are both acting as IPv6
         routers since they are forwarding IPv6 datagrams that they receive on one interface
         out another interface. The configured tunnel counts as an interface, even though it
         is a virtual interface and not a physical interface.

    3.   The tunnel endpoint, HR3, receives the encapsulated datagram, strips off the IPv4
         header, and sends the IPv6 datagram onto its LAN.

    4.   The destination, H4, receives the IPv6 datagram.

                                                                                               Page 1002

B.4 IPv6 Transition: 6to4
The 6to4 transition mechanism, fully described in "Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4
Clouds" (RFC 3056 [Carpenter and Moore 2001]), is a method of dynamically creating the
tunnels shown in Figure B.2. Unlike previously designed dynamic tunnel mechanisms,
which required that each host involved have an IPv4 address and be aware of the tunneling
mechanism, 6to4 only involves routers in the tunneling process. This allows for simpler
configuration and a central location to enforce security policy. It also permits colocation of
6to4 functionality with the common NAT/firewall function that is often at the edge of a
network (e.g., a small NAT/firewall device at the customer's end of a DSL or cable-modem
connection).

6to4 addresses are in the range 2002/16. The IPv4 address follows in the next four bytes of
the address, as shown in Figure B.3; the 16-bit 2002 prefix and the 32-bit IPv4 address
create a 48-bit public topology identifier. This leaves two bytes for the subnet ID before
the 64-bit interface ID. For example, the 6to4 prefix corresponding to our host freebsd,
with IPv4 address 12.106.32.254, is 2002:c6a:20fe/48.

                             Figure B.3. 6to4 addresses.

The advantage of 6to4 over the 6bone is that the tunnels making up the 6to4
infrastructure are built automatically; there is no prearranged configuration required. A site
using 6to4 configures a default router using a well-known IPv4 anycast address,
192.88.99.1 (RFC 3068 [Huitema 2001]). This corresponds to the IPv6 address
2002:c058:6301::. Routers in the native IPv6 infrastructure that are willing to act as 6to4
gateways advertise a route to 2002/16 and encapsulate any traffic to the IPv4 address
embedded in the 6to4 address. Such routers can be local to a site, regional, or global,
depending on the scope of their route advertisements.

The goal for these virtual networks is that over time, as intermediate routers gain the
required functionality (e.g., IPv6 routing in terms of the 6bone and other IPv6 transition
mechanisms), the virtual networks will disappear.

                                                                                                 Page 1003
