
Appendix C. Debugging Techniques
This appendix contains some hints and techniques for debugging network applications. No
single technique is the answer for everyone; instead, there are various tools that we should
be familiar with, and then use whatever works in our environment.

C.1 System Call Tracing
Many versions of Unix provide a system call tracing facility. This can often provide a
valuable debugging technique.

Working at this level, we need to differentiate between a system call and a function. The
former is an entry point into the kernel, and that is what we are able to trace with the tools
we will look at in this section. POSIX and most other standards use the term "function" to
describe what appears to the user to be functions, even though on some implementations,
they may be system calls. For example, on a Berkeley-derived kernel, socket is a system
call even though it appears to be a normal C function to the application programmer. But
under SVR4, we will see shortly that it is a library function in the sockets library that issues
calls to putmsg and getmsg, these latter two being actual system calls.

In this section, we will examine the system calls involved in running our daytime client.
We showed this client in Figure 1.5.

BSD Kernel Sockets
We start with FreeBSD, a Berkeley-derived kernel in which all the socket functions are
system calls. The ktrace program is provided by FreeBSD to run a program and trace the
system calls that are executed. This writes the trace information to a file (whose default
name is ktrace.out), which we print with kdump. We execute our sockets client as

freebsd % ktrace daytimetcpcli 192.168.42.2
Tue Aug 19 23:35:10 2003

We then execute kdump to output the trace information to standard output.

 3211 daytimetcpcli CALL socket(0x2,0x1,0)
 3211 daytimetcpcli RET socket 3

 3211 daytimetcpcli CALL connect(0x3,0x7fdffffe820,0x10)
 3211 daytimetcpcli RET connect 0

 3211 daytimetcpcli CALL read(0x3,0x7fdffffe830,0x1000)
 3211 daytimetcpcli GIO fd 3 read 26 bytes
      "Tue Aug 19 23:35:10 2003
      "
 3211 daytimetcpcli RET read 26/0x1a

...

 3211 daytimetcpcli CALL write(0x1,0x204000,0x1a)
 3211 daytimetcpcli GIO fd 1 wrote 26 bytes
      "Tue Aug 19 23:35:10 2003/r
      "
 3211 daytimetcpcli RET write 26/0x1a

 3211 daytimetcpcli CALL read(0x3,0x7fdffffe830,0x1000)
 3211 daytimetcpcli GIO fd 3 read 0 bytes
      ""

 3211 daytimetcpcli RET      read 0

 3211 daytimetcpcli CALL exit(0)

3211 is the PID. CALL identifies a system call, RET is the return, and GIO stands for generic
process I/O. We see the calls to socket and connect, followed by the call to read that
returns 26 bytes. Our client writes these bytes to standard output and the next call to read
returns 0 (EOF).

Solaris 9 Kernel Sockets
Solaris 2.x is based on SVR4 and all the releases before 2.6 have implemented sockets as
shown in Figure 31.3. One problem, however, with all SVR4 implementations that
implement sockets in this fashion is that they rarely provide 100% compatibility with
Berkeley-derived kernel sockets. To provide additional compatibility, versions starting with
Solaris 2.6 changed the implementation technique and implemented sockets using a
sockfs filesystem. This provides kernel sockets, as we can verify using truss on our
sockets client.

solaris % truss -v connect daytimetcpcli 127.0.0.1
Mon Sep 8 12:16:42 2003

After the normal library linking, the first system call we see is to so_socket, a system call
invoked by our call to socket.

so_socket(PF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, IPPROTO_IP, "", 1) = 3
connect(3, 0xFFBFDEF0, 16, 1)                   =0
         AF_INET name = 127.0.0.1 port = 13
read(3, " M o n   S e p     8   1".., 4096)     = 26
Mon Sep 8 12:48:06 2003
write(1, " M o n   S e p      8  1".., 26)      = 26
read(3, 0xFFBFDF03, 4096)                       = 0
_exit(0)

The first three arguments to so_socket are our three arguments to socket.

We see that connect is a system call, and truss, when invoked with the -v connect flag,
prints the contents of the socket address structure pointed to by the second argument (the
IP address and port number). The only system calls that we have replaced with ellipses are
a few dealing with standard input and standard output.

C.2 Standard Internet Services
Be familiar with the standard Internet services described in Figure 2.18. We have used the
daytime service many times for testing our clients. The discard service is a convenient port
to which we can send data. The echo service is similar to the echo server we have used
throughout this text.

Many sites now prevent access to these services through their firewalls because of some
denial-of-service attacks using these services in 1996 (Exercise 13.3). Nevertheless, you
can hopefully use these services within your own network.

C.3 sock Program
Stevens' sock program first appeared in TCPv1, where it was frequently used to generate
special case conditions, most of which were then examined in the text using tcpdump. The
handy thing about the program is that it generates so many different scenarios, saving us
from having to write special test programs.

We do not show the source code for the program in this text (it is over 2,000 lines of C),
but the source code is freely available (see the Preface).

The program operates in one of four modes, and each mode can use either TCP or UDP:

       Standard input, standard output client (Figure C.1):

               Figure C.1. sock client, standard input, standard output.

        In the client mode, everything read from standard input is written to the network,
        and everything received from the network is written to standard output. The server's
        IP address and port must be specified, and in the case of TCP, an active open is
        performed.

       Standard input, standard output server This mode is similar to the previous mode,
        except the program binds a well-known port to its socket, and in the case of TCP,
        performs a passive open.

       Source client (Figure C.2):

                        Figure C.2. sock program as source client.

        The program performs a fixed number of writes to a network of some specified size.

       Sink server (Figure C.3):

                         Figure C.3. sock program as sink server.

        The program performs a fixed number of reads from a network.

These four operating modes correspond to the following four commands:

 sock [options] hostname service

 sock [options] -s [hostname] service

 sock [options] -i hostname service

 sock [options] -is [hostname] service

where hostname is a hostname or IP address and service is a service name or port number.
In the two server modes, the wildcard address is bound, unless the optional hostname is
specified.

About 40 command-line options can also be specified, and these drive the optional features
of the program. We will not detail these options here, but many of the socket options
described in Chapter 7 can be set. Executing the program without any arguments prints a
summary of the options.

-b n bind n as client's local port number
-c    convert newline to CR/LF & vice versa
-f a.b.c.d.p foreign IP address = a.b.c.d, foreign port # = p
-g a.b.c.d loose source route
-h    issue TCP half-close on standard input EOF
-i    "source" data to socket, "sink" data from socket (w/-s)
-j a.b.c.d join multicast group
-k    write or writev in chunks
-l a.b.c.d.p client's local IP address = a.b.c.d, local port # = p
-n n # buffers to write for "source" client (default 1024)
-o    do NOT connect UDP client
-p n # ms to pause before each read or write (source/sink)
-q n size of listen queue for TCP server (default 5)
-r n # bytes per read() for "sink" server (default 1024)
-s    operate as server instead of client
-t n set multicast ttl
-u    use UDP instead of TCP
-v    verbose
-w n # bytes per write() for "source" client (default 1024)
-x n # ms for SO_RCVTIMEO (receive timeout)
-y n # ms for SO_SNDTIMEO (send timeout)
-A    SO_REUSEADDR option
-B    SO_BROADCAST option
-C    set terminal to cbreak mode
-D    SO_DEBUG option
-E    IP_RECVDSTADDR option
-F    fork after connection accepted (TCP concurrent server)
-G a.b.c.d strict source route
-H n IP_TOS option (16=min del, 8=max thru, 4=max rel, 2=min cost)
-I    SIGIO signal
-J n IP_TTL option
-K    SO_KEEPALIVE option
-L n SO_LINGER option, n = linger time
-N    TCP_NODELAY option
-O n # ms to pause after listen, but before first accept
-P n # ms to pause before first read or write (source/sink)
-Q n # ms to pause after receiving FIN, but before close
-R n SO_RCVBUF option
-S n SO_SNDBUF option
-T    SO_REUSEPORT option

-U n   enter urgent mode before write number n (source only)
-V     use writev() instead of write(); enables -k too
-W     ignore write errors for sink client
-X n   TCP_MAXSEG option (set MSS)
-Y     SO_DONTROUTE option
-Z     MSG_PEEK

C.4 Small Test Programs
Another useful debugging technique, one that the authors use all the time, is writing small
test programs to see how one specific feature works in a carefully constructed test case. It
helps when writing small test programs to have a set of library wrapper functions and
some simple error functions, such as the ones we have used throughout this text. This
reduces the amount of code that we have to write, but still provides the required testing
for errors.

C.5 tcpdump Program
An invaluable tool when dealing with network programming is a tool like tcpdump. This
program reads packets from a network and prints lots of information about the packets. It
also has the capability of printing only those packets that match some criteria that we
specify. For example,

% tcpdump '(udp and port daytime) or icmp'

prints only the UDP datagrams with a source or destination port of 13 (the daytime server),
or ICMP packets. The following command:

% tcpdump 'tcp and port 80 and tcp[13:1] & 2 != 0'

prints only the TCP segments with a source or destination port of 80 (the HTTP server) that
have the SYN flag set. The SYN flag has a value of 2 in the byte with an offset of 13 from
the start of the TCP header. The following command:

% tcpdump 'tcp and tcp[0:2] > 7000 and tcp[0:2] <= 7005'

prints only TCP segments with a source port between 7001 and 7005. The source port
starts at byte offset 0 in the TCP header and occupies 2 bytes.

Appendix A of TCPv1 details the operation of this program in more detail.

This program is available from http://www.tcpdump.org/ and works under many different
flavors of Unix. It was originally written by Van Jacobson, Craig Leres, and Steven McCanne
at LBL, and is now maintained by a team at tcpdump.org.

Some vendors supply a program of their own with similar functionality. For example,
Solaris 2.x provides the snoop program. The advantage of tcpdump is that it works under so
many versions of Unix, and using a single tool in a heterogeneous environment, instead of
a different tool for each environment, is a big advantage.

C.6 netstat Program
We have used the netstat program many times throughout the text. This program serves
multiple purposes:

       It shows the status of networking endpoints. We showed this in Section 5.6, when
        we followed the status of our endpoint as we started our client and server.

       It shows the multicast groups that a host belongs to on each interface. The -ia flags
        are the normal way to show this, or the -g flag under Solaris 2.x.

       It shows the per-protocol statistics with the -s option. We showed this in Section
        8.13, when looking at the lack of flow control with UDP.

       It displays the routing table with the -r option and the interface information with
        the -i option. We showed this in Section 1.9, where we used netstat to discover
        the topology of our network.

There are other uses of netstat and most vendors have added their own features. Check
the man page on your system.

C.7 lsof Program
The name lsof stands for "list open files." Like tcpdump, it is a publicly available tool that
is handy for debugging and has been ported to many versions of Unix.

One common use for lsof with networking is to find which process has a socket open on a
specified IP address or port. netstat tells us which IP addresses and ports are in use, and
the state of the TCP connections, but it does not identify the process. For example, to find
out which process provides the daytime server, we execute the following:

freebsd % lsof -i TCP:daytime
COMMAND   PID USER    FD             TYPE             DEVICE SIZE/OFF NODE NAME
inetd     561 root     5u            IPv4 0xfffff8003027a260      0t0 TCP *:daytime
(LISTEN)
inetd     561 root     7u            IPv6 0xfffff800302b6720            0t0   TCP *:daytime

This tells us the command (this service is provided by the inetd server), its PID, the
owner, descriptor (5 for IPv4 and 7 for IPv6, and the u means it is open for read/write),
type of socket, address of the protocol control block, size or offset of the file (not
meaningful for a socket), protocol type, and name.

One common use for this program is when we start a server that binds its well-known port
and get the error that the address is already in use. We then use lsof to find the process
that is using the port.

Since lsof reports on open files, it cannot report on network endpoints that are not
associated with an open file: TCP endpoints in the TIME_WAIT state.

ftp://lsof.itap.purdue.edu/pub/tools/unix/lsof/ is the location for this program. It
was written by Vic Abell.

Some vendors supply their own utility that does similar things. For example, FreeBSD
supplies the fstat program. The advantage in lsof is that it works under so many versions
of Unix, and using a single tool in a heterogeneous environment, instead of a different tool
for each environment, is a big advantage.

