                          FORE WORD

Dear reader,
     In the course of your experience with Rust so far, it’s likely that
you have noticed a knowledge gap between what your existing learning
resources have prepared you for versus what you see from the folks making
the top tier of widely used Rust libraries and applications.
     Libraries that do very well are commonly powered by a co-occurrence
of taste and dedication on the authors’ part: feeling what to build, and
building the thing (it’s that simple). This book teaches neither of those
things.
     However, it’s been my experience that taste emerges from a deep com-
fort with the fundamental pieces. It’s here I feel this book will be helpful to
you. I don’t consider it a coincidence that pretty much all of the “household
name” open source Rust library developers understand everything in this
book—even when it’s not the case that they use every single thing from the
book in every single library.
     In this book you will find a level of nuance and tradeoffs and opin-
ions that does not arise from introductory material. Structs are structs,
and we have no need to have an opinion about structs. But infinitely flex-
ible macro APIs (Chapter 7), the judicious application of unsafe code
(Chapter 9), effective testing that speeds you up rather than slowing you
down (Chapter 6)—someone who’s digested The Rust Programming Language
(a.k.a. The Book, https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/) but not much beyond that
is generally going to have a hard time manifesting what they know into
          high-quality or innovative projects, but this book takes you to the starting
          point to begin building your personal taste in highly polished Rust develop-
          ment. You will take what you read here and get it wrong a bunch of times,
          and get it right a couple, and get better.
              I encourage you to seize upon that starting point consciously. I want
          you to be free to think that we got something wrong in this book; that
          the best current guidance in here is missing something, and that you can
          accomplish something over the next couple years that is better than what
          anybody else has envisioned. That’s how Rust and its ecosystem have gotten
          to this point.

                                                                         David Tolnay

xvi   ﻿
