                            PR E FAC E

One of the goals listed on the Rust 2018 roadmap was to develop teaching
resources to better serve intermediate Rustaceans—those who aren’t begin-
ners but also aren’t compiler experts looking to design a new iteration of
the borrow checker. That call inspired me to start live-streaming coding
sessions where I implemented real systems in Rust in real time—not toy
projects or long-winded introductions to basic concepts, but libraries and
tools I would actually use for my research. My thinking was that Rust new-
comers needed to see an experienced Rust programmer go through the
whole development process, including design, debugging, and iteration, in
order to understand how to think in Rust. While a beginner could attempt
the same things themselves, it’d likely be far slower and frustrating since
they would also be learning the language along the way.
     Many developers said that my videos provided a good way to learn to
use Rust “for real,” which was very exciting. However, over the years, it also
became clear that the videos weren’t for everyone, or for every situation.
Some developers prefer to be more in control over their own learning and
would rather have a teaching resource they can consume at their own pace.
Others just need to understand a particular topic better, or find out how
a specific feature works or is best used, and for those situations, a six-hour
coding video isn’t that helpful. I wanted to make sure that intermediate
resources were available for those people and situations as well, which is
what ultimately made me decide to write this book. My aim was to distill
                  all that time spent teaching intermediate Rust by example into solid textual
                  explanations of the most important intermediate topics.
                       I realized early on that the book would complement the videos, not
                  replace them. I remain convinced that the best way to quickly gain expe-
                  rience in a language, barring actively working with it yourself daily, is to
                  watch someone experienced use it. But in my time writing this book, I’ve
                  also found that this format works incredibly well as a comprehensive, by-
                  topic reference that collects lots of knowledge in one place, which is where
                  coding videos fall terribly short. The coding sessions help develop your Rust
                  experience, intuition, and taste. The book teaches you the theory, mecha-
                  nisms, and idioms of the language. And ultimately, a developer needs all of
                  the above to truly excel at what they do.
                       Now, many many words and iterations later, what you have in front of
                  you is my attempt at plugging another hole in the set of intermediate Rust
                  teaching resources. I hope that you find it useful and that we’re now one
                  step closer to fulfilling that roadmap goal!

xviii   Preface
              ACKNOW LEDGMENT S

Having never written a book before, I knew little of what to expect from the
process. I naively assumed that it would be like writing a sequence of blog
posts, or perhaps like writing extensive documentation, but writing a book
has been a whole different ballgame. I’ve spent countless hours researching,
planning, writing, rewriting, discarding, rethinking, and editing. And I’m
incredibly grateful for the support and patience my girlfriend, Talia, has
shown throughout the many late nights I spent working on this project—
without you, the writing experience would have been so much bleaker.
    This book could never have happened without the incredible Rust
developers and community, who have developed a language and ecosystem
I continue to find a joy to interact with and am inspired to help spread and
teach to the best of my ability. The same goes for the amazing people who
have watched my streams over the years; I don’t think I would ever have
ended up in a position to write this book in the first place without your
ongoing support, encouragement, and endless curiosity.
    This book also would not have been half as good had it not been for
David Tolnay, who to my great delight agreed to be the book’s technical
reviewer. David was obviously invaluable in finding errors in both theory
and code, but it was his vast experience, attention to detail, and penchant
for pedagogy that truly made a mark. His thoughtful and insightful com-
ments sometimes made me decide to rewrite entire sections, but always in
ways that made them immeasurably better than they had been before.
                            The same goes for my editor, Liz Chadwick, and the rest of the publish-
                       ing team at No Starch. It was so fun to see Liz’s journey through the book’s
                       development; she picked up Rust along the way while reading, and I was
                       thrilled when her comments showed that she truly followed along with the
                       intermediate material. The discussions whenever there was something she
                       didn’t follow were always illuminating, and resulted in more accessible and
                       thorough explanations.
                            I’d also be remiss not to mention Steve Klabnik and Carol Nichols, the
                       authors of The Rust Programming Language, which was my first introduction
                       to Rust. This book is, at least in my mind, very much a sequel to their book
                       and could not exist without the extraordinary job they’ve done of making
                       the fundamentals of Rust so easily accessible and well explained.
                            Finally, I want to give a nod to you. Yes, you! Writing this book has
                       been a very long process, and it’s partially the outpouring of support and
                       encouragement from the people wanting to read it that has kept me going
                       throughout it all. And it’s people like you who pick up this book, whether
                       virtually or physically, with a desire to improve your own understanding and
                       skills that drive me to keep contributing to the collection of Rust teaching
                       resources as best I can.
                            Thank you all!

xx   Acknowledgments
