                     INTRODUCTION

             In any language, the gap between what the
             introductory material teaches you and what
            you know after years of hands-on experience
        is always wide. Over time, you build familiar-
ity with idioms, develop better mental models for core
concepts, learn which designs and patterns work and
which do not, and discover useful libraries and tools in
the surrounding ecosystem. Taken together, this expe-
rience enables you to write better code in less time.
      With this book, I’m hoping to distill years of my own experience writing
Rust code into a single, easy-to-digest resource. Rust for Rustaceans picks up
where The Rust Programming Language (“the Rust book”) leaves off, though
it’s well suited to any Rust programmer that wants to go beyond the basics,
wherever you learned the trade. This book delves deeper into concepts
such as unsafe code, the trait system, no_std code, and macros. It also cov-
ers new areas like asynchronous I/O, testing, embedded development, and
                       ergonomic API design. I aim to explain and demystify these more advanced
                       and powerful features of Rust and to enable you to build faster, more ergo-
                       nomic, and more robust applications going forward.

       What’s in the Book
                       This book is written both as a guide and as a reference. The chapters are
                       more or less independent, so you can skip directly to topics that particularly
                       interest you (or are currently causing you headaches), or you can read the
                       book start to finish for a more holistic experience. That said, I do recom-
                       mend that you start by reading Chapters 1 and 2, as they lay the foundation
                       for the later chapters and for many topics that will come up in your day-to-
                       day Rust development. Here’s a quick breakdown of what you’ll find in each
                       chapter:

                           Chapter 1, Foundations, gives deeper, more thorough descriptions of
                           fundamental Rust concepts like variables, memory, ownership, bor-
                           rowing, and lifetimes that you’ll need to be familiar with to follow the
                           remainder of the book.
                           Chapter 2, Types, similarly provides a more exhaustive explanation of
                           types and traits in Rust, including how the compiler reasons about
                           them, their features and restrictions, and a number of advanced
                           applications.
                           Chapter 3, Designing Interfaces, covers how to design APIs that are intui-
                           tive, flexible, and misuse-resistant, including advice on how to name
                           things, how to use the type system to enforce API contracts, and when
                           to use generics versus trait objects.
                           Chapter 4, Error Handling, explores the two primary kinds of errors
                           (enumerated and opaque), when the use of each is appropriate, and
                           how each of these are defined, constructed, propagated, and handled.
                           Chapter 5, Project Structure, focuses on the non-code parts of a Rust
                           project, such as Cargo metadata and configuration, crate features, and
                           versioning.
                           Chapter 6, Testing, details how the standard Rust testing harness
                           works and presents some testing tools and techniques that go beyond
                           standard unit and integration tests, such as fuzzing and performance
                           testing.
                           Chapter 7, Macros, covers both declarative and procedural macros,
                           including how they’re written, what they’re useful for, and some of their
                           pitfalls.
                           Chapter 8, Asynchronous Programming, gives an introduction to the dif-
                           ference between synchronous and asynchronous interfaces and then
                           delves into how asynchrony is represented in Rust both at the low level
                           of Future and Pin and at the high level of async and await. The chapter
                           also explains the role of an asynchronous executor and how it makes
                           the whole async machinery come together.

xxii    Introduction
    Chapter 9, Unsafe Code, explains the great powers that the unsafe key-
    word unlocks and the great responsibilities that come with those pow-
    ers. You’ll learn about common gotchas in unsafe code as well as tools
    and techniques you can use to reduce the risk of incorrect unsafe code.
    Chapter 10, Concurrency (and Parallelism), looks at how concurrency is
    represented in Rust and why it can be so difficult to get right in terms
    of both correctness and performance. It covers how concurrency and
    asynchrony are related (but not the same), how concurrency works
    when you get closer to the hardware, and how to stay sane while trying
    to write correct concurrent programs.
    Chapter 11, Foreign Function Interfaces, teaches you how to make Rust
    cooperate nicely with other languages and what FFI primitives like the
    extern keyword actually do.
    Chapter 12, Rust Without the Standard Library, is all about using Rust
    in situations where the full standard library isn’t available, such as
    on embedded devices or other constrained platforms, where you’re
    restricted to what the core and alloc modules provide.
    Chapter 13, The Rust Ecosystem, doesn’t cover a particular Rust subject
    but instead aims to give broader guidance about working in the Rust
    ecosystem. It contains descriptions of common design patterns, advice
    on staying up to date on additions to the language and best practices,
    tips on useful tools and other useful trivia I’ve accumulated over the
    years that isn’t otherwise described in any single place.
    The book has a website at https://rust-for-rustaceans.com with links to
resources from the book, future errata, and the like. You’ll also find that
information at the book’s page on the No Starch Press website at https://­
nostarch.com/rust-rustaceans/.
    And now, with all that out of the way, there’s only one thing left to do:

fn main() {

                                                                 Introduction   xxiii
