                         PROJECT STRUCTURE
                                            5
                     This chapter provides some ideas for struc-
                     turing your Rust projects. For simple proj-
                    ects, the structure set up by cargo new is likely
                 to be something you think little about. You
           may add some modules to split up the code, and some
           dependencies for additional functionality, but that’s about it. However, as a
           project grows in size and complexity, you’ll find that you need to go beyond
           that. Maybe the compilation time for your crate is getting out of hand, or
           you need conditional dependencies, or you need a better strategy for con-
           tinuous integration. In this chapter, we will look at some of the tools that the
           Rust language, and Cargo in particular, provide that make it easier to man-
           age such things.

Features
           Features are Rust’s primary tool for customizing projects. At its core, a fea-
           ture is just a build flag that crates can pass to their dependencies in order
           to add optional functionality. Features carry no semantic meaning in and of
           themselves—instead, you choose what a feature means for your crate.
                      Generally, we use features in three ways: to enable optional dependencies,
                 to conditionally include additional components of a crate, and to augment the
                 behavior of the code. Note that all of these uses are additive; features can add
                 to the functionality of the crate, but they shouldn’t generally do things like
                 remove modules or replace types or function signatures. This stems from the
                 principle that if a developer makes a simple change to their Cargo.toml, such
                 as adding a new dependency or enabling a feature, that shouldn’t make their
                 crate stop compiling. If a crate has mutually exclusive features, that principle
                 quickly falls by the wayside—if crate A depends on one feature of crate C,
                 and crate B on another mutually exclusive feature of C, adding a dependency
                 on crate B would then break crate A! For that reason, we generally follow the
                 principle that if crate A compiles against crate C with some set of features, it
                 should also compile if all features are enabled on crate C.
                      Cargo leans into this principle quite hard. For example, if two crates
                 (A and B) both depend on crate C, but they each enable different features
                 on C, Cargo will compile crate C only once, with all the features that either
                 A or B requires. That is, it’ll take the union of the requested features for C
                 across A and B. Because of this, it’s generally hard to add mutually exclusive
                 features to Rust crates; chances are that some two dependents will depend
                 on the crate with different features, and if those features are mutually
                 exclusive, the downstream crate will fail to build.

       NOTE      I highly recommend that you configure your continuous integration infrastructure to
                 check that your crate compiles for any combination of its features. One tool that helps you
                 do this is cargo-hack, which you can find at https://github.com/taiki-e/cargo-hack/.

                 Defining and Including Features
                 Features are defined in Cargo.toml. Listing 5-1 shows an example of a crate
                 named foo with a simple feature that enables the optional dependency syn.

                 [package]
                 name = "foo"
                 ...
                 [features]
                 derive = ["syn"]

                 [dependencies]
                 syn = { version = "1", optional = true }

Listing 5-1: A feature that enables an optional dependency

                     When Cargo compiles this crate, it will not compile the syn crate by default,
                 which reduces compile time (often significantly). The syn crate will be com-
                 piled only if a downstream crate needs to use the APIs enabled by the derive
                 feature and explicitly opts in to it. Listing 5-2 shows how such a downstream
                 crate bar would enable the derive feature, and thus include the syn dependency.

                 [package]
                 name = "bar"
                 ...

[dependencies]
foo = { version = "1", features = ["derive"] }

Listing 5-2: Enabling a feature of a dependency

     Some features are used so frequently that it makes more sense to have a
crate opt out of them rather than in to them. To support this, Cargo allows
you to define a set of default features for a crate. And similarly, it allows you
to opt out of the default features of a dependency. Listing 5-3 shows how
foo can make its derive feature enabled by default, while also opting out of
some of syn’s default features and instead enabling only the ones it needs
for the derive feature.

[package]
name = "foo"
...
[features]
derive = ["syn"]
default = ["derive"]

[dependencies.syn]
version = "1"
default-features = false
features = ["derive", "parsing", "printing"]
optional = true

Listing 5-3: Adding and opting out of default features, and thus optional dependencies

    Here, if a crate depends on foo and does not explicitly opt out of the
default features, it will also compile foo’s syn dependency. In turn, syn will
be built with only the three listed features, and no others. Opting out of
default features this way, and opting in to only what you need, is a great way
to cut down on your compile times!

                OP TIONAL DEPENDENCIES A S FE AT URES

    When you define a feature, the list that follows the equal sign is itself a list of
    features. This might, at first, sound a little odd—in Listing 5-3, syn is a depen-
    dency, not a feature. It turns out that Cargo makes every optional dependency
    a feature with the same name as the dependency. You’ll see this if you try to
    add a feature with the same name as an optional dependency; Cargo won’t
    allow it. Support for a different namespace for features and dependencies is
    in the works in Cargo, but has not been stabilized at the time of writing. In the
    meantime, if you want to have a feature named after a dependency, you can
    rename the dependency using package = "" to avoid the name collision. The list
    of features that a feature enables can also include features of dependencies.
    For example, you can write derive = ["syn/derive"] to have your derive fea-
    ture enable the derive feature of the syn dependency.

                 Using Features in Your Crate
                 When using features, you need to make sure your code uses a dependency
                 only if it is available. And if your feature enables a particular component,
                 you need to make sure that if the feature isn’t enabled, the component is
                 not included.
                      You achieve this using conditional compilation, which lets you use annota-
                 tions to give conditions under which a particular piece of code should or
                 should not be compiled. Conditional compilation is primarily expressed
                 using the #[cfg] attribute. There is also the closely related cfg! macro, which
                 lets you change runtime behavior based on similar conditions. You can do
                 all sorts of neat things with conditional compilation, as we’ll see later in this
                 chapter, but the most basic form is #[cfg(feature = "some-feature")], which
                 makes it so that the next “thing” in the source code is compiled only if the
                 some-feature feature is enabled. Similarly, if cfg!(feature = "some-feature")
                 is equivalent to if true only if the derive feature is enabled (and if false
                 otherwise).
                      The #[cfg] attribute is used more often than the cfg! macro, because
                 the macro modifies runtime behavior based on the feature, which can
                 make it difficult to ensure that features are additive. You can place #[cfg]
                 in front of certain Rust items—such as functions and type definitions, impl
                 blocks, modules, and use statements—as well as on certain other constructs
                 like struct fields, function arguments, and statements. The #[cfg] attribute
                 can’t go just anywhere, though; where it can appear is carefully restricted by
                 the Rust language team so that conditional compilation can’t cause situa-
                 tions that are too strange and hard to debug.
                      Remember that modifying certain public parts of your API may inad-
                 vertently make a feature nonadditive, which in turn may make it impos-
                 sible for some users to compile your crate. You can often use the rules for
                 backward compatible changes as a rule of thumb here—for example, if you
                 make an enum variant or a public struct field conditional upon a feature,
                 then that type must also be annotated with #[non_exhaustive]. Otherwise,
                 a dependent crate that does not have the feature enabled may no longer
                 compile if the feature is added due to some second crate in the depen-
                 dency tree.

       NOTE      If you’re writing a large crate where you expect that your users will need only a subset
                 of the functionality, you should consider making it so that larger components (usually
                 modules) are guarded by features. That way, users can opt in to, and pay the compi-
                 lation cost of, only the parts they really need.

     Workspaces
                 Crates play many roles in Rust—they are the vertices in the dependency
                 graph, the boundaries for trait coherence, and the scopes for compilation
                 features. Because of this, each crate is managed as a single compilation

       unit; the Rust compiler treats a crate more or less as one big source file
       compiled as one chunk that is ultimately turned into a single binary output
       (either a binary or a library).
            While this simplifies many aspects of the compiler, it also means that
       large crates can be painful to work with. If you change a unit test, a comment,
       or a type in one part of your application, the compiler must re-­evaluate the
       entire crate to determine what, if anything, changed. Internally, the compiler
       implements a number of mechanisms to speed up this process, like incremen-
       tal recompilation and parallel code generation, but ultimately the size of your
       crate is a big factor in how long your project takes to compile.
            For this reason, as your project grows, you may want to split it into
       multiple crates that internally depend on one another. Cargo has just the
       feature you need to make this convenient: workspaces. A workspace is a col-
       lection of crates (often called subcrates) that are tied together by a top-level
       Cargo.toml file like the one shown in Listing 5-4.

       [workspace]
       members = [
         "foo",
         "bar/one",
         "bar/two",
       ]

Listing 5-4: A workspace Cargo.toml

            The members array is a list of directories that each contain a crate in
       the workspace. Those crates all have their own Cargo.toml files in their own
       subdirectories, but they share a single Cargo.lock file and a single output
       directory. The crate names don’t need to match the entry in members. It is
       common, but not required, that crates in a workspace share a name prefix,
       usually chosen as the name of the “main” crate. For example, in the tokio
       crate, the members are called tokio, tokio-test, tokio-macros, and so on.
            Perhaps the most important feature of workspaces is that you can inter-
       act with all of the workspace’s members by invoking cargo in the root of the
       workspace. Want to check that they all compile? cargo check will check them
       all. Want to run all your tests? cargo test will test them all. It’s not quite as
       convenient as having everything in one crate, so don’t go splitting every-
       thing into minuscule crates, but it’s a pretty good approximation.

NOTE   Cargo commands will generally do the “right thing” in a workspace. If you ever need
       to disambiguate, such as if two workspace crates both have a binary by the same
       name, use the -p flag (for package). If you are in the subdirectory for a particular
       workspace crate, you can pass --workspace to perform the command for the entire
       workspace instead.

          Once you have a workspace-level Cargo.toml with the array of workspace
       members, you can set your crates to depend on one another using path
       dependencies, as shown in Listing 5-5.

                 # bar/two/Cargo.toml
                 [dependencies]
                 one = { path = "../one" }
                 # bar/one/Cargo.toml
                 [dependencies]
                 foo = { path = "../../foo" }

Listing 5-5: Intercrate dependencies among workspace crates

                      Now if you make a change to the crate in bar/two, then only that crate
                 is re-compiled, since foo and bar/one did not change. It may even be faster
                 to compile your project from scratch, since the compiler does not need to
                 evaluate your entire project source for optimization opportunities.

                           SPECIF Y ING INTR A-WORKSPACE DEPENDENCIES

                     The most obvious way to specify that one crate in a workspace depends on
                     another is to use the path specifier, as shown in Listing 5-5. However, if your
                     individual subcrates are intended for public consumption, you may want to use
                     version specifiers instead.
                           Say you have a crate that depends on a Git version of the one crate from
                     the bar workspace in Listing 5-5 with one = { git = ". . ." }, and a released
                     version of foo (also from bar) with foo = "1.0.0". Cargo will dutifully fetch
                     the one Git repository, which holds the entire bar workspace, and see that one
                     in turn depends on foo, located at ../../foo inside the workspace. But Cargo
                     doesn’t know that the released version foo = "1.0.0" and the foo in the Git
                     repository are the same crate! It considers them two separate dependencies
                     that just happen to have the same name.
                           You may already see where this is going. If you try to use any type from
                     foo (1.0.0) with an API from one that accepts a type from foo, the compiler will
                     reject the code. Even though the types have the same name, the compiler can’t
                     know that they are the same underlying type. And the user will be thoroughly
                     confused, since the compiler will say something like “expected foo::Type, got
                     foo::Type.”
                           The best way to mitigate this problem is to use path dependencies between
                     subcrates only if they depend on unpublished changes. As long as one works
                     with foo 1.0.0, it should list foo = "1.0.0" in its dependencies. Only if you
                     make a change to foo that one needs should you change one to use a path
                     dependency. And once you release a new version of foo that one can depend
                     on, you should remove the path dependency again.
                           This approach also has its shortcomings. Now if you change foo and then
                     run the tests for one, you’ll see that one will be tested using the old foo, which
                     may not be what you expected. You’ll probably want to configure your continu-
                     ous integration infrastructure to test each subcrate both with the latest released
                     versions of the other subcrates and with all of them configured to use path
                     dependencies.

Project Configuration
        Running cargo new sets you up with a minimal Cargo.toml that has the crate’s
        name, its version number, some author information, and an empty list of
        dependencies. That will take you pretty far, but as your project matures, there
        are a number of useful things you may want to add to your Cargo.toml.

        Crate Metadata
        The first and most obvious thing to add to your Cargo.toml is all the meta-
        data directives that Cargo supports. In addition to obvious fields like
        description and homepage, it can be useful to include information such as
        the path to a README for the crate (readme), the default binary to run
        with cargo run (default-run), and additional keywords and categories to help
        crates.io categorize your crate.
             For crates with a more convoluted project layout, it’s also useful to set
        the include and exclude metadata fields. These dictate which files should be
        included and published in your package. By default, Cargo includes all files
        in a crate’s directory except any listed in your .gitignore file, but this may not
        be what you want if you also have large test fixtures, unrelated scripts, or
        other auxiliary data in the same directory that you do want under version
        control. As their names suggest, include and exclude allow you to include
        only a specific set of files or exclude files matching a given set of patterns,
        respectively.

 NOTE   If you have a crate that should never be published, or should be published only to cer-
        tain alternative registries (that is, not to crates.io), you can set the publish directive
        to false or to a list of allowed registries.

            The list of metadata directives you can use continues to grow, so make
        sure to periodically check in on the Manifest Format page of the Cargo ref-
        erence (https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/manifest.html).

        Build Configuration
        Cargo.toml can also give you control over how Cargo builds your crate.
        The most obvious tool for this is the build parameter, which allows you to
        write a completely custom build program for your crate (we’ll revisit this
        in Chapter 11). However, Cargo also provides two smaller, but very useful,
        mechanisms that we’ll explore here: patches and profiles.

        [patch]
        The [patch] section of Cargo.toml allows you to specify a different source for
        a dependency that you can use temporarily, no matter where in your depen-
        dencies the patched dependency appears. This is invaluable when you need
        to compile your crate against a modified version of some transitive depen-
        dency to test a bug fix, a performance improvement, or a new minor release
        you’re about to publish. Listing 5-6 shows an example of how you might
        temporarily use a variant of a set of dependencies.

                 [patch.crates-io]
                 # use a local (presumably modified) source
                 regex = { path = "/home/jon/regex" }
                 # use a modification on a git branch
                 serde = { git = "https://github.com/serde-rs/serde.git", branch = "faster" }
                 # patch a git dependency
                 [patch.'https://github.com/jonhoo/project.git']
                 project = { path = "/home/jon/project" }

Listing 5-6: Overriding dependency sources in Cargo.toml using [patch]

                     Even if you patch a dependency, Cargo takes care to check the crate
                 versions so that you don’t accidentally end up patching the wrong major ver-
                 sion of a crate. If you for some reason transitively depend on multiple major
                 versions of the same crate, you can patch each one by giving them distinct
                 identifiers, as shown in Listing 5-7.

                 [patch.crates-io]
                 nom4 = { path = "/home/jon/nom4", package = "nom" }
                 nom5 = { path = "/home/jon/nom5", package = "nom" }

Listing 5-7: Overriding multiple versions of the same crate in Cargo.toml using [patch]

                      Cargo will look at the Cargo.toml inside each path, realize that /nom4
                 contains major version 4 and that /nom5 contains major version 5, and patch
                 the two versions appropriately. The package keyword tells Cargo to look for a
                 crate by the name nom in both cases instead of using the dependency identi-
                 fiers (the part on the left) as it does by default. You can use package this way
                 in your regular dependencies as well to rename a dependency!
                      Keep in mind that patches are not taken into account in the package
                 that’s uploaded when you publish a crate. A crate that depends on your
                 crate will use only its own [patch] section (which may be empty), not that of
                 your crate!

                                              CR ATES V S. PACK AGES

                     You may wonder what the difference between a package and a crate is.
                     These two terms are often used interchangeably in informal contexts, but they
                     also have specific definitions that vary depending on whether you’re talking
                     about the Rust compiler, Cargo, crates.io, or something else. I personally think
                     of a crate as a Rust module hierarchy starting at a root .rs file (one where you
                     can use crate-level attributes like #![feature])—usually something like lib.rs or
                     main.rs. In contrast, a package is a collection of crates and metadata, so essen-
                     tially all that’s described by a Cargo.toml file. That may include a library crate,
                     multiple binary crates, some integration test crates, and maybe even multiple
                     workspace members that themselves have Cargo.toml files.

       [profile]
       The [profile] section lets you pass additional options to the Rust compiler
       in order to change the way it compiles your crate. These options fall pri-
       marily into three categories: performance options, debugging options, and
       options that change code behavior in user-defined ways. They all have dif-
       ferent defaults depending on whether you are compiling in debug mode or
       in release mode (other modes also exist).
            The three primary performance options are opt-level, codegen-units,
       and lto. The opt-level option tweaks runtime performance by telling the
       compiler how aggressively to optimize your program (0 is “not at all,” 3 is “as
       much as you can”). The higher the setting, the more optimized your code
       will be, which may make it run faster. Extra optimization comes at the cost
       of higher compile times, though, which is why optimizations are generally
       enabled only for release builds.

NOTE   You can also set opt-level to "s" to optimize for binary size, which may be important
       on embedded platforms.

            The codegen-units option is about compile-time performance. It tells the
       compiler how many independent compilation tasks (code generation units) it
       is allowed to split the compilation of a single crate into. The more pieces a
       large crate’s compilation is split into, the faster it will compile, since more
       threads can help compile the crate in parallel. Unfortunately, to achieve this
       speedup, the threads need to work more or less independently, which means
       code optimization suffers. Imagine, for example, that the segment of a crate
       compiling in one thread could benefit from inlining some code in a differ-
       ent segment—since the two segments are independent, that inlining can’t
       happen! This setting, then, is a trade-off between compile-time performance
       and runtime performance. By default, Rust uses an effectively unbounded
       number of codegen units in debug mode (basically, “compile as fast as you
       can”) and a smaller number (16 at the time of writing) in release mode.
            The lto setting toggles link-time optimization (LTO), which enables the
       compiler (or the linker, if you want to get technical about it) to jointly
       optimize bits of your program, known as compilation units, that were origi-
       nally compiled separately. The exact details of LTO are beyond the scope
       of this book, but the basic idea is that the output from each compilation
       unit includes information about the code that went into that unit. After all
       the units have been compiled, the linker makes another pass over all of the
       units and uses that additional information to optimize the combined com-
       piled code. This extra pass adds to the compile time but recovers most of
       the runtime performance that may have been lost due to splitting the com-
       pilation into smaller parts. In particular, LTO can offer significant perfor-
       mance boosts to ­performance-sensitive programs that might benefit from
       cross-crate optimization. Beware, though, that cross-crate LTO can add a
       lot to your compile time.
            Rust performs LTO across all the codegen units within each crate by
       default in an attempt to make up for the lost optimizations caused by using
       many codegen units. Since the LTO is performed only within each crate,

                 rather than across crates, this extra pass isn’t too onerous, and the added
                 compile time should be lower than the amount of time saved by using a lot
                 of codegen units. Rust also offers a technique known as thin LTO, which
                 allows the LTO pass to be mostly parallelized, at the cost of missing some
                 optimizations a “full” LTO pass would have found.

       NOTE      LTO can be used to optimize across foreign function interface boundaries in many
                 cases, too. See the linker-plugin-lto rustc flag for more details.

                     The [profile] section also supports flags that aid in debugging, such as
                 debug, debug-assertions, and overflow-checks. The debug flag tells the compiler
                 to include debug symbols in the compiled binary. This increases the binary
                 size, but it means that you get function names and such, rather than just
                 instruction addresses, in backtraces and profiles. The debug-assertions flag
                 enables the debug_assert! macro and other related debug code that isn’t
                 compiled otherwise (through cfg(debug_assertions)). Such code may make
                 your program run slower, but it makes it easier to catch questionable behav-
                 ior at runtime. The overflow-checks flag, as the name implies, enables over-
                 flow checks on integer operations. This slows them down (notice a trend
                 here?) but can help you catch tricky bugs early on. By default, these are all
                 enabled in debug mode and disabled in release mode.

                 [profile.*.panic]
                 The [profile] section has another flag that deserves its own subsection: panic.
                 This option dictates what happens when code in your program calls panic!,
                 either directly or indirectly through something like unwrap. You can set panic to
                 either unwind (the default on most platforms) or abort. We’ll talk more about
                 panics and unwinding in Chapter 9, but I’ll give a quick summary here.
                      Normally in Rust, when your program panics, the thread that panicked
                 starts unwinding its stack. You can think of unwinding as forcibly return-
                 ing recursively from the current function all the way to the bottom of that
                 thread’s stack. That is, if main called foo, foo called bar, and bar called baz, a
                 panic in baz would forcibly return from baz, then bar, then foo, and finally
                 from main, resulting in the program exiting. A thread that unwinds will
                 drop all values on the stack normally, which gives the values a chance to
                 clean up resources, report errors, and so on. This gives the running system
                 a chance to exit gracefully even in the case of a panic.
                      When a thread panics and unwinds, other threads continue running
                 unaffected. Only when (and if) the thread that ran main exits does the
                 program terminate. That is, the panic is generally isolated to the thread in
                 which the panic occurred.
                      This means unwinding is a double-edged sword; the program is limp-
                 ing along with some failed components, which may cause all sorts of strange
                 behaviors. For example, imagine a thread that panics halfway through updat-
                 ing the state in a Mutex. Any thread that subsequently acquires that Mutex
                 must now be prepared to handle the fact that the state may be in a partially
                 updated, inconsistent state. For this reason, some synchronization primitives
                 (like Mutex) will remember if a panic occurred when they were last accessed

          and communicate that to any thread that tries to access the primitive subse-
          quently. If a thread encounters such a state, it will normally also panic, which
          leads to a cascade that eventually terminates the entire program. But that is
          arguably better than continuing to run with corrupted state!
               The bookkeeping needed to support unwinding is not free, and it
          often requires special support by the compiler and the target platform. For
          example, many embedded platforms cannot unwind the stack efficiently at
          all. Rust therefore supports a different panic mode: abort ensures the whole
          program simply exits immediately when a panic occurs. In this mode, no
          threads get to do any cleanup. This may seem severe, and it is, but it ensures
          that the program is never running in a half-working state and that errors are
          made visible immediately.

WARNING   The panic setting is global—if you set it to abort, all your dependencies are also com-
          piled with abort.

               You may have noticed that when a thread panics, it tends to print a back-
          trace: the trail of function calls that led to where the panic occurred. This is
          also a form of unwinding, though it is separate from the unwinding panic
          behavior discussed here. You can have backtraces even with panic=abort by
          passing -Cforce-unwind-tables to rustc, which makes rustc include the infor-
          mation necessary to walk back up the stack while still terminating the pro-
          gram on a panic.

                                         PROFILE OV ERRIDES

              You can set profile options for just a particular dependency, or a particular profile,
              using profile overrides. For example, Listing 5-8 shows how to enable aggressive
              optimizations for the serde crate and moderate optimizations for all other crates in
              debug mode, using the [profile.<profile-name>.package.<crate-name>] syntax.

              [profile.dev.package.serde]
              opt-level = 3
              [profile.dev.package."*"]
              opt-level = 2

Listing 5-8: Overriding profile options for a specific dependency or for a
              specific mode

                    This kind of optimization override can be handy if some dependency would
              be prohibitively slow in debug mode (such as decompression or video encod-
              ing), and you need it optimized so that your test suite won’t take several days to
              complete. You can also specify global profile defaults using a [profile.dev] (or
              similar) section in the Cargo configuration file in ~/.cargo/config.
                    When you set optimization parameters for a specific dependency, keep in
              mind that the parameters apply only to the code compiled as part of that crate;
              if serde in this example has a generic method or type that you use in your crate,
                                                                                        (continued)

                     the code of that method or type will be monomorphized and optimized in your
                     crate, and your crate’s profile settings will apply, not those in the profile over-
                     ride for serde.

     Conditional Compilation
                 Most Rust code you write is universal—it’ll work the same regardless of
                 what CPU or operating system it runs on. But sometimes you’ll have to do
                 something special to get the code to work on Windows, on ARM chips, or
                 when compiled against a particular platform application binary interface
                 (ABI). Or maybe you want to write an optimized version of a particular
                 function when a given CPU instruction is available, or disable some slow but
                 uninteresting setup code when running in a continuous integration (CI)
                 environment. To cater to cases like these, Rust provides mechanisms for con-
                 ditional compilation, in which a particular segment of code is compiled only
                 if certain conditions are true of the compilation environment.
                      We denote conditional compilation with the cfg keyword that you saw
                 earlier in the chapter in “Using Features in Your Crate.” It usually appears in
                 the form of the #[cfg(condition)] attribute, which says to compile the next item
                 only if condition is true. Rust also has #[cfg_attr(condition, attribute)], which
                 is compiled as #[attribute] if condition holds and is a no-op otherwise. You can
                 also evaluate a cfg condition as a Boolean expression using the cfg!(condition)
                 macro.
                      Every cfg construct takes a single condition made up of options, like
                 feature = "some-feature", and the combinators all, any, and not, which do
                 what you would probably expect. Options are either simple names, like unix,
                 or key/value pairs like those used by feature conditions.
                      There are a number of interesting options you can make compilation
                 dependent on. Let’s go through them, from most common to least common:
                 Feature options
                     You’ve already seen examples of these. Feature options take the form
                     feature = "name-of-feature" and are considered true if the named fea-
                     ture is enabled. You can check for multiple features in a single condi-
                     tion using the combinators. For example, any(feature = "f1", feature =
                     "f2") is true if either feature f1 or feature f2 is enabled.

                 Operating system options
                    These use key/value syntax with the key target_os and values like win-
                    dows, macos, and linux. You can also specify a family of operating systems
                    using target_family, which takes the value windows or unix. These are
                    common enough that they have received their own named short forms,
                    so you can use cfg(windows) and cfg(unix) directly. For example, if you
                    wanted a particular code segment to be compiled only on macOS and
                    Windows, you would write: #[cfg(any(windows, target_os = "macos"))].

Context options
   These let you tailor code to a particular compilation context. The most
   common of these is the test option, which is true only when the crate
   is being compiled under the test profile. Keep in mind that test is set
   only for the crate that is being tested, not for any of its dependencies.
   This also means that test is not set in your crate when running inte-
   gration tests; it’s the integration tests that are compiled under the test
   profile, whereas your actual crate is compiled normally (that is, without
   test set). The same applies to the doc and doctest options, which are set
   only when building documentation or compiling doctests, respectively.
   There’s also the debug_assertions option, which is set in debug mode by
   default.

Tool options
   Some tools, like clippy and Miri, set custom options (more on that
   later) that let you customize compilation when run under these tools.
   Usually, these options are named after the tool in question. For exam-
   ple, if you want a particular compute-intensive test not to run under
   Miri, you can give it the attribute #[cfg_attr(miri, ignore)].

Architecture options
   These let you compile based on the CPU instruction set the compiler
   is targeting. You can specify a particular architecture with target_arch,
   which takes values like x86, mips, and aarch64, or you can specify a par-
   ticular platform feature with target_feature, which takes values like avx
   or sse2. For very low-level code, you may also find the target_endian and
   target_pointer_width options useful.

Compiler options
   These let you adapt your code to the platform ABI it is compiled against
   and are available through target_env with values like gnu, msvc, and musl.
   For historical reasons, this value is often empty, especially on GNU
   platforms. You normally need this option only if you need to interface
   directly with the environment ABI, such as when linking against an
   ABI-specific symbol name using #[link].
    While cfg conditions are usually used to customize code, some can also
be used to customize dependencies. For example, the dependency winrt
usually makes sense only on Windows, and the nix crate is probably useful
only on Unix-based platforms. Listing 5-9 gives an example of how you can
use cfg conditions for this:

[target.'cfg(windows)'.dependencies]
winrt = "0.7"
[target.'cfg(unix)'.dependencies]
nix = "0.17"

Listing 5-9: Conditional dependencies

                     Here, we specify that winrt version 0.7 should be considered a depen-
                 dency only under cfg(windows) (so, on Windows), and nix version 0.17 only
                 under cfg(unix) (so, on Linux, macOS, and other Unix-based platforms).
                 One thing to keep in mind is that the [dependencies] section is evaluated
                 very early in the build process, when only certain cfg options are available.
                 In particular, feature and context options are not yet available at this point,
                 so you cannot use this syntax to pull in dependencies based on features
                 and contexts. You can, however, use any cfg that depends only on the target
                 specification or architecture, as well as any options explicitly set by tools
                 that call into rustc (like cfg(miri)).

       NOTE      While we’re on the topic of dependency specifications, I highly recommend that you set
                 up your CI infrastructure to perform basic auditing of your dependencies using tools
                 like cargo-deny and cargo-audit. These tools will detect cases where you transitively
                 depend on multiple major versions of a given dependency, where you depend on
                 crates that are unmaintained or have known security vulnerabilities, or where you
                 use licenses that you may want to avoid. Using such a tool is a great way to raise the
                 quality of your codebase in an automated way!

                     It’s also quite simple to add your own custom conditional compilation
                 options. You just have to make sure that --cfg=myoption is passed to rustc
                 when rustc compiles your crate. The easiest way to do this is to add your
                 --cfg to the RUSTFLAGS environment variable. This can come in handy in CI,
                 where you may want to customize your test suite depending on whether it’s
                 being run on CI or on a dev machine: add --cfg=ci to RUSTFLAGS in your CI
                 setup, and then use cfg(ci) and cfg(not(ci)) in your code. Options set this
                 way are also available in Cargo.toml dependencies.

     Versioning
                 All Rust crates are versioned and are expected to follow Cargo’s implemen-
                 tation of semantic versioning. Semantic versioning dictates the rules for what
                 kinds of changes require what kinds of version increases and for which ver-
                 sions are considered compatible, and in what ways. The RFC 1105 standard
                 itself is well worth reading (it’s not horribly technical), but to summarize,
                 it differentiates between three kinds of changes: breaking changes, which
                 require a major version change; additions, which require a minor version
                 change; and bug fixes, which require only a patch version change. RFC 1105
                 does a decent job of outlining what constitutes a breaking change in Rust,
                 and we’ve touched on some aspects of it elsewhere in this book.
                      I won’t go into detail here about the exact semantics of the different
                 types of changes. Instead, I want to highlight some less straightforward ways
                 version numbers come up in the Rust ecosystem, which you need to keep in
                 mind when deciding how to version your own crates.

Minimum Supported Rust Version
The first Rust-ism is the minimum supported Rust version (MSRV). There is
much debate in the Rust community about what policy projects should
adhere to when it comes to their MSRV and versioning, and there’s no truly
good answer. The core of the problem is that some Rust users are limited to
using older versions of Rust, often in an enterprise setting where they have
little choice. If we constantly take advantage of newly stabilized APIs, those
users will not be able to compile the latest versions of our crates and will be
left behind.
      There are two techniques crate authors can use to make life a little easier
for users in this position. The first is to establish an MSRV policy promising
that new versions of a crate will always compile with any stable release from
the last X months. The exact number varies, but 6 or 12 months is common.
With Rust’s six-week release cycle, that corresponds to the latest four or eight
stable releases, respectively. Any new code introduced to the project must
compile with the MSRV compiler (usually checked by CI) or be held until the
MSRV policy allows it to be merged as is. This can sometimes be a pain, as it
means these crates cannot take advantage of the latest and greatest the lan-
guage has to offer, but it will make life easier for your users.
      The second technique is to make sure to increase the minor version
number of your crate any time that the MSRV changes. So, if you release
version 2.7.0 of your crate and that increases your MSRV from Rust 1.44
to Rust 1.45, then a project that is stuck on 1.44 and that depends on your
crate can use the dependency version specifier version = "2, <2.7" to keep
the project working until it can move on to Rust 1.45. It’s important that you
increment the minor version, not just the patch version, so that you can still
issue critical security fixes for the previous MSRV release by doing another
patch release if necessary.
      Some projects take their MSRV support so seriously that they consider
an MSRV change a breaking change and increment the major version num-
ber. This means that downstream projects will explicitly have to opt in to an
MSRV change, rather than opting out—but it also means that users who do
not have such strict MSRV requirements will not see future bug fixes with-
out updating their dependencies, which may require them to issue a break-
ing change as well. As I said, none of these solutions are without drawbacks.
      Enforcing an MSRV in the Rust ecosystem today is challenging. Only
a small subset of crates provide any MSRV guarantees, and even if your
dependencies do, you will need to constantly monitor them to know when
they increase their MSRV. When they do, you’ll need to do a new release
of your crate with the restricted version bounds mentioned previously to
make sure your MSRV doesn’t also change. This may in turn force you to
forego security and performance updates made to your dependencies, as
you’ll have to continue using older versions until your MSRV policy permits
updating. And that decision also carries over to your dependents. There
have been proposals to build MSRV checking into Cargo itself, but nothing
workable has been stabilized as of this writing.

                 Minimal Dependency Versions
                 When you first add a dependency, it’s not always clear what version specifier
                 you should give that dependency. Programmers commonly choose the latest
                 version, or just the current major version, but chances are that both of those
                 choices are wrong. By “wrong,” I don’t mean that your crate won’t compile,
                 but rather that making that choice may cause strife for users of your crate
                 down the line. Let’s look at why each of these cases is problematic.
                      First, consider the case where you add a dependency on hugs = "1.7.3",
                 the latest published version. Now imagine that a developer somewhere
                 depends on your crate, but they also depend on some other crate, foo, that
                 itself depends on hugs. Further imagine that the author of foo is really careful
                 about their MSRV policy, so they depend on hugs = "1, <1.6". Here, you’ll run
                 into trouble. When Cargo sees hugs = "1.7.3", it considers only versions >=1.7.
                 But then it sees that foo’s dependency on hugs requires <1.6, so it gives up and
                 reports that there is no version of hugs compatible with all the requirements.

       NOTE      In practice, there are a number of reasons why a crate may explicitly not want a
                 newer version of a dependency. The most common ones are to enforce MSRV, to meet
                 enterprise auditing requirements (the newer version will contain code that hasn’t been
                 audited), and to ensure reproducible builds where only the exact listed version is used.

                      This is unfortunate, as it could well be that your crate compiles fine
                 with, say, hugs 1.5.6. Maybe it even compiles fine with any 1.X version! But
                 by using the latest version number, you are telling Cargo to consider only
                 versions at or beyond that minor version. Is the solution to use hugs = "1"
                 instead, then? No, that’s not quite right either. It could be that your code
                 truly does depend on something that was added only in hugs 1.6, so while
                 1.6.2 would be fine, 1.5.6 would not be. You wouldn’t notice this if you were
                 only ever compiling your crate in situations where a newer version ends up
                 getting used, but if some crate in the dependency graph specifies hugs = "1,
                 <1.5", your crate would not compile!
                      The right strategy is to list the earliest version that has all the things
                 your crate depends on and to make sure that this remains the case even
                 as you add new code to your crate. But how do you establish that beyond
                 trawling the changelogs, or through trial and error? Your best bet is to use
                 Cargo’s unstable -Zminimal-versions flag, which makes your crate use the
                 minimum acceptable version for all dependencies, rather than the maxi-
                 mum. Then, set all your dependencies to just the latest major version num-
                 ber, try to compile, and add a minor version to any dependencies that don’t.
                 Rinse and repeat until everything compiles fine, and you now have your
                 minimum version requirements!
                      It’s worth noting that, like with MSRV, minimal version checking faces
                 an ecosystem adoption problem. While you may have set all your version
                 specifiers correctly, the projects you depend on may not have. This makes
                 the Cargo minimal versions flag hard to use in practice (and is why it’s still
                 unstable). If you depend on foo, and foo depends on bar with a specifier
                 of bar = "1" when it actually requires bar = "1.4", Cargo will report that it
                 failed to compile foo no matter how you list foo because the -Z flag tells it
82   Chapter 5
       to always prefer minimal versions. You can work around this by listing bar
       directly in your dependencies with the appropriate version requirement,
       but these workarounds can be painful to set up and maintain. You may end
       up listing a large number of dependencies that are only really pulled in
       through your transitive dependencies, and you’ll have to keep that list up to
       date as time goes on.

NOTE   One current proposal is to present a flag that favors minimal versions for the current
       crate but maximal ones for dependencies, which seems quite promising.

       Changelogs
       For all but the most trivial crates, I highly recommend keeping a changelog.
       There is little more frustrating than seeing that a dependency has received
       a major version bump and then having to dig through the Git logs to figure
       out what changed and how to update your code. I recommend that you do
       not just dump your Git logs into a file named changelog, but instead keep a
       manual changelog. It is much more likely to be useful.
           A simple but good format for changelogs is the Keep a Changelog for-
       mat documented at https://keepachangelog.com/.

       Unreleased Versions
       Rust considers version numbers even when the source of a dependency is a
       directory or a Git repository. This means that semantic versioning is impor-
       tant even when you have not yet published a release to crates.io; it matters
       what version is listed in your Cargo.toml between releases. The semantic ver-
       sioning standard does not dictate how to handle this case, but I’ll provide a
       workflow that works decently well without being too onerous.
            After you’ve published a release, immediately update the version num-
       ber in your Cargo.toml to the next patch version with a suffix like -alpha.1.
       If you just released 2.0.3, make the new version 2.0.4-alpha.1. If you just
       released an alpha, increment the alpha number instead.
            As you make changes to the code between releases, keep an eye out for
       additive or breaking changes. If one happens, and the corresponding ver-
       sion number has not changed since the last release, increment it. For exam-
       ple, if the last released version is 2.0.3, the current version is 2.0.4-alpha.2,
       and you make an additive change, make the version with the change 2.1.0-
       alpha.1. If you made a breaking change, it becomes 3.0.0-alpha.1 instead. If
       the corresponding version increase has already been made, just increment
       the alpha number.
            When you make a release, remove the suffix (unless you want to do a
       prerelease), then publish, and start from the top.
            This process is effective because it makes two common workflows work
       much better. First, imagine that a developer depends on major version 2
       of your crate, but they need a feature that’s currently available only in Git.
       Then you commit a breaking change. If you don’t increase the major ver-
       sion at the same time, their code will suddenly fail in unexpected ways,

                 either by failing to compile or as a result of weird runtime issues. If you fol-
                 low the procedure laid out here, they’ll instead be notified by Cargo that a
                 breaking change has occurred, and they’ll have to either resolve that or pin
                 a specific commit.
                       Next, imagine that a developer needs a feature they just contributed
                 to your crate, but which isn’t part of any released version of your crate yet.
                 They’ve used your crate behind a Git dependency for a while, so other
                 developers on their project already have older checkouts of your crate’s
                 repository. If you do not increment the major version number in Git, this
                 developer has no way to communicate that their project now relies on the
                 feature that was just merged. If they push their change, their fellow develop-
                 ers will find that the project no longer compiles, since Cargo will reuse the
                 old checkout. If, on the other hand, the developer can increment the minor
                 version number for the Git dependency, then Cargo will realize that the old
                 checkout is outdated.
                       This workflow is by no means perfect. It doesn’t provide a good way to
                 communicate multiple minor or major changes between releases, and you
                 still need to do a bit of work to keep track of the versions. However, it does
                 address two of the most common issues Rust developers run into when they
                 work against Git dependencies, and even if you make multiple such changes
                 between releases, this workflow will still catch many of the issues.
                       If you’re not too worried about small or consecutive version numbers
                 in releases, you can improve this suggested workflow by simply always incre-
                 menting the appropriate part of the version number. Be aware, though, that
                 depending on how frequently you make such changes, this may make your
                 version numbers quite large!

     Summary
                 In this chapter, we’ve looked at a number of mechanisms for configuring,
                 organizing, and publishing crates, for both your own benefit and that of
                 others. We’ve also gone over some common gotchas when working with
                 dependencies and features in Cargo that now hopefully won’t catch you out
                 in the future. In the next chapter we’ll turn to testing and dig into how you
                 go beyond Rust’s simple #[test] functions that we know and love.

