                                7
                             MACROS

           Macros are, in essence, a tool for making
           the compiler write code for you. You give
          the compiler a formula for generating code
       given some input parameters, and the compiler
replaces every invocation of the macro with the result
of running through the formula. You can think of
macros as automatic code substitution where you get
to define the rules for the substitution.
     Rust’s macros come in many different shapes and sizes to make it easy
to implement many different forms of code generation. The two primary
types are declarative macros and procedural macros, and we will explore both
of them in this chapter. We’ll also look at some of the ways macros can come
in handy in your everyday coding and some of the pitfalls that arise with
more advanced use.
     Programmers coming from C-based languages may be used to the
unholy land of C and C++ where you can use #define to change each true to
false, or to remove all occurrences of the else keyword. If that’s the case for
                   you, you’ll need to disassociate macros from a feeling of doing something
                   “bad.” Macros in Rust are far from the Wild West of C macros. They follow
                   (mostly) well-defined rules and are fairly misuse-resistant.

      Declarative Macros
                   Declarative macros are those defined using the macro_rules! syntax, which
                   lets you conveniently define function-like macros without having to resort to
                   writing a dedicated crate for the purpose (as you do with procedural macros).
                   Once you’ve defined a declarative macro, you can invoke it using the name
                   of the macro followed by an exclamation mark. I like to think of this kind
                   of macro as a sort of compiler-assisted search and replace: it does the job
                   for many regular, well-structured transformation tasks, and for eliminating
                   repetitive boilerplate. In your experience with Rust up until this point, most
                   of the macros you have recognized as macros are likely to have been declara-
                   tive macros. Note, however, that not all function-like macros are declarative
                   macros; macro_rules! itself is one example of this, and format_args! is another.
                   The ! suffix merely indicates to the compiler that the macro invocation will
                   be replaced with different source code at compile time.

        NOTE       Since Rust’s parser specifically recognizes and parses macro invocations annotated
                   with !, you can use them only in places where the parser allows them. They work in
                   most places you’d expect, like in expression position or in an impl block, but not every-
                   where. For example, you cannot (at the time of writing) invoke a function-like macro
                   where an identifier or match arm is expected.

                        It may not be immediately obvious why declarative macros are called
                   declarative. After all, don’t you “declare” everything in your program? In
                   this context, declarative refers to the fact that you don’t say how the macro’s
                   inputs should be translated into the output, just that you want the output to
                   look like A when the input is B. You declare that it shall be so, and the com-
                   piler figures out all the parsing rewiring that has to happen to make your
                   declaration reality. This makes declarative macros concise and expressive,
                   though it also has a tendency to make them rather cryptic since you have a
                   limited language with which to express your declarations.

                   When to Use Them
                   Declarative macros are primarily useful when you find yourself writing the
                   same code over and over, and you’d like to, well, not do that. They’re best
                   suited for fairly mechanical replacements—if you’re aiming to do fancy
                   code transformations or lots of code generation, procedural macros are
                   likely a better fit.
                        I most frequently use declarative macros in cases where I find myself
                   writing repetitive and structurally similar code, such as in tests and trait

implementations. For tests, I often want to run the same test multiple times
but with slightly different configurations. I might have something like what
is shown in Listing 7-1.

fn test_inner<T>(init: T, frobnify: bool) { ... }
#[test]
fn test_1u8_frobnified() {
  test_inner(1u8, true);
}
// ...
#[test]
fn test_1i128_not_frobnified() {
  test_inner(1i128, false);
}

Listing 7-1: Repetitive testing code

    While this works, it’s too verbose, too repetitive, and too prone to man-
ual error. With macros we can do much better, as shown in Listing 7-2.

macro_rules! test_battery {
   ($($t:ty as $name:ident),*)) => {
     $(
        mod $name {
          #[test]
          fn frobnified() { test_inner::<$t>(1, true) }
          #[test]
          fn unfrobnified() { test_inner::<$t>(1, false) }
        }
     )*
   }
}
test_battery! {
   u8 as u8_tests,
   // ...
   i128 as i128_tests
);

Listing 7-2: Making a macro repeat for you

      This macro expands each comma-separated directive into its own mod-
ule that then contains two tests, one that calls test_inner with true, and one
with false. While the macro definition isn’t trivial, it makes adding more
tests much easier. Each type is one line in the test_battery! invocation, and
the macro will take care of generating tests for both true and false argu-
ments. We could also have it generate tests for different values for init.
We’ve now significantly reduced the likelihood that we’ll forget to test a
­particular configuration!
      The story for trait implementations is similar. If you define your own
 trait, you’ll often want to implement that trait for a number of types in the
 standard library, even if those implementations are trivial. Let’s imagine
 you invented the Clone trait and want to implement it for all the Copy types

                  in the standard library. Instead of manually writing an implementation for
                  each one, you can use a macro like the one in Listing 7-3.

                  macro_rules! clone_from_copy {
                    ($($t:ty),*) => {
                      $(impl Clone for $t {
                        fn clone(&self) -> Self { *self }
                      })*
                    }
                  }
                  clone_from_copy![bool, f32, f64, u8, i8, /* ... */];

Listing 7-3: Using a macro to implement a trait for many similar types in one fell swoop

                        Here, we generate an implementation of Clone for each provided type
                  whose body just uses * to copy out of &self. You may wonder why we don’t
                  add a blanket implementation of Clone for T where T: Copy. We could do
                  that, but a big reason not to is that it would force types in other crates to
                  also use that same implementation of Clone for their own types that happen
                  to be Copy. An experimental compiler feature called specialization could offer
                  a workaround, but at the time of writing the stabilization of that feature
                  is still some way off. So, for the time being, we’re better off enumerating
                  the types specifically. This pattern also extends beyond simple forwarding
                  implementations: for example, you could easily alter the code in Listing 7-3
                  to implement an AddOne trait to all integer types!

       NOTE       If you ever find yourself wondering if you should use generics or a declarative macro,
                  you should use generics. Generics are generally more ergonomic than macros and
                  integrate much better with other constructs in the language. Consider this rule of
                  thumb: if your code changes based on type, use generics; otherwise, use macros.

                  How They Work
                  Every programming language has a grammar that dictates how the indi-
                  vidual characters that make up the source code can be turned into tokens.
                  Tokens are the lowest-level building blocks of a language, such as numbers,
                  punctuation characters, string and character literals, and identifiers; at
                  this level, there’s no distinction between language keywords and variable
                  names. For example, the text (value + 4) would be represented by the five-
                  token sequence (, value, +, 4, ) in Rust-like grammar. The process of turning
                  text into tokens also provides a layer of abstraction between the rest of the
                  compiler and the gnarly low-level details of parsing text. For example, in
                  the token representation, there is no notion of whitespace, and /*"foo"*/
                  and "/*foo*/" have distinct representations (the former is no token, and the
                  latter is a string literal token with the content /*foo*/).
                       Once the source code has been turned into a sequence of tokens, the
                  compiler walks that sequence and assigns syntactic meaning to the tokens. For
                  example, ()-delimited tokens make up a group, ! tokens denote macro invo-
                  cations, and so on. This is the process of parsing, which ultimately produces
                  an abstract syntax tree (AST) that describes the structure represented by the

source code. As an example, consider the expression let x = || 4, which con-
sists of the sequence of tokens let (keyword), x (identifier), = (punctuation),
two instances of | (punctuation), and 4 (literal). When the compiler turns that
into a syntax tree, it represents it as a statement whose pattern is the identifier x
and whose right-hand expression is a closure that has an empty argument list and a
literal expression of the integer literal 4 as its body. Notice how the syntax tree rep-
resentation is much richer than the token sequence, since it assigns syntactic
meaning to the token combinations following the language’s grammar.
      Rust macros dictate the syntax tree that a given sequence of tokens gets
turned into—when the compiler encounters a macro invocation during
parsing, it has to evaluate the macro to determine the replacement tokens,
which will ultimately become the syntax tree for the macro invocation. At
this point, however, the compiler is still parsing the tokens and might not be
in a position to evaluate a macro yet, since all it has done is parse the tokens
of the macro definition. Instead, then, the compiler defers the parsing of
anything contained within the delimiters of a macro invocation and remem-
bers the input token sequence. When the compiler is ready to evaluate the
indicated macro, it evaluates the macro over the token sequence, parses the
tokens it yields, and substitutes the resulting syntax tree into the tree where
the macro invocation was.
      Technically, the compiler does do a little bit of parsing for the input
to a macro. Specifically, it parses out basic things like string literals and
delimited groups and so produces a sequence of token trees rather than just
tokens. For example, the code x - (a.b + 4) parses as a sequence of three
token trees. The first token tree is a single token that is the identifier x, the
second is a single token that is the punctuation character -, and the third
is a group (using parentheses as the delimiter), which itself consists of a
sequence of five token trees: a (an identifier), . (punctuation), b (another
identifier), + (another punctuation token), and 4 (a literal). This means
that the input to a macro does not necessarily have to be valid Rust, but it
must consist of code that the Rust compiler can parse. For example, you
couldn’t write for <- x in Rust outside of a macro invocation, but inside of
a macro invocation you can, as long as the macro produces valid syntax.
On the other hand, you cannot pass for { to a macro because it doesn’t
have a closing brace.
      Declarative macros always generate valid Rust as output. You cannot
have a macro generate, say, the first half of a function invocation or an if
without the block that follows it. A declarative macro must generate an
expression (basically anything that you can assign to a variable), a statement
such as let x = 1;, an item like a trait definition or impl block, a type, or a
match pattern. This makes Rust macros resistant to misuse: you simply can-
not write a declarative macro that generates invalid Rust code, because the
macro definition itself would not compile!
      That’s really all there is to declarative macros at a high level—when
the compiler encounters a macro invocation, it passes the tokens contained
within the invocation delimiters to the macro, parses the resulting token
stream, and replaces the macro invocation with the resulting AST.

                  How to Write Declarative Macros
                  An exhaustive explanation of all the syntax that declarative macros support
                  is outside the scope of this book. However, we’ll cover the basics as there are
                  some oddities worth pointing out.
                       Declarative macros consist of two main parts: matchers and transcribers.
                  A given macro can have many matchers, and each matcher has an associ-
                  ated transcriber. When the compiler finds a macro invocation, it walks
                  the ­macro’s matchers from first to last, and when it finds a matcher that
                  matches the tokens in the invocation, it substitutes the invocation by walk-
                  ing the tokens of the corresponding transcriber. Listing 7-4 shows how the
                  different parts of a declarative macro rule fit together.

                  macro_rules! /* macro name */ {
                    (/* 1st matcher */) => { /* 1st transcriber */ };
                    (/* 2nd matcher */) => { /* 2nd transcriber */ };
                  }

Listing 7-4: Declarative macro definition components

                  Matchers
                  You can think of a macro matcher as a token tree that the compiler tries to
                  twist and bend in predefined ways to match the input token tree it was given
                  at the invocation site. As an example, consider a macro with the matcher
                  $a:ident + $b:expr. That matcher will match any identifier (:ident) followed
                  by a plus sign followed by any Rust expression (:expr). If the macro is invoked
                  with x + 3 * 5, the compiler notices that the matcher matches if it sets $a = x
                  and $b = 3 * 5. Even though * never appears in the matcher, the compiler
                  realizes that 3 * 5 is a valid expression and that it can therefore be matched
                  with $b:expr, which accepts anything that is an expression (the :expr part).
                       Matchers can get pretty hairy, but they have huge expressive power,
                  much like regular expressions. For a not-too-hairy example, this matcher
                  accepts a sequence ($()) of one or more (+) comma-separated (),) key/value
                  pairs given in key => value format:

                  $($key:expr => $value:expr),+

                       And, crucially, code that invokes a macro with this matcher can give an
                  arbitrarily complex expression for the key or value—the magic of match-
                  ers will make sure that the key and value expressions are partitioned
                  appropriately.
                       Macro rules support a wide variety of fragment types; you’ve already seen
                  :ident for identifiers and :expr for expressions, but there is also :ty for types
                  and even :tt for any single token tree! You can find a full list of the frag-
                  ment types in Chapter 3 of the Rust language reference (https://doc.rust-lang
                  .org/reference/macros-by-example.html). These, plus the mechanism for match-
                  ing a pattern repeatedly ($()), enable you to match most straightforward
                  code patterns. If, however, you find that it is difficult to express the pattern
                  you want with a matcher, you may want to try a procedural macro instead,

       where you don’t need to follow the strict syntax that macro_rules! requires.
       We’ll look at these in more detail later in the chapter.

       Transcribers
       Once the compiler has matched a declarative macro matcher, it generates
       code using the matcher’s associated transcriber. The variables defined by
       a macro matcher are called metavariables, and the compiler substitutes any
       occurrence of each metavariable in the transcriber (like $key in the example
       in the previous section) with the input that matches that part of the matcher.
       If you have repetition in the matcher (like $(),+ in that same example), you
       can use the same syntax in the transcriber and it will be repeated once for
       each match in the input, with each expansion holding the appropriate sub-
       stitution for each metavariable for that iteration. For example, for the $key
       and $value matcher, we could write the following transcriber to generate an
       insert call into some map for each $key/$value pair that was matched:

       $(map.insert($key, $value);)+

           Notice that here we want a semicolon for each repetition, not just to delimit
       the repetition, so we place the semicolon inside the repetition parentheses.

NOTE   You must use a metavariable in each repetition in the transcriber so that the compiler
       knows which repetition in the matcher to use (in case there is more than one).

       Hygiene
       You may have heard that Rust macros are hygienic, and perhaps that being
       hygienic makes them safer or nicer to work with, without necessarily under-
       standing what that means. When we say Rust macros are hygienic, we mean
       that a declarative macro (generally) cannot affect variables that aren’t explic-
       itly passed to it. A trivial example is that if you declare a variable with the
       name foo, and then call a macro that also defines a variable named foo,
       the macro’s foo is by default not visible at the call site (the place where the
       macro is called from). Similarly, macros cannot access variables defined at
       the call site (even self) unless they are explicitly passed in.
            You can, most of the time, think of macro identifiers as existing in their
       own namespace that is separate from that of the code they expand into. For
       an example, take a look at the code in Listing 7-5, which has a macro that
       tries (and fails) to shadow a variable at the call site.
       macro_rules! let_foo {
         ($x:expr) => {
           let foo = $x;
         }
       }
       let foo = 1;
       // expands to let foo = 2;
       let_foo!(2);
       assert_eq!(foo, 1);

Listing 7-5: Macros exist in their own little universes. Mostly.

                       After the compiler expands let_foo!(2), the assert looks like it should
                  fail. However, the foo from the original code and the one generated by the
                  macro exist in different universes and have no relationship to one another
                  beyond that they happen to share a human-readable name. In fact, the
                  compiler will complain that the let foo in the macro is an unused vari-
                  able. This hygiene is very helpful in making macros easier to debug—you
                  don’t have to worry about accidentally shadowing or overwriting variables
                  in the macro caller just because you happened to choose the same vari-
                  able names!
                       This hygienic separation does not apply beyond variable identifiers,
                  however. Declarative macros do share a namespace for types, modules, and
                  functions with the call site. This means your macro can define new func-
                  tions that can be called in the invoking scope, add new implementations to
                  a type defined elsewhere (and not passed in), introduce a new module that
                  can then be accessed where the macro was invoked, and so on. This is by
                  design—if macros could not affect the broader code like this, it would be
                  much more cumbersome to use them to generate types, trait implementa-
                  tions, and functions, which is where they come in most handy.
                       The lack of hygiene for types in macros is particularly important when
                  writing a macro you want to export from your crate. For the macro to truly
                  be reusable, you cannot assume anything about what types will be in scope
                  at the caller. Maybe the code that calls your macro has a mod std {} defined
                  or has imported its own Result type. To be on the safe side, make sure you
                  use fully specified types like ::core::option::Option or ::alloc::boxed::Box.
                  If you specifically need to refer to something in the crate that defines the
                  macro, use the special metavariable $crate.

       NOTE       Avoid using ::std paths if you can so that the macro will continue to work in
                  no_std crates.

                       You can choose to share identifiers between a macro and its caller if you
                  want the macro to affect a specific variable in the caller’s scope. The key is
                  to remember where the identifier originated, because that’s the namespace
                  the identifier will be tied to. If you put let foo = 1; in a macro, the identi-
                  fier foo originates in the macro and will never be available to the identifier
                  namespace at the caller. If, on the other hand, the macro takes $foo:ident
                  as an argument and then writes let $foo = 1;, when the caller invokes the
                  macro with !(foo), the identifier will have originated in the caller and will
                  therefore refer to foo in the caller’s scope.
                       The identifier does not have to be quite so explicitly passed, either; any
                  identifier that appears in code that originates outside the macro will refer
                  to the identifier in the caller’s scope. In the example in Listing 7-6, the vari-
                  able identifier appears in an :expr but nonetheless has access to the variable
                  in the caller’s scope.

                  macro_rules! please_set {
                    ($i:ident, $x:expr) => {
                      $i = $x;
                    }

        }
        let mut x = 1;
        please_set!(x, x + 1);
        assert_eq!(x, 2);

Listing 7-6: Giving macros access to identifiers at the call site

             We could have used = $i + 1 in the macro instead, but we could not
        have used = x + 1 as the name x is not available in the macro’s definition
        scope.
             One last note on declarative macros and scoping: unlike pretty much
        everything else in Rust, declarative macros exist in the source code only after
        they are declared. If you try to use a macro that you define further down in
        the file, this will not work! This applies globally to your project; if you declare
        a macro in one module and want to use it in another, the module you declare
        the macro in must appear earlier in the crate, not later. If foo and bar are mod-
        ules at the root of a crate, and foo declares a macro that bar wants to use, then
        mod foo must appear before mod bar in lib.rs!

 NOTE   There is one exception to this odd scoping of macros (formally called textual scop-
        ing), and that is if you mark the macro with #[macro_export]. That annotation effec-
        tively hoists the macro to the root of the crate and marks it as pub so that it can then be
        used anywhere in your crate or by your crate’s dependents.

Procedural Macros
        You can think of a procedural macro as a combination of a parser and code
        generation, where you write the glue code in between. At a high level, with
        procedural macros, the compiler gathers the sequence of input tokens to
        the macro and runs your program to figure out what tokens to replace
        them with.
             Procedural macros are so called because you define how to generate
        code given some input tokens rather than just writing what code gets gener-
        ated. There are very few smarts involved on the compiler’s side—as far as it is
        aware, the procedural macro is more or less a source code preprocessor that
        may replace code arbitrarily. The requirement that your input can be parsed
        as a stream of Rust tokens still holds, but that’s about it!

        Types of Procedural Macros
        Procedural macros come in three different flavors, each specialized to a
        particular common use case:

        •    Function-like macros, like the ones that macro_rules! generates
        •    Attribute macros, like #[test]
        •    Derive macros, like #[derive(Serialize)]

            All three types use the same underlying mechanism: the compiler pro-
        vides your macro with a sequence of tokens, and it expects you to produce

                  a sequence of tokens in return that are (probably) related to the input tree.
                  However, they differ in how the macro is invoked and how its output is han-
                  dled. We’ll cover each one briefly.

                  Function-Like Macros
                  The function-like macro is the simplest form of procedural macro. Like a
                  declarative macro, it simply replaces the macro code at the call site with the
                  code that the procedural macro returns. However, unlike with declarative
                  macros, all the guard rails are off: these macros (like all procedural mac-
                  ros) are not required to be hygienic and will not protect you from interact-
                  ing with identifiers in the surrounding code at the call site. Instead, your
                  macros are expected to explicitly call out which identifiers should overlap
                  with the surrounding code (using Span::call_site) and which should be
                  treated as private to the macro (using Span::mixed_site, which we’ll discuss
                  later).

                  Attribute Macros
                  The attribute macro also replaces the item that the attribute is assigned to
                  wholesale, but this one takes two inputs: the token tree that appears in the
                  attribute (minus the attribute’s name) and the token tree of the entire item
                  it is attached to, including any other attributes that item may have. Attribute
                  macros allow you to easily write a procedural macro that transforms an
                  item, such as by adding a prelude or epilogue to a function definition (like
                  #[test] does) or by modifying the fields of a struct.

                  Derive Macros
                  The derive macro is slightly different from the other two in that it adds
                  to, rather than replaces, the target of the macro. Even though this limita-
                  tion may seem severe, derive macros were one of the original motivating
                  factors behind the creation of procedural macros. Specifically, the serde
                  crate needed derive macros to be able to implement its now-well-known
                  #[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)] magic.
                       Derive macros are arguably the simplest of the procedural macros,
                  since they have such a rigid form: you can append items only after the
                  annotated item; you can’t replace the annotated item, and you cannot have
                  the derivation take arguments. Derive macros do allow you to define helper
                  attributes—attributes that can be placed inside the annotated type to give
                  clues to the derive macro (like #[serde(skip)])—but these function mostly
                  like markers and are not independent macros.

                  The Cost of Procedural Macros
                  Before we talk about when each of the different procedural macro types is
                  appropriate, it’s worth discussing why you may want to think twice before
                  you reach for a procedural macro—namely, increased compile time.
                      Procedural macros can significantly increase compile times for two
                  main reasons. The first is that they tend to bring with them some pretty

heavy dependencies. For example, the syn crate, which provides a parser
for Rust token streams that makes the experience of writing procedural
macros much easier, can take tens of seconds to compile with all features
enabled. You can (and should) mitigate this by disabling features you do
not need and compiling your procedural macros in debug mode rather
than release mode. Code often compiles several times faster in debug
mode, and for most procedural macros, you won’t even notice the differ-
ence in execution time.
     The second reason why procedural macros increase compile time is
that they make it easy for you to generate a lot of code without realizing it.
While the macro saves you from having to actually type the generated code,
it does not save the compiler from having to parse, compile, and optimize
it. As you use more procedural macros, that generated boilerplate adds up,
and it can bloat your compile times.
     That said, the actual execution time of procedural macros is rarely a
factor in overall compile time. While the compiler has to wait for the proce-
dural macro to do its thing before it can continue, in practice, most proce-
dural macros don’t do any heavy computation. That said, if your procedural
macro is particularly involved, you may end up with your compiles spend-
ing a significant chunk of execution time on your procedural macro code,
which is worth keeping an eye out for!

So You Think You Want a Macro
Let’s now look at some good uses for each type of procedural macro. We’ll
start with the easy one: derive macros.

When to Use Derive Macros
Derive macros are used for one thing, and one thing only: to automate the
implementation of a trait where automation is possible. Not all traits have
obvious automated implementations, but many do. In practice, you should
consider adding a derive macro for a trait only if the trait is implemented
often and if its implementation for any given type is fairly obvious. The first
of these conditions may seem like common sense; if your trait is going to be
implemented only once or twice, it’s probably not worth writing and main-
taining a convoluted derive macro for it.
     The second condition may seem stranger, however: what does it mean
for the implementation to be “obvious”? Consider a trait like Debug. If you
were told what Debug does and were shown a type, you would probably
expect an implementation of Debug to output the name of each field along-
side the debug representation of its value. And that’s what derive(Debug)
does. What about Clone? You’d probably expect it to just clone every field—
and again, that’s what derive(Clone) does. With derive(serde::Serialize), we
expect it to serialize every field and its value, and it does just that. In gen-
eral, you want the derivation of a trait to match the developer’s intuition for
what it probably does. If there is no obvious derivation for a trait, or worse
yet, if your derivation does not match the obvious implementation, then
you’re probably better off not giving it a derive macro.

                  When to Use Function-Like Macros
                  Function-like macros are harder to give a general rule of thumb for. You
                  might say you should use function-like macros when you want a function-
                  like macro but can’t express it with macro_rules!, but that’s a fairly subjective
                  guideline. You can do a lot with declarative macros if you really put your
                  mind to it, after all!
                       There are two particularly good reasons to reach for a function-like
                  macro:

                  •   If you already have a declarative macro, and its definition is becoming
                      so hairy that the macro is hard to maintain.
                  •   If you have a pure function that you need to be able to execute at com-
                      pile time but cannot express it with const fn. An example of this is the phf
                      crate, which generates a hash map or set using a perfect hash function
                      when given a set of keys provided at compile time. Another is ­hex-literal,
                      which takes a string of hexadecimal characters and replaces it with the
                      corresponding bytes. In general, anything that does not merely trans-
                      form the input at compile time but actually computes over it is likely to
                      be a good candidate.

                      I do not recommend reaching for a function-like macro just so that you
                  can break hygiene within your macro. Hygiene for function-like macros is a
                  feature that avoids many debugging headaches, and you should think very
                  carefully before you intentionally break it.

                  When to Use Attribute Macros
                  That leaves us with attribute macros. Though these are arguably the most
                  general of procedural macros, they are also the hardest to know when to
                  use. Over the years and time and time again, I have seen four ways in which
                  attribute macros add tremendous value.
                  Test generation
                      It is very common to want to run the same test under multiple different
                      configurations, or many similar tests with the same bootstrapping code.
                      While a declarative macro may let you express this, your code is often
                      easier to read and maintain if you have an attribute like #[foo_test] that
                      introduces a setup prelude and postscript in each annotated test, or a
                      repeatable attribute like #[test_case(1)] #[test_case(2)] to mark that a
                      given test should be repeated multiple times, once with each input.

                  Framework annotations
                     Libraries like rocket use attribute macros to augment functions and
                     types with additional information that the framework then uses without
                     the user having to do a lot of manual configuration. It’s so much more
                     convenient to be able to write #[get("/<name>")] fn hello(name: String)
                     than to have to set up a configuration struct with function pointers and

    the like. Essentially, the attributes make up a miniature domain-specific
    language (DSL) that hides a lot of boilerplate that’d otherwise be nec-
    essary. Similarly, the asynchronous I/O framework tokio lets you use
    #[tokio::main] async fn main() to automatically set up a runtime and run
    your asynchronous code, thereby saving you from writing the same run-
    time setup in every asynchronous application’s main function.

Transparent middleware
   Some libraries want to inject themselves into your application in unobtru-
   sive ways to provide added value that does not change the application’s
   functionality. For example, tracing and logging libraries like tracing and
   metric collection libraries like metered allow you to transparently instru-
   ment a function by adding an attribute to it, and then every call to that
   function will run some additional code dictated by the library.

Type transformers
   Sometimes you want to go beyond merely deriving traits for a type and
   actually change the type’s definition in some fundamental way. In these
   cases, attribute macros are the way to go. The pin_project crate is a great
   example of this: its primary purpose is not to implement a particular
   trait but rather to ensure that all pinned access to fields of a given type
   happens according to the strict rules that are set forth by Rust’s Pin type
   and the Unpin trait (we’ll talk more about those types in Chapter 8).
   It does this by generating additional helper types, adding methods to
   the annotated type, and introducing static safety checks to ensure that
   users don’t accidentally shoot themselves in the foot. While pin_project
   could have been implemented with a procedural derive macro, that
   derived trait implementation would likely not have been obvious, which
   violates one of our rules for when to use procedural macros.

How Do They Work?
At the heart of all procedural macros is the TokenStream type, which can be
iterated over to get the individual TokenTree items that make up that token
stream. A TokenTree is either a single token—like an identifier, punctuation,
or a literal—or another TokenStream enclosed in a delimiter like () or {}. By
walking a TokenStream, you can parse out whatever syntax you wish as long as
the individual tokens are valid Rust tokens. If you want to parse your input
specifically as Rust code, you will likely want to use the syn crate, which
implements a complete Rust parser and can turn a TokenStream into an easy-
to-traverse Rust AST.
     With most procedural macros, you want to not only parse a TokenStream
but also produce Rust code to be injected into the program that invokes the
procedural macro. There are two main ways to do so. The first is to manually
construct a TokenStream and extend it one TokenTree at a time. The second is to
use TokenStream’s implementation of FromStr, which lets you parse a string that

                  contains Rust code into a TokenStream with "".parse::<TokenStream>(). You can
                  also mix and match these; if you want to prepend some code to your macro’s
                  input, just construct a TokenStream for the prologue, and then use the Extend
                  trait to append the original input.

       NOTE       TokenStream also implements Display, which pretty-prints the tokens in the stream.
                  This comes in super handy for debugging!

                       Tokens are very slightly more magical than I’ve described so far in that
                  every token, and indeed every TokenTree, also has a span. Spans are how the
                  compiler ties generated code back to the source code that generated it.
                  Every token’s span marks where that token originated. For example, con-
                  sider a (declarative) macro like the one in Listing 7-7, which generates a
                  trivial Debug implementation for the provided type.

                  macro_rules! name_as_debug {
                    ($t:ty) => {
                      impl ::core::fmt::Debug for $t {
                         fn fmt(&self, f: &mut ::core::fmt::Formatter<'_>) -> ::core::fmt::Result
                         { ::core::write!(f, ::core::stringify!($t)) }
                  } }; }

Listing 7-7: A very simple macro for implementing Debug

                      Now let’s imagine that someone invokes this macro with name_as_debug!
                  (u31). Technically, the compiler error occurs inside the macro, specifically
                  where we write for $t (the other use of $t can handle an invalid type). But
                  we’d like the compiler to point the user at the u31 in their code—and indeed,
                  that’s what spans let us do.
                        The span of the $t in the generated code is the code mapped to $t in
                  the macro invocation. That information is then carried through the com-
                  piler and associated with the eventual compiler error. When that compiler
                  error is eventually printed, the compiler will print the error from inside the
                  macro saying that the type u31 does not exist but will highlight the u31 argu-
                  ment in the macro invocation, since that’s the error’s associated span!
                        Spans are quite flexible, and they enable you to write procedural
                  macros that can produce sophisticated error messages if you use the
                  c­ ompile_error! macro. As its name implies, compile_error! causes the com-
                   piler to emit an error wherever it is placed with the provided string as the
                   message. This may not seem very useful, until you pair it with a span. By
                   setting the span of the TokenTree you generate for the compile_error! invoca-
                   tion to be equal to the span of some subset of the input, you are effectively
                   telling the compiler to emit this compiler error and point the user to this
                   part of the source. Together, these two mechanisms let a macro produce
                   errors that seem to stem from the relevant part of the code, even though
                   the actual compiler error is somewhere in the generated code that the
                   user never even sees!

 NOTE    If you’ve ever been curious how syn’s error handling works, its Error type imple-
        ments an Error::to_compile_error method, which turns it into a TokenStream that
        holds only a compile_error! directive. What’s particularly neat with syn’s Error type
        is that it internally holds a collection of errors, each of which produces a distinct
        c­ ompile_error! directive with its own span so that you can easily produce multiple
         independent errors from your procedural macro.

             The power of spans doesn’t end there; spans are also how Rust’s macro
        hygiene is implemented. When you construct an Ident token, you also give
        the span for that identifier, and that span dictates the scope of that identi-
        fier. If you set the identifier’s span to be Span::call_site(), the identifier
        is resolved where the macro was called from and will thus not be isolated
        from the surrounding scope. If, on the other hand, you set it to Span::mixed
        _site() then (variable) identifiers are resolved at the macro definition site,
        and so will be completely hygienic with respect to similarly named variables
        at the call site. Span::mixed_site is so called because it matches the rules
        around identifier hygiene for macro_rules!, which, as we discussed earlier,
        “mixes” identifier resolution between using the macro definition site for
        variables and using the call site for types, modules, and everything else.

Summary
        In this chapter we covered both declarative and procedural macros, and
        looked at when you might find each of them useful in your own code. We
        also took a deeper dive into the mechanisms that underpin each type of
        macro and some of the features and gotchas to be aware of when you write
        your own macros. In the next chapter, we’ll start our journey into asyn-
        chronous programming and the Future trait. I promise—it’s just on
        the next page.

