ASYNCHRONOUS PROGR AMMING
                              8
             Asynchronous programming is, as the
             name implies, programming that is not
          ­s ynchronous. At a high level, an asynchro-
       nous operation is one that executes in the
background—the program won’t wait for the asyn-
chronous operation to complete but will instead
­continue to the next line of code immediately.
If you’re not already familiar with asynchronous programming, that defini-
tion may feel insufficient as it doesn’t actually explain what asynchronous
programming is. To really understand the asynchronous programming
model and how it works in Rust, we have to first dig into what the alter-
native is. That is, we need to understand the synchronous programming
model before we can understand the asynchronous one. This is important
in both clarifying the concepts and demonstrating the trade-offs of using
asynchronous programming: an asynchronous solution is not always the
right one! We’ll start this chapter by taking a quick journey through what
                   motivates asynchronous programming as a concept in the first place; then
                   we’ll dig into how asynchrony in Rust actually works under the hood.

      What’s the Deal with Asynchrony?
                   Before we get to the details of the synchronous and asynchronous program-
                   ming models, we first need to take a quick look at what your computer is
                   actually doing when it runs your programs.
                         Computers are fast. Really fast. So fast, in fact, that they spend most of
                   their time waiting for things to happen. Unless you’re decompressing files,
                   encoding audio, or crunching numbers, chances are that your CPU mostly
                   sits idle, waiting for operations to complete. It’s waiting for a network packet
                   to arrive, for the mouse to move, for the disk to finish writing some bytes, or
                   maybe even just for a read from main memory to complete. From the CPU’s
                   perspective, eons go by between most such events. When one does occur, the
                   CPU runs a few more instructions, then goes back to waiting again. Take a
                   look at your CPU utilization—it’s probably somewhere in the low single digits,
                   and that’s likely where it hovers the majority of the time.

                   Synchronous Interfaces
                   Synchronous interfaces allow your program (or rather, a single thread in
                   your program) to execute only a single operation at a time; each operation
                   has to wait for the previous synchronous operation to finish before it gets
                   to run. Most interfaces you see in the wild are synchronous: you call them,
                   they go do some stuff, and eventually they return when the operation has
                   completed and your program can continue from there. The reason for this,
                   as we’ll see later in this chapter, is that making an operation asynchronous
                   takes a fair bit of extra machinery. Unless you need the benefits of asyn-
                   chrony, sticking to the synchronous model requires much less pomp and
                   circumstance.
                         Synchronous interfaces hide all this waiting; the application calls a
                   function that says “write these bytes to this file,” and some time later, that
                   function completes and the next line of code executes. Behind the scenes,
                   what really happens is that the operating system queues up a write opera-
                   tion to the disk and then puts the application to sleep until the disk reports
                   that it has finished the write. The application experiences this as the func-
                   tion taking a long time to execute, but in reality it isn’t really executing at
                   all, just waiting.
                         An interface that performs operations sequentially in this way is also
                   often referred to as blocking, since the operation in the interface that has
                   to wait for some external event to happen in order for it to make progress
                   blocks further execution until that event happens. Whether you refer to an
                   interface as synchronous or blocking, the basic idea is the same: the appli-
                   cation does not move on until the current operation finishes. While the
                   operation is waiting, so is the application.
                         Synchronous interfaces are usually considered to be easy to work with
                   and simple to reason about, since your code executes just one line at a time.

But they also allow the application to do only one thing at a time. That
means if you want your program to wait for either user input or a network
packet, you’re out of luck unless your operating system provides an opera-
tion specifically for that. Similarly, even if your application could do some
other useful work while the disk is writing a file, it doesn’t have that option
as the file write operation blocks the execution!

Multithreading
By far the most common solution to allowing concurrent execution is to use
multithreading. In a multithreaded program, each thread is responsible for
executing a particular independent sequence of blocking operations, and
the operating system multiplexes among the threads so that if any thread can
make progress, progress is made. If one thread blocks, some other thread
may still be runnable, and so the application can continue to do u ­ seful work.
     Usually, these threads communicate with each other using a synchroni-
zation primitive like a lock or a channel so that the application can still coor-
dinate their efforts. For example, you might have one thread that waits for
user input, one thread that waits for network packets, and another thread
that waits for either of those threads to send a message on a channel shared
between all three threads.
     Multithreading gives you concurrency—the ability to have multiple inde-
pendent operations that can be executed at any one time. It’s up to the sys-
tem running the application (in this case, the operating system) to choose
among the threads that aren’t blocked and decide which to execute next.
If one thread is blocked, it can choose to run another one that can make
progress instead.
     Multithreading combined with blocking interfaces gets you quite far,
and large swaths of production-ready software are built in this way. But this
approach is not without its shortcomings. First, keeping track of all these
threads quickly gets cumbersome; if you have to spin up a thread for every
concurrent task, including simple ones like waiting for keyboard input, the
threads add up fast, and so does the additional complexity needed to keep
track of how all those threads interact, communicate, and coordinate.
     Second, switching between threads gets costly the more of them there
are. Every time one thread stops running and another one starts back up
in its place, you need to do a round-trip to the operating system scheduler,
and that’s not free. On some platforms, spawning new threads is also a fairly
heavyweight process. Applications with high performance needs often miti-
gate this cost by reusing threads and using operating system calls that allow
you to block on many related operations, but ultimately you are left with the
same problem: blocking interfaces require that you have as many threads as
the number of blocking calls you want to make.
     Finally, threads introduce parallelism into your program. The distinc-
tion between concurrency and parallelism is subtle, but important: con-
currency means that the execution of your tasks is interleaved, whereas
parallelism means that multiple tasks are executing at the same time. If you
have two tasks, their execution expressed in ASCII might look like _-_-_

                  (concurrency) versus ===== (parallelism). Multithreading does not necessar-
                  ily imply parallelism—even though you have many threads, you might have
                  only a single core, so only one thread is executing at a given time—but the
                  two usually go hand in hand. You can make two threads mutually exclusive
                  in their execution by using a Mutex or other synchronization primitive, but
                  that introduces additional complexity—threads want to run in parallel.
                  And while parallelism is often a good thing—who doesn’t want their pro-
                  gram to run faster on more cores—it also means that your program must
                  handle truly simultaneous access to shared data structures. This means
                  moving from Rc, Cell, and RefCell to the more powerful but also slower Arc
                  and Mutex. While you may want to use the latter types in your concurrent
                  program to enable parallelism, threading forces you to use them. We’ll look
                  at multithreading in much greater detail in Chapter 10.

                  Asynchronous Interfaces
                  Now that we’ve explored synchronous interfaces, we can look at the alter-
                  native: asynchronous or nonblocking interfaces. An asynchronous interface
                  is one that may not yield a result straightaway, and may instead indicate
                  that the result will be available at some later time. This gives the caller the
                  opportunity to do something else in the meantime rather than having to go
                  to sleep until that particular operation completes. In Rust parlance, an asyn-
                  chronous interface is a method that returns a Poll, as defined in Listing 8-1.

                  enum Poll<T> {
                      Ready(T),
                      Pending
                  }

Listing 8-1: The core of asynchrony: the “here you are or come back later” type

                       Poll usually shows up in the return type of functions whose names start
                  with poll—these are methods that signal they can attempt an operation
                  without blocking. We’ll get into how exactly they do that later in this chap-
                  ter, but in general they attempt to perform as much as they can of the oper-
                  ation before they would normally block, and then return. And crucially,
                  they remember where they left off so that they can resume execution later
                  when additional progress can again be made.
                       These nonblocking functions allow us to easily perform multiple tasks
                  concurrently. For example, if you want to read from either the network or
                  the user’s keyboard, whichever has an event available first, all you have to
                  do is poll both in a loop until one of them returns Poll::Ready. No need for
                  any additional threads or synchronization!
                       The word loop here should make you a little nervous. You don’t want your
                  program to burn through a loop three billion times a second when it may
                  be minutes until the next input occurs. In the world of blocking interfaces,
                  this wasn’t a problem since the operating system simply put the thread to
                  sleep and then took care of waking it up when a relevant event occurred, but
                  how do we avoid burning cycles while waiting in this brave new nonblocking
                  world? That’s what much of the remainder of this chapter will be about.

        Standardized Polling
        To get to a world where every library can be used in a nonblocking fashion,
        we could have every library author cook up their own poll methods, all with
        slightly different names, signatures, and return types—but that would quickly
        get unwieldy. Instead, in Rust, polling is standardized through the Future
        trait. A simplified version of Future is shown in Listing 8-2 (we’ll get back to
        the real one later in this chapter).

        trait Future {
            type Output;
            fn poll(&mut self) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
        }

Listing 8-2: A simplified view of the Future trait

             Types that implement the Future trait are known as futures and repre-
        sent values that may not be available yet. A future could represent the next
        time a network packet comes in, the next time the mouse cursor moves,
        or just the point at which some amount of time has elapsed. You can read
        Future<Output = Foo> as “a type that will produce a Foo in the future.” Types
        like this are often referred to in other languages as promises—they promise
        that they will eventually yield the indicated type. When a future eventually
        returns Poll::Ready(T), we say that the future resolves into a T.
             With this trait in place, we can generalize the pattern of providing poll
        methods. Instead of having methods like poll_recv and poll_keypress, we can
        have methods like recv and keypress that both return impl Future with an
        appropriate Output type. This doesn’t change the fact that you have to poll
        them—we’ll deal with that later—but it does mean that at least there is a
        standardized interface to these kinds of pending values, and we don’t need
        to use the poll_ prefix everywhere.

 NOTE   In general, you should not poll a future again after it has returned Poll::Ready. If
        you do, the future is well within its rights to panic. A future that is safe to poll after it
        has returned Ready is sometimes referred to as a fused future.

Ergonomic Futures
        Writing a type that implements Future in the way I’ve described so far is
        quite a pain. To see why, first take a look at the fairly straightforward asyn-
        chronous code block in Listing 8-3 that simply tries to forward messages
        from the input channel rx to the output channel tx.

        async fn forward<T>(rx: Receiver<T>, tx: Sender<T>) {
            while let Some(t) = rx.next().await {
                tx.send(t).await;
            }
        }

Listing 8-3: Implementing a channel-forwarding future using async and await

                       This code, written using async and await syntax, looks very similar to its
                   equivalent synchronous code and is easy to read. We simply send each mes-
                   sage we receive in a loop until there are no more messages, and each await
                   point corresponds to a place where a synchronous variant might block. Now
                   think about if you instead had to express this code by manually implement-
                   ing the Future trait. Since each call to poll starts at the top of the function,
                   you’d need to package the necessary state to continue from the last place
                   the code yielded. The result is fairly grotesque, as Listing 8-4 demonstrates.

enum Forward<T> { 1
    WaitingForReceive(ReceiveFuture<T>, Option<Sender<T>>),
    WaitingForSend(SendFuture<T>, Option<Receiver<T>>),
}

impl<T> Future for Forward<T> {
    type Output = (); 2
    fn poll(&mut self) -> Poll<Self::Output> {
        match self { 3
            Forward::WaitingForReceive(recv, tx) => {
                if let Poll::Ready((rx, v)) = recv.poll() {
                    if let Some(v) = v {
                         let tx = tx.take().unwrap(); 4
                         *self = Forward::WaitingForSend(tx.send(v), Some(rx)); 5
                         // Try to make progress on sending.
                         return self.poll(); 6
                    } else {
                         // No more items.
                         Poll::Ready(())
                    }
                } else {
                    Poll::Pending
                }
            }
            Forward::WaitingForSend(send, rx) => {
                if let Poll::Ready(tx) = send.poll() {
                    let rx = rx.take().unwrap();
                    *self = Forward::WaitingForReceive(rx.receive(), Some(tx));
                    // Try to make progress on receiving.
                    return self.poll();
                } else {
                    Poll::Pending
                }
            }
        }
    }
}

Listing 8-4: Manually implementing a channel-forwarding future

                         You’ll rarely have to write code like this in Rust anymore, but it gives
                   important insight into how things work under the hood, so let’s walk through
                   it. First, we define our future type as an enum 1, which we’ll use to keep track
                   of what we’re currently waiting on. This is a consequence of the fact that

when we return Poll::Pending, the next call to poll will start at the top of the
function again. We need some way to know what we were in the middle of so
that we know which operation to continue on. Furthermore, we need to keep
track of different information depending on what we’re doing: if we’re wait-
ing for a receive to finish, we need to keep that ReceiveFuture (the definition
of which is not shown in this example) so that we can poll it the next time we
are polled ourselves, and the same goes for SendFuture. The Options here might
strike you as weird too; we’ll get back to those shortly.
     When we implement Future for Forward, we declare its output type as
() 2 because this future doesn’t actually return anything. Instead, the
future resolves (with no result) when it has finished forwarding everything
from the input channel to the output channel. In a more complete exam-
ple, the Output of our forwarding type might be a Result so that it could com-
municate errors from receive() and send() back up the stack to the function
that’s polling for the completion of the forwarding. But this code is compli-
cated enough already, so we’ll leave that for another day.
     When Forward is polled, it needs to resume wherever it last left off,
which we find out by matching on the enum variant currently held in
self 3. For whichever branch we go into, the first step is to poll the future
that blocks progress for the current operation; if we’re trying to receive, we
poll the ReceiveFuture, and if we’re trying to send, we poll the SendFuture. If
that call to poll returns Poll::Pending, then we can make no progress, and
we return Poll::Pending ourselves. But if the current future resolves, we
have work to do!
     When one of the inner futures resolves, we need to update what the
current operation is by switching which enum variant is stored in self.
In order to do so, we have to move out of self to call Receiver::receive or
Sender::send—but we can’t do that because all we have is &mut self. So, we
store the state we have to move in an Option, which we move out of with
Option::take 4. This is silly since we’re about to overwrite self anyway 5,
and hence the Options will always be Some, but sometimes tricks are needed
to make the borrow checker happy.
     Finally, if we do make progress, we then poll self again 6 so that if
we can immediately make progress on the pending send or receive, we do
so. This is actually necessary for correctness when implementing the real
Future trait, which we’ll get back to later, but for now think of this as an
optimization.
     We just hand-wrote a state machine: a type that has a number of possible
states and moves between them in response to particular events. This was a
fairly simple state machine, at that. Imagine having to write code like this for
more complicated use cases where you have additional intermediate steps!
     Beyond writing the unwieldy state machine, we have to know the types
of the futures that Sender::send and Receiver::receive return so that we can
store them in our type. If those methods instead returned impl Future, we’d
have no way to write out the types for our variants. The send and receive
methods also have to take ownership of the sender and the receiver; if they
did not, the lifetimes of the futures they returned would be tied to the

                  borrow of self, which would end when we return from poll. But that would
                  not work, since we’re trying to store those futures in self.

       NOTE       You may have noticed that Receiver looks a lot like an asynchronous version of
                  Iterator. Others have noticed the same thing, and the standard library is on its way
                  to adding a trait specifically for types that can meaningfully implement poll_next.
                  Down the line, these asynchronous iterators (often referred to as streams) may end up
                  with first-class language support, such as the ability to loop over them directly!

                  Ultimately, this code is hard to write, hard to read, and hard to change. If
                  we wanted to add error handling, for example, the code complexity would
                  increase significantly. Luckily, there’s a better way!

                  async/await
                  Rust 1.39 gave us the async keyword and the closely related await postfix
                  operator, which we used in the original example in Listing 8-3. Together,
                  they provide a much more convenient mechanism for writing asynchronous
                  state machines like the one in Listing 8-5. Specifically, they let you write the
                  code in such a way that it doesn’t even look like a state machine!

                  async fn forward<T>(rx: Receiver<T>, tx: Sender<T>) {
                      while let Some(t) = rx.next().await {
                          tx.send(t).await;
                      }
                  }

Listing 8-5: Implementing a channel-forwarding future using async and await, repeated
                  from Listing 8-3

                      If you don’t have much experience with async and await, the difference
                  between Listing 8-4 and Listing 8-5 might give you an idea of why the Rust
                  community was so excited to see them land. But since this is an intermedi-
                  ate book, let’s dive a little deeper to understand just how this short segment
                  of code can replace the much longer manual implementation. To do that,
                  we first need to talk about generators—the mechanism by which async and
                  await are implemented.

                  Generators
                  Briefly described, a generator is a chunk of code with some extra compiler-
                  generated bits that enables it to stop, or yield, its execution midway through
                  and then resume from where it last yielded later on. Take the forward func-
                  tion in Listing 8-3, for example. Imagine that it gets to the call to send, but
                  the channel is currently full. The function can’t make any more progress,
                  but it also cannot block (this is nonblocking code, after all), so it needs to
                  return. Now suppose the channel eventually clears and we want to proceed
                  with the send. If we call forward again from the top, it’ll call next again and
                  the item we previously tried to send will be lost, so that’s no good. Instead,
                  we turn forward into a generator.

     Whenever the forward generator cannot make progress anymore, it
needs to store its current state somewhere so that when its execution even-
tually resumes, it resumes in the right place with the right state. It saves the
state through an associated data structure that’s generated by the compiler,
which contains all the state of the generator at a given point in time. A
method on that data structure (also generated) then allows the generator
to resume from its current state, stored in &mut self, and updates the state
again when the generator again cannot make progress.
     This “return but allow me to resume later” operation is called yielding,
which effectively means it returns while keeping some extra state on the
side. When we later want to resume a call to forward, we invoke the known
entry point into the generator (the resume method, which is poll for async
generators), and the generator inspects the previously stored state in self
to decide what to do next. This is exactly the same thing we did manually in
Listing 8-4! In other words, the code in Listing 8-5 loosely desugars to the
hypothetical code shown in Listing 8-6.

generator fn forward<T>(rx: Receiver<T>, tx: Sender<T>) {
    loop {
        let mut f = rx.next();
        let r = if let Poll::Ready(r) = f.poll() { r } else { yield };
        if let Some(t) = r {
            let mut f = tx.send(t);
            let _ = if let Poll::Ready(r) = f.poll() { r } else { yield };
        } else { break Poll::Ready(()); }
    }
}

Listing 8-6: Desugaring async/await into a generator

     At the time of writing, generators are not actually usable in Rust—they
are only used internally by the compiler to implement async/await—but that
may change in the future. Generators come in handy in a number of cases,
such as to implement iterators without having to carry around a struct or to
implement an impl Iterator that figures out how to yield items one at a time.
     If you look closely at Listings 8-5 and 8-6, they may seem a little magical
once you know that every await or yield is really a return from the function.
After all, there are several local variables in the function, and it’s not clear
how they’re restored when we resume later on. This is where the compiler-
generated part of generators comes into play. The compiler transparently
injects code to persist those variables into and read them from the genera-
tor’s associated data structure, rather than the stack, at the time of execu-
tion. So if you declare, write to, or read from some local variable a, you are
really operating on something akin to self.a. Problem solved! It’s all really
quite marvelous.
     One subtle but important difference between the manual forward imple-
mentation and the async/await version is that the latter can hold references
across yield points. This enables functions like Receiver::next and Sender::send
in Listing 8-5 to take &mut self rather than the self they took in Listing 8-4.
If we tried to use a &mut self receiver for these methods in the manual state

                  machine implementation, the borrow checker would have no way to enforce
                  that the Receiver stored inside Forward cannot be referenced between when
                  Receiver::next is called and when the future it returns resolves, and so it would
                  reject the code. Only by moving the Receiver into the future can we convince
                  the compiler that the Receiver is not otherwise accessible. Meanwhile, with
                  async/await, the borrow checker can inspect the code before the compiler
                  turns it into a state machine and verify that rx is indeed not accessed again
                  until after the future is dropped, when the await on it returns.

                                             THE SIZE OF GENER ATORS

                      The data structure used to back a generator’s state must be able to hold the com-
                      bined state at any one yield point. If your async fn contains, say, a [u8; 8192],
                      those 8KiB must be stored in the generator itself. Even if your async fn contains
                      only smaller local variables, it must also contain any future that it awaits, since it
                      needs to be able to poll such a future later, when poll is invoked.
                            This nesting means that generators, and thus futures based on async
                      functions and blocks, can get quite large without any visible indicator of that
                      increased size in your code. This can in turn impact your program’s runtime
                      performance, since those giant generators may have to be copied across func-
                      tion calls and in and out of data structures, which amounts to a fair amount of
                      memory copying. In fact, you can usually identify when the size of your gener-
                      ator-based futures is affecting performance by looking for excessive amounts of
                      time spent in the memcpy function in your application’s performance profiles!
                            Finding these large futures isn’t always easy, however, and often requires
                      manually identifying long or complex chains of async functions. Clippy may
                      be able to help with this in the future, but at the time of writing, you’re on your
                      own. When you do find a particularly large future, you have two options: you
                      can try to reduce the amount of local state the async functions need, or you
                      can move the future to the heap (with Box::pin) so that moving the future just
                      requires moving the pointer to it. The latter is by far the easiest way to go, but
                      it also introduces an extra allocation and a pointer indirection. Your best bet is
                      usually to put the problematic future on the heap, measure your performance,
                      and then use your performance benchmarks to guide you from there.

                  Pin and Unpin
                  We’re not quite done. While generators are neat, a challenge arises from
                  the technique as I’ve described it so far. In particular, it’s not clear what
                  happens if the code in the generator (or, equivalently, the async block) takes
                  a reference to a local variable. In the code from Listing 8-5, the future that
                  rx.next() returns must necessarily hold a reference to rx if a next message
                  is not immediately available so that it knows where to try again when the
                  generator next resumes. When the generator yields, the future and the ref-
                  erence the future contains get stashed away inside the generator. But what

now happens if the generator is moved? Specifically, look at the code in
Listing 8-7, which calls forward.

async fn try_forward<T>(rx: Receiver<T>, tx: Sender<T>) -> Option<impl Future>
{
    let mut f = forward(rx, tx);
    if f.poll().is_pending() { Some(f) } else { None }
}

Listing 8-7: Moving a future after polling it

     The try_forward function polls forward only once, to forward as many
messages as possible without blocking. If the receiver may still produce more
messages (that is, if it returned Poll::Pending instead of Poll::Ready(None)),
those messages are deferred to be forwarded at some later time by returning
the forwarding future to the caller, which may choose to poll again at a time
when it sees fit.
     Let’s work through what happens here with what we know about async
and await so far. When we poll the forward generator, it goes through the
while loop some unknown number of times and eventually returns either
Poll::Ready(()) if the receiver ended, or Poll::Pending otherwise. If it returns
Poll::Pending, the generator contains a future returned from either rx.next()
or tx.send(t). Those futures both contain a reference to one of the argu-
ments initially provided to forward (rx and tx, respectively), which must also
be stored in the generator. But when try_forward returns the entire genera-
tor, the fields of the generator also move. Thus, rx and tx no longer reside
at the same locations in memory, and the references stored in the stashed-
away future are no longer pointing to the right data!
     What we’ve run into here is a case of a self-referential data structure: one
that holds both data and references to that data. With generators, these self-
referential structures are very easy to construct, and being unable to support
them would be a significant blow to ergonomics because it would mean you
wouldn’t be able to hold references across any yield point. The (ingenious)
solution for supporting self-referential data structures in Rust comes in the
form of the Pin type and the Unpin trait. Very briefly, Pin is a wrapper type that
prevents the wrapped type from being (safely) moved, and Unpin is a marker
trait that says the implementing type can be removed safely from a Pin.

Pin
There’s a lot of nuance to cover here, so let’s start with a concrete use of
the Pin wrapper. Listing 8-2 gave you a simplified version of the Future trait,
but we’re now ready to peel back one part of the simplification. Listing 8-8
shows the Future trait somewhat closer to its final form.

trait Future {
    type Output;
    fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
}

Listing 8-8: A less simplified view of the Future trait with Pin

                       In particular, this definition requires that you call poll on Pin<&mut Self>.
                  Once you have a value behind a Pin, that constitutes a contract that that value
                  will never move again. This means that you can construct self-references
                  internally to your heart’s delight, exactly as you want for generators.

       NOTE       While Future makes use of Pin, Pin is not tied to the Future trait—you can use Pin for
                  any self-referential data structure.

                       But how do you get a Pin to call poll? And how can Pin ensure that
                  the contained value won’t move? To see how this magic works, let’s look
                  at the definition of std::pin::Pin and some of its key methods, shown in
                  Listing 8-9.

                  struct Pin<P> { pointer: P }
                  impl<P> Pin<P> where P: Deref {
                      pub unsafe fn new_unchecked(pointer: P) -> Self;
                  }
                  impl<'a, T> Pin<&'a mut T> {
                      pub unsafe fn get_unchecked_mut(self) -> &'a mut T;
                  }
                  impl<P> Deref for Pin<P> where P: Deref {
                      type Target = P::Target;
                      fn deref(&self) -> &Self::Target;
                  }

                  Listing 8-9: std::pin::Pin and its key methods

                       There’s a lot to unpack here, and we’re going to have to go over the
                  definition in Listing 8-9 a few times before all the bits make sense, so please
                  bear with me.
                       First, you’ll notice that Pin holds a pointer type. That is, rather than hold
                  some T directly, it holds a type P that dereferences through Deref into T. This
                  means that rather than have a Pin<MyType>, you’ll have a Pin<Box<MyType>> or
                  Pin<Rc<MyType>> or Pin<&mut MyType>. The reason for this design is simple—
                  Pin’s primary goal is to make sure that once you place a T behind a Pin, that
                  T won’t move, as doing so might invalidate self-references stored in the T. If
                  the Pin just held a T directly, then simply moving the Pin would be enough to
                  invalidate that invariant! In the remainder of this section, I’ll refer to P as
                  the pointer type and T as the target type.
                       Next, notice that Pin’s constructor, new_unchecked, is unsafe. This is
                  because the compiler has no way to actually check that the pointer type
                  indeed promises that the pointed-to (target) type won’t move again. Con­
                  sider, for example, a variable foo on the stack. If Pin’s constructor were safe,
                  we could do Pin::new(&mut foo), call a method that requires Pin<&mut Self>
                  (and thus assumes that Self won’t move again), and then drop the Pin. At
                  this point, we could modify foo as much as we liked, since it is no longer
                  borrowed—including moving it! We could then pin it again and call the
                  same method, which would be none the wiser that any self-referential point-
                  ers it may have constructed the first time around would now be invalid.

                                PIN CONS TRUC TOR SAFE T Y

           The other reason the constructor for Pin is unsafe is that its safety depends on
           the implementation of traits that are themselves safe. For example, the way
           that Pin<P> implements get_unchecked_mut is to use the implementation of
           DerefMut::deref_mut for P. While the call to get_unchecked_mut is unsafe, the
           impl DerefMut for P is not. Yet it receives a &mut self, and can thus freely (and
           without unsafe code) move the T. The same thing applies to Drop. The safety
           requirement for Pin::new_unchecked is therefore not only that the pointer type
           will not let the target type be moved again (like in the Pin<&mut T> example),
           but also that its Deref, DerefMut, and Drop implementations do not move the
           pointed-to value behind the &mut self they receive.

            We then get to the get_unchecked_mut method, which gives you a mutable
       reference to the T behind the Pin’s pointer type. This method is also unsafe,
       because once we give out a &mut T, the caller has to promise it won’t use
       that &mut T to move the T or otherwise invalidate its memory, lest any self-
       references be invalidated. If this method weren’t unsafe, a caller could
       call a method that takes Pin<&mut Self> and then call the safe variant of
       get_unchecked_mut on two Pin<&mut _>s, then use mem::swap to swap the values
       behind the Pin. If we were to then call a method that takes Pin<&mut Self>
       again on either Pin, its assumption that the Self hasn’t moved would be vio-
       lated, and any internal references it stored would be invalid!
            Perhaps surprisingly, Pin<P> always implements Deref<Target = T>, and
       that is entirely safe. The reason for this is that a &T does not let you move T
       without writing other unsafe code (UnsafeCell, for example, as we’ll discuss
       in Chapter 9). This is a good example of why the scope of an unsafe block
       extends beyond just the code it contains. If you wrote some code in one part
       of the application that (unsafely) replaced a T behind an & using UnsafeCell,
       then it could be that that &T initially came from a Pin<&mut T>, and that you
       have now violated the invariant that the T behind the Pin may never move,
       even though the place where you unsafely replaced the &T did not even men-
       tion Pin!

NOTE   If you’ve browsed through the Pin documentation while reading this chapter, you may
       have noticed Pin::set, which takes a &mut self and a <P as Deref>::Target and
       safely changes the value behind the Pin. This is possible because set does not return
       the value that was previously pinned—it simply drops it in place and stores the new
       value there instead. Therefore, it does not violate the pinning invariants: the old
       value was never accessed outside of a Pin after it was placed there.

       Unpin: The Key to Safe Pinning
       At this point you might ask: given that getting a mutable reference is unsafe
       anyway, why not have Pin hold a T directly? That is, rather than require an

                  indirection through a pointer type, you could instead make the contract
                  for get_unchecked_mut that it is only safe to call if you haven’t moved the Pin.
                  The answer to that question lies in a neat safe use of Pin that the pointer
                  design enables. Recall that the whole reason we want Pin in the first place is
                  so we can have target types that may contain references to themselves (like
                  a generator) and give their methods a guarantee that the target type hasn’t
                  moved and thus that internal self-references remain valid. Pin lets us use the
                  type system to enforce that guarantee, which is great. But unfortunately,
                  with the design so far, Pin is very unwieldy to work with. This is because it
                  always requires unsafe code, even if you are working with a target type that
                  doesn’t contain any self-references, and so doesn’t care whether it’s been
                  moved or not.
                       This is where the marker trait Unpin comes into play. An implementation
                  of Unpin for a type simply asserts that the type is safe to move out of a Pin
                  when used as a target type. That is, the type promises that it will never use
                  any of Pin’s guarantees about the referent not moving again when used as a
                  target type, and thus those guarantees may be broken. Unpin is an auto-trait,
                  like Send and Sync, and so is auto-implemented by the compiler for any type
                  that contains only Unpin members. Only types that explicitly opt out of Unpin
                  (like generators) and types that contain those types are !Unpin.
                       For target types that are Unpin, we can provide a much simpler safe
                  interface to Pin, as shown in Listing 8-10.

                  impl<P> Pin<P> where P: Deref, P::Target: Unpin {
                      pub fn new(pointer: P) -> Self;
                  }
                  impl<P> DerefMut for Pin<P> where P: DerefMut, P::Target: Unpin {
                      fn deref_mut(&mut self) -> &mut Self::Target;
                  }

Listing 8-10: The safe API to Pin for Unpin target types

                       To make sense of the safe API in Listing 8-10, think about the safety
                  requirements of the unsafe methods from Listing 8-9: the function
                  Pin::new_unchecked is unsafe because the caller must promise that the ref-
                  erent cannot be moved outside of the Pin, and that the implementations
                  of Deref, DerefMut, and Drop for the pointer type do not move the refer-
                  ent through the reference they receive. Those requirements are there to
                  ensure that once we give out a Pin to a T, we never move that T again. But
                  if the T is Unpin, it has declared that it does not care if it is moved even if it
                  was previously pinned, so it’s fine if the caller does not satisfy any of those
                  requirements!
                       Similarly, get_unchecked_mut is unsafe because the caller must guarantee
                  that it doesn’t move the T out of the &mut T—but with T: Unpin, T has declared
                  that it’s fine being moved even after being pinned, so that safety require-
                  ment is no longer important. This means that for Pin<P> where P::Target:
                  Unpin, we can simply provide safe variants of both those methods (DerefMut
                  being the safe version of get_unchecked_mut). In fact, we can even provide a
                  Pin::into_inner that simply gives back the owned P if the target type is Unpin,
                  since the Pin is essentially irrelevant!

Ways of Obtaining a Pin
With our new understanding of Pin and Unpin, we can now make progress
toward using the new Future definition from Listing 8-8 that requires
Pin<&mut Self>. The first step is to construct the required type. If the future
type is Unpin, that step is easy—we just use Pin::new(&mut future). If it is not
Unpin, we can pin the future in one of two main ways: by pinning to the
heap or pinning to the stack.
     Let’s start with pinning to the heap. The primary contract of Pin is that
once something has been pinned, it cannot move. The pinning API takes
care of honoring that contract for all methods and traits on Pin, so the main
role of any function that constructs a Pin is to ensure that if the Pin itself
moves, the referent value does not move too. The easiest way to ensure that is
to place the referent on the heap, and then place just a pointer to the refer-
ent in the Pin. You can then move the Pin to your heart’s delight, but the tar-
get will remain where it was. This is the rationale behind the (safe) method
Box::pin, which takes a T and returns a Pin<Box<T>>. There’s no magic to it; it
simply asserts that Box follows the Pin constructor, Deref, and Drop contracts.

                                      UNPIN BOX

     While we’re on the topic of Box, take a look at the implementation of Unpin for
     Box. The Box type unconditionally implements Unpin for any T, even if that T is
     not Unpin. This might strike you as odd, given the earlier assertion that Unpin
     is an auto-trait that is generally implemented for a type only if all of the type’s
     members are also Unpin. Box is an exception to this for the same reason that it
     can provide a safe Pin constructor: if you move a Box<T>, you do not move the
     T. In other words, the unconditional implementation asserts that you can move a
     Box<T> out of a Pin even if T cannot be moved out of a Pin. Note, however, that
     this does not enable you to move a T that is !Unpin out of a Pin<Box<T>>.

    The other option, pinning to the stack, is a little more involved, and at
the time of writing requires a smidgen of unsafe code. We have to ensure
that the pinned value cannot be accessed after the Pin with a &mut to it has
been dropped. We accomplish that by shadowing the value as shown in the
macro in Listing 8-11 or by using one of the crates that provide exactly this
macro. One day it may even make it into the standard library!

macro_rules! pin_mut {
    ($var:ident) => {
        let mut $var = $var;
        let mut $var = unsafe { Pin::new_unchecked(&mut $var) };
    }
}

Listing 8-11: Macro for pinning to the stack

                        By taking the name of the variable to pin to the stack, the macro
                  ensures that the caller has the value it wants to pin somewhere on the
                  stack already. The shadowing of $var ensures that the caller cannot drop
                  the Pin and continue to use the unpinned value (which would breach the
                  Pin ­contract for any target type that’s !Unpin). By moving the value stored
                  in $var, the macro also ensures that the caller cannot drop the $var bind-
                  ing the macro declarations without also dropping the original variable.
                  Specifically, without that line, the caller could write (note the extra scope):

                  let foo = /* */; { pin_mut!(foo); foo.poll() }; foo.mut_self_method();

                      Here, we give a pinned instance of foo to poll, but then we later use a
                  &mut to foo without a Pin, which violates the Pin contract. With the extra reas-
                  signment, on the other hand, that code would also move foo into the new
                  scope, rendering it unusable after the scope ends.
                      Pinning on the stack therefore requires unsafe code, unlike Box::pin,
                  but avoids the extra allocation that Box introduces and also works in no_std
                  environments.

                  Back to the Future
                  We now have our pinned future, and we know what that means. But you
                  may have noticed that none of this important pinning stuff shows up in
                  most asynchronous code you write with async and await. And that’s because
                  the compiler hides it from you.
                      Think back to when we discussed Listing 8-5, when I told you that
                  <expr>.await desugars into something like:

                  loop { if let Poll::Ready(r) = expr.poll() { break r } else { yield } }

                       That was an ever-so-slight simplification because, as we’ve seen, you can
                  call Future::poll only if you have a Pin<&mut Self> for the future. The desug-
                  aring is actually a bit more sophisticated, as shown in Listing 8-12.

                  1 match expr {
                        mut pinned => loop {
                          2 match unsafe { Pin::new_unchecked(&mut pinned) }.poll() {
                                 Poll::Ready(r) => break r,
                                 Poll::Pending => yield,
                            }
                      }
                  }

Listing 8-12: A more accurate desugaring of <expr>.await

                      The match 1 is a neat shorthand to not only ensure that the expan-
                  sion remains a valid expression, but also move the expression result into
                  a variable that we can then pin on the stack. Beyond that, the main new
                  addition is the call to Pin::new_unchecked 2. That call is safe because for the
                  containing async block to be polled, it must already be pinned due to the
                  signature of Future::poll. And the async block was polled for us to reach

        the call to Pin::new_unchecked, so the generator state is pinned. Since pinned
        is stored in the generator that corresponds to the async block (it must be so
        that yield will resume correctly), we know that pinned will not move again.
        Furthermore, pinned is not accessible except through a Pin once we’re in the
        loop, so no code is able to move out of the value in pinned. Thus, we meet all
        the safety requirements of Pin::new_unchecked, and the code is safe.

Going to Sleep
        We went pretty deep into the weeds with Pin, but now that we’re out the
        other side, there is another issue around futures that may have been mak-
        ing your brain itch. If a call to Future::poll returns Poll::Pending, you need
        something to call poll again at a later time to check whether you can make
        progress yet. That something is usually called the executor. Your executor
        could be a simple loop that polls all the futures you are waiting on until
        they’ve all returned Poll::Ready, but that would burn a lot of CPU cycles you
        could probably have used for other, more useful things, like running your
        web browser. Instead, we want the executor to do whatever useful work it
        can do, and then go to sleep. It should stay asleep until one of the futures
        can make progress, and only then wake up to do another pass, before going
        to sleep again.

        Waking Up
        The condition that determines when to check back with a given future var-
        ies widely. It might be “when a network packet arrives on this port,” “when
        the mouse cursor moves,” “when someone sends on this channel,” “when
        the CPU receives a particular interrupt,” or even “after this much time has
        passed.” On top of that, developers can write their own futures that wrap
        multiple other futures, and thus, they may have several wake-up conditions.
        Some futures may even introduce their own entirely custom wake events.
             To accommodate these many use cases, Rust introduces the notion of
        a Waker: a way to wake the executor to signal that progress can be made. The
        Waker is what makes the whole machinery around futures work. The executor
        constructs a Waker that integrates with the mechanism the executor uses to
        go to sleep, and passes the Waker in to any Future it polls. How? With the addi-
        tional parameter to Future::poll that I’ve hidden from you so far. Sorry about
        that. Listing 8-13 gives the final and true definition for Future—no more lies!

        trait Future {
            type Output;
            fn poll(self: Pin<&mut Self>, cx: &mut Context<'_>) -> Poll<Self::Output>;
        }

Listing 8-13: The actual Future trait with Context

            The &mut Context contains the Waker. The argument is a Context, not a
        Waker directly, so that we can augment the asynchronous ecosystem with
        additional context for futures should that be deemed necessary.

                      The primary method on Waker is wake (and the by-reference variant wake
                  _by_ref), which should be called when the future can again make progress.
                  The wake method takes no arguments, and its effects are entirely defined
                  by the executor that constructed the Waker. You see, Waker is secretly generic
                  over the executor. Or, more precisely, whatever constructed the Waker gets to
                  dictate what happens when Waker::wake is called, when a Waker is cloned, and
                  when a Waker is dropped. This all happens through a manually implemented
                  vtable, which functions similarly to the dynamic dispatch we discussed way
                  back in Chapter 2.
                       It’s a somewhat involved process to construct a Waker, and the mechan-
                  ics of it aren’t all that important for using one, but you can see the building
                  blocks in the RawWakerVTable type in the standard library. It has a constructor
                  that takes the function pointers for wake and wake_by_ref as well as Clone and
                  Drop. The RawWakerVTable, which is usually shared among all of an executor’s
                  wakers, is bundled up with a raw pointer intended to hold data specific to
                  each Waker instance (like which future it’s for) and is turned into a RawWaker.
                  That is in turn passed to Waker::from_raw to produce a safe Waker that can be
                  passed to Future::poll.

                  Fulfilling the Poll Contract
                  So far we’ve skirted around what a future actually does with a Waker. The
                  idea is fairly simple: if Future::poll returns Poll::Pending, it is the future’s
                  responsibility to ensure that something calls wake on the provided Waker
                  when the future is next able to make progress. Most futures uphold this
                  property by returning Poll::Pending only if some other future also returned
                  Poll::Pending; in this way, it trivially fulfills the contract of poll since the
                  inner future must follow that same contract. But there can’t be turtles all
                  the way down. At some point, you reach a future that does not poll other
                  futures but instead does something like write to a network socket or attempt
                  to receive on a channel. These are commonly referred to as leaf futures since
                  they have no children. A leaf future has no inner future but instead directly
                  represents some resource that may not yet be ready to return a result.

       NOTE       The poll contract is the reason why the recursive poll call 6 back in Listing 8-4 is
                  necessary for correctness.

                       Leaf futures typically come in one of two shapes: those that wait for
                  events that originate within the same process (like a channel receiver), and
                  those that wait for events external to the process (like a TCP packet read).
                  Those that wait for internal events all tend to follow the same pattern: store
                  the Waker where the code that will wake you up can find it, and have that
                  code call wake on the Waker when it generates the relevant event. For example,
                  consider a leaf future that has to wait for a message on an in-memory chan-
                  nel. It stores its Waker inside the part of the channel that is shared between
                  the sender and the receiver and then returns Poll::Pending. When a sender
                  later comes along and injects a message into the channel, it notices the Waker
                  left there by the waiting receiver and calls wake on the Waker before returning
                  from send. Now the receiver is awoken, and the poll contract is upheld.

            Leaf futures that deal with external events are more involved, as the
       code that generates the event they’re waiting for knows nothing of futures
       or wakers. Most often the generating code is the operating system kernel,
       which knows when a disk is ready or a timer expires, but it could also be
       a C library that invokes a callback into Rust when an operation completes
       or some other such external entity. A leaf future wrapping an external
       resource like this could spin up a thread that executes a blocking system
       call (or waits for the C callback) and then use the internal waking mecha-
       nism, but that would be wasteful; you would spin up a thread every time
       an operation had to wait and be left with lots of single-use threads sitting
       around waiting for things.
            Instead, executors tend to provide implementations of leaf futures
       that communicate behind the scenes with the executor to arrange for
       the appropriate interaction with the operating system. How exactly this
       is orchestrated depends on the executor and the operating system, but
       roughly speaking the executor keeps track of all the event sources that it
       should listen for the next time it goes to sleep. When a leaf future realizes
       it must wait for an external event, it updates that executor’s state (which it
       knows about since it’s provided by the executor crate) to include that exter-
       nal event source alongside its Waker. When the executor can no longer make
       progress, it gathers all of the event sources the various pending leaf futures
       are waiting for and does a big blocking call to the operating system, telling
       it to return when any of the resources the leaf futures are waiting on have
       a new event. On Linux, this is usually achieved with the epoll system call;
       Windows, the BSDs, macOS, and pretty much every other operating system
       provide similar mechanisms. When that call returns, the executor calls wake
       on all the wakers associated with event sources that the operating system
       reported events for, and thus the poll contract is fulfilled.

NOTE   A reactor is the part of an executor that leaf futures register event sources with and
       that the executor waits on when it has no more useful work to do. It is possible to
       separate the executor and the reactor, though bundling them together often improves
       performance as the two can be co-optimized more readily.

            A knock-on effect of the tight integration between leaf futures and
       the executor is that leaf futures from one executor crate often cannot be
       used with a different executor. Or at least, they cannot be used unless the
       leaf future’s executor is also running. When the leaf future goes to store
       its Waker and register the event source it’s waiting for, the executor it was
       built against needs to have that state set up and needs to be running so
       that the event source will actually be monitored and wake eventually called.
       There are ways around this, such as having leaf futures spawn an executor
       if one is not already running, but this is not always advisable as it means
       that an application can transparently end up with multiple executors run-
       ning at the same time, which can reduce performance and mean you must
       inspect the state of multiple executors when debugging.
            Library crates that wish to support multiple executors have to be generic
       over their leaf resources. For example, instead of using a particular executor’s

                  TcpStream or File future type, a library can store a generic T: AsyncRead +
                  AsyncWrite. However, the ecosystem has yet to settle on exactly what these traits
                  should look like and which traits are needed, so for the moment it’s fairly diffi-
                  cult to make code truly generic over the executor. For example, while AsyncRead
                  and AsyncWrite are somewhat common across the ecosystem (or can be easily
                  adapted if necessary), no traits currently exist for running a future in the
                  background (spawning, which we’ll discuss later) or for representing a timer.

                  Waking Is a Misnomer
                  You may already have realized that Waker::wake doesn’t necessarily seem to
                  wake anything. For example, for external events (as described in the previ-
                  ous section), the executor is already awake, and it might seem silly for it to
                  then call wake on a Waker that belongs to that executor anyway! The reality is
                  that Waker::wake is a bit of a misnomer—in reality, it signals that a particular
                  future is runnable. That is, it tells the executor that it should make sure to
                  poll this particular future when it gets around to it rather than go to sleep
                  again, since this future can make progress. This might wake the executor if
                  it is currently sleeping so it will go poll that future, but that’s more of a side
                  effect than its primary purpose.
                        It is important for the executor to know which futures are runnable
                  for two reasons. First, it needs to know when it can stop polling a future
                  and go to sleep; it’s not sufficient to just poll each future until it returns
                  Poll::Pending, since polling a later future might make it possible to progress
                  an earlier future. Consider the case where two futures bounce messages
                  back and forth on channels to one another. When you poll one, the other
                  becomes ready, and vice versa. In this case, the executor should never go to
                  sleep, as there is always more work to do.
                        Second, knowing which futures are runnable lets the executor avoid
                  polling futures unnecessarily. If an executor manages thousands of pending
                  futures, it shouldn’t poll all of them just because an event made one of them
                  runnable. If it did, executing asynchronous code would get very slow indeed.

                  Tasks and Subexecutors
                  The futures in an asynchronous program form a tree: a future may contain
                  any number of other futures, which in turn may contain other futures, all the
                  way down to the leaf futures that interact with wakers. The root of each tree is
                  the future you give to whatever the executor’s main “run” function is. These
                  root futures are called tasks, and they are the only point of contact between
                  the executor and the futures tree. The executor calls poll on the task, and
                  from that point forward the code of each contained future must figure out
                  which inner future(s) to poll in response, all the way down to the relevant leaf.
                      Executors generally construct a separate Waker for each task they poll so
                  that when wake is later called, they know which task was just made runnable
                  and can mark it as such. That is what the raw pointer in RawWaker is for—to dif-
                  ferentiate between tasks while sharing the code for the various Waker methods.
                      When the executor eventually polls a task, that task starts running from
                  the top of its implementation of Future::poll and must decide from there how

to get to the future deeper down that can now make progress. Since each
future knows only about its own fields, and nothing about the whole tree, this
all happens through calls to poll that each traverse one edge in the tree.
     The choice of which inner future to poll is often obvious, but not always.
In the case of async/await, the future to poll is the one we’re blocked waiting
for. But in a future that waits for the first of several futures to make prog-
ress (often called a select), or for all of a set of futures (often called a join),
there are many options. A future that has to make such a choice is basically
a subexecutor. It could poll all of its inner futures, but doing so could be
quite wasteful. Instead, these subexecutors often wrap the Waker they receive
in poll’s Context with their own Waker type before they invoke poll on any
inner future. In the wrapping code, they mark the future they just polled as
runnable in their own state before they call wake on the original Waker. That
way, when the executor eventually polls the subexecutor future again, the
subexecutor can consult its own internal state to figure out which of its inner
futures caused the current call to poll, and then only poll those.

                         BLOCKING IN A S Y NC CODE

    You must be careful about calling synchronous code from asynchronous code,
    since any time an executor thread spends executing the current task is time it’s
    not spending running other tasks. If a task occupies the current thread for a
    prolonged period of time without yielding back to the executor, which might
    happen when executing a blocking system call (like std::sync::sleep), running
    a subexecutor that doesn’t yield occasionally, or running in a tight loop with no
    awaits, then other tasks the current executor thread is responsible for won’t get
    to run during that time. Usually, this manifests as long delays between when
    certain tasks can make progress (such as when a client connects) and when
    they actually get to execute.
          Some multithreaded executors implement work-stealing techniques, where
    idle executor threads steal tasks from busy executor threads, but this is more of
    a mitigation than a solution. Ultimately, you could end up in a situation where
    all the executor threads are blocked, and thus no tasks get run until one of the
    blocking operations completes.
          In general, you should be very careful with executing compute-intensive
    operations or calling functions that could block in an asynchronous context.
    Such operations should either be converted to asynchronous operations where
    possible or executed on dedicated threads that then communicate using a
    primitive that does support asynchrony, like a channel. Some executors also
    provide mechanisms for indicating that a particular segment of asynchronous
    code might block or for yielding voluntarily in the context of loops that might
    otherwise not yield, which can compose part of the solution. A good rule of
    thumb is that no future should be able to run for more than 1 ms without return-
    ing Poll::Pending.

      Tying It All Together with spawn
                   When working with asynchronous executors, you may come across an
                   operation that spawns a future. We’re now in a position to explore what
                   that means! Let’s do so by way of example. First, consider the simple server
                   implementation in Listing 8-14.

                   async fn handle_client(socket: TcpStream) -> Result<()> {
                       // Interact with the client over the given socket.
                   }

                   async fn server(socket: TcpListener) -> Result<()> {
                       while let Some(stream) = socket.accept().await? {
                           handle_client(stream).await?;
                       }
                   }

Listing 8-14: Handling connections sequentially

                        The top-level server function is essentially one big future that listens
                   for new connections and does something when a new connection arrives.
                   You hand that future to the executor and say “run this,” and since you don’t
                   want your program to then exit immediately, you’ll probably have the exec-
                   utor block on that future. That is, the call to the executor to run the server
                   future will not return until the server future resolves, which may be never
                   (another client could always arrive later).
                        Now, every time a new client connection comes in, the code in
                   Listing 8-14 makes a new future (by calling handle_client) to handle that
                   connection. Since the handling is itself a future, we await it and then move
                   on to the next client connection.
                        The downside of this approach is that we only ever handle one connec-
                   tion at a time—there is no concurrency. Once the server accepts a connec-
                   tion, the handle_client function is called, and since we await it, we don’t go
                   around the loop again until handle_client’s return future resolves (presum-
                   ably when that client has left).
                        We could improve on this by keeping a set of all the client futures and
                   having the loop in which the server accepts new connections also check all
                   the client futures to see if any can make progress. Listing 8-15 shows what
                   that might look like.

                   async fn server(socket: TcpListener) -> Result<()> {
                       let mut clients = Vec::new();
                       loop {
                           poll_client_futures(&mut clients)?;
                           if let Some(stream) = socket.try_accept()? {
                               clients.push(handle_client(stream));
                           }
                       }
                   }

Listing 8-15: Handling connections with a manual executor

                        This at least handles many connections concurrently, but it’s quite
                   convoluted. It’s also not very efficient because the code now busy-loops,
                   switching between handling the connections we already have and accept-
                   ing new ones. And it has to check each connection each time, since it won’t
                   know which ones can make progress (if any). It also can’t await at any point,
                   since that would prevent the other futures from making progress. You could
                   implement your own wakers to ensure that the code polls only the futures
                   that can make progress, but ultimately this is going down the path of devel-
                   oping your own mini-executor.
                        Another downside of sticking with just the one task for the server that
                   internally contains the futures for all of the client connections is that the
                   server ends up being single-threaded. There is just the one task and to poll
                   it the code must hold an exclusive reference to the task’s future (poll takes
                   Pin<&mut Self>), which only one thread can hold at a time.
                        The solution is to make each client future its own task and leave it to
                   the executor to multiplex among all the tasks. Which, you guessed it, you
                   do by spawning the future. The executor will continue to block on the
                   server future, but if it cannot make progress on that future, it will use its
                   execution machinery to make progress on the other tasks in the meantime
                   behind the scenes. And best of all, if the executor is multithreaded and
                   your client futures are Send, it can run them in parallel since it can hold
                   &muts to the separate tasks concurrently. Listing 8-16 gives an example of
                   what this might look like.

async fn server(socket: TcpListener) -> Result<()> {
    while let Some(stream) = socket.accept().await? {
        // Spawn a new task with the Future that represents this client.
        // The current task will continue to just poll for more connections
        // and will run concurrently (and possibly in parallel) with handle_client.
        spawn(handle_client(stream));
    }
}

Listing 8-16: Spawning futures to create more tasks that can be polled concurrently

                        When you spawn a future and thus make it a task, it’s sort of like spawn-
                   ing a thread. The future continues running in the background and is mul-
                   tiplexed concurrently with any other tasks given to the executor. However,
                   unlike a spawned thread, spawned tasks still depend on being polled by
                   the executor. If the executor stops running, either because you drop it or
                   because your code no longer runs the executor’s code, those spawned tasks
                   will stop making progress. In the server example, imagine what will hap-
                   pen if the main server future resolves for some reason. Since the executor
                   has returned control back to your code, it cannot continue doing, well,
                   anything. Multi-threaded executors often spawn background threads that
                   continue to poll tasks even if the executor yields control back to the user’s
                   code, but not all executors do this, so check your executor before you rely
                   on that behavior!

      Summary
                  In this chapter, we’ve taken a look behind the scenes of the asynchronous
                  constructs available in Rust. We’ve seen how the compiler implements gen-
                  erators and self-referential types, and why that work was necessary to sup-
                  port what we now know as async/await. We’ve also explored how futures are
                  executed, and how wakers allow executors to multiplex among tasks when
                  only some of them can make progress at any given moment. In the next
                  chapter, we’ll tackle what is perhaps the deepest and most discussed area
                  of Rust: unsafe code. Take a deep breath, and then turn the page.

