                                9
                       UNSAFE CODE

           The mere mention of unsafe code often
           elicits strong responses from many in the
          Rust community, and from many of those
       watching Rust from the sidelines. While some
maintain it’s “no big deal,” others decry it as “the rea-
son all of Rust’s promises are a lie.” In this chapter,
I hope to pull back the curtain a bit to explain what unsafe is, what it isn’t,
and how you should go about using it safely. At the time of writing, and
likely also when you read this, Rust’s precise requirements for unsafe code
are still being determined, and even if they were all nailed down, the com-
plete description would be beyond the scope of this book. Instead, I’ll do
my best to arm you with the building blocks, intuition, and tooling you’ll
need to navigate your way through most unsafe code.
     Your main takeaway from this chapter should be this: unsafe code is the
mechanism Rust gives developers for taking advantage of invariants that,
for whatever reason, the compiler cannot check. We’ll look at the ways in
which unsafe does that, what those invariants may be, and what we can do
with it as a result.
                                                        IN VARIANT S

                       Throughout this chapter, I’ll be talking a lot about invariants. Invariant is just a
                       fancy way of saying “something that must be true for your program to be cor-
                       rect.” For example, in Rust, one invariant is that references, using & and &mut,
                       do not dangle—they always point to valid values. You can also have applica-
                       tion- or library-specific invariants, like “the head pointer is always ahead of the
                       tail pointer” or “the capacity is always a power of two.” Ultimately, invariants
                       represent all the assumptions required for your code to be correct. However,
                       you may not always be aware of all the invariants that your code uses, and
                       that’s where bugs creep in.

                         Crucially, unsafe code is not a way to skirt the various rules of Rust, like
                   borrow checking, but rather a way to enforce those rules using reasoning
                   that is beyond the compiler. When you write unsafe code, the onus is on
                   you to ensure that the resulting code is safe. In a way, unsafe is misleading
                   as a keyword when it is used to allow unsafe operations through unsafe {};
                   it’s not that the contained code is unsafe, it’s that the code is allowed to per-
                   form otherwise unsafe operations because in this particular context, those
                   operations are safe.
                         The rest of this chapter is split into four sections. We’ll start with a brief
                   examination of how the keyword itself is used, then explore what unsafe
                   allows you to do. Next, we’ll look at the rules you must follow in order to
                   write safe unsafe code. Finally, I’ll give you some advice about how to actu-
                   ally go about writing unsafe code safely.

      The unsafe Keyword
                   Before we discuss the powers that unsafe grants you, we need to talk about
                   its two different meanings. The unsafe keyword serves a dual purpose in
                   Rust: it marks a particular function as unsafe to call and it enables you to
                   invoke unsafe functionality in a particular code block. For example, the
                   method in Listing 9-1 is marked as unsafe, even though it contains no
                   unsafe code. Here, the unsafe keyword serves as a warning to the caller that
                   there are additional guarantees that someone who writes code that invokes
                   decr must manually check.

                   impl<T> SomeType<T> {
                       pub unsafe fn decr(&self) {
                           self.some_usize -= 1;
                       }
                   }

Listing 9-1: An unsafe method that contains only safe code

          Listing 9-2 illustrates the second usage. Here, the method itself is not
       marked as unsafe, even though it contains unsafe code.

       impl<T> SomeType<T> {
           pub fn as_ref(&self) -> &T {
               unsafe { &*self.ptr }
           }
       }

Listing 9-2: A safe method that contains unsafe code

            These two listings differ in their use of unsafe because they embody
       different contracts. decr requires the caller to be careful when they call the
       method, whereas as_ref assumes that the caller was careful when invoking
       other unsafe methods (like decr). To see why, imagine that SomeType is really
       a reference-counted type like Rc. Even though decr only decrements a num-
       ber, that decrement may in turn trigger undefined behavior through the
       safe method as_ref. If you call decr and then drop the second-to-last Rc of a
       given T, the reference count drops to zero and the T will be dropped—but
       the program might still call as_ref on the last Rc, and end up with a dan-
       gling reference.

NOTE   Undefined behavior describes the consequences of a program that violates invari-
       ants of the language at runtime. In general, if a program triggers undefined behav-
       ior, the outcome is entirely unpredictable. We’ll cover undefined behavior in greater
       detail later in this chapter.

            Conversely, as long as there is no way to corrupt the Rc reference count
       using safe code, it is always safe to dereference the pointer inside the Rc
       the way the code for as_ref does—the fact that &self exists is proof that the
       pointer must still be valid. We can use this to give the caller a safe API to
       an otherwise unsafe operation, which is a core piece of how to use unsafe
       responsibly.
            For historical reasons, every unsafe fn contains an implicit unsafe block
       in Rust today. That is, if you declare an unsafe fn, you can always invoke any
       unsafe methods or primitive operations inside that fn. However, that deci-
       sion is now considered a mistake, and it’s currently being reverted through
       the already accepted and implemented RFC 2585. This RFC warns about
       having an unsafe fn that performs unsafe operations without an explicit
       unsafe block inside it. The lint will also likely become a hard error in future
       editions of Rust. The idea is to reduce the “footgun radius”—if every unsafe
       fn is one giant unsafe block, then you might accidentally perform unsafe
       operations without realizing it! For example, in decr in Listing 9-1, under
       the current rules you could also have added *std::ptr::null() without any
       unsafe annotation.
            The distinction between unsafe as a marker and unsafe blocks as a
       mechanism to enable unsafe operations is important, because you must
       think about them differently. An unsafe fn indicates to the caller that
       they have to be careful when calling the fn in question and that they must
       ensure that the function’s documented safety invariants hold.

                        Meanwhile, an unsafe block implies that whoever wrote that block care-
                   fully checked that the safety invariants for any unsafe operations performed
                   inside it hold. If you want an approximate real-world analogy, unsafe fn is an
                   unsigned contract that asks the author of calling code to “solemnly swear X,
                   Y, and Z.” Meanwhile, unsafe {} is the calling code’s author signing off on all
                   the unsafe contracts contained within the block. Keep that in mind as we
                   go through the rest of this chapter.

      Great Power
                   So, once you sign the unsafe contract with unsafe {}, what are you allowed
                   to do? Honestly, not that much. Or rather, it doesn’t enable that many new
                   features. Inside an unsafe block, you are allowed to dereference raw point-
                   ers and call unsafe fns.
                        That’s it. Technically, there are a few other things you can do, like
                   accessing mutable and external static variables and accessing fields of
                   unions, but those don’t change the discussion much. And honestly, that’s
                   enough. Together, these powers allow you to wreak all sorts of havoc, like
                   turning types into one another with mem::transmute, dereferencing raw point-
                   ers that point to who knows where, casting &'a to &'static, or making types
                   shareable across thread boundaries even though they’re not thread-safe.
                        In this section, we won’t worry too much about what can go wrong with
                   these powers. We’ll leave that for the boring, responsible, grown-up section
                   that comes after. Instead, we’ll look at these neat shiny new toys and what
                   we can do with them.

                   Juggling Raw Pointers
                   One of the most fundamental reasons to use unsafe is to deal with Rust’s raw
                   pointer types: *const T and *mut T. You should think of these as more or less
                   analogous to &T and &mut T, except that they don’t have lifetimes and are not
                   subject to the same validity rules as their & counterparts, which we’ll discuss
                   later in the chapter. These types are interchangeably referred to as point-
                   ers and raw pointers, mostly because many developers instinctively refer to
                   references as pointers, and calling them raw pointers makes the distinction
                   clearer.
                        Since fewer rules apply to * than &, you can cast a reference to a pointer
                   even outside an unsafe block. Only if you want to go the other way, from *
                   to &, do you need unsafe. You’ll generally turn a pointer back into a refer-
                   ence to do useful things with the pointed-to data, such as reading or modi-
                   fying its value. For that reason, a common operation to use on pointers is
                   unsafe { &*ptr } (or &mut *). The * there may look strange as the code is just
                   constructing a reference, not dereferencing the pointer, but it makes sense
                   if you look at the types; if you have a *mut T and want a &mut T, then &mut ptr
                   would just give you a &mut *mut T. You need the * to indicate that you want
                   the mutable reference to what ptr is a pointer to.

                                    POINTER T Y PES

     You may be wondering what the difference is between *mut T and *const T
     and std::ptr::NonNull<T>. Well, the exact specification is still being worked
     out, but the primary practical difference between *mut T and *const T/
     NonNull<T> is that *mut T is invariant in T (see “Lifetime Variance” in Chapter 1),
     whereas the other two are covariant. As the names imply, *const T and
     NonNull<T> differ primarily in that NonNull<T> is not allowed to be a null pointer,
     whereas *const T is.
           My best advice in choosing among these types is to use your intuition
     about whether you would have written &mut or & if you were able to name the
     relevant lifetime. If you would have written &, and you know that the pointer is
     never null, use NonNull<T>. It benefits from a cool optimization called the niche
     optimization: basically, since the compiler knows that the type can never be
     null, it can use that information to represent types like Option<NonNull<T>> with-
     out any extra overhead, since the None case can be represented by setting the
     NonNull to be a null pointer! The null pointer value is a niche in the NonNull<T>
     type. If the pointer might be null, use *const T. And if you would have written
     &mut T, use *mut T.

Unrepresentable Lifetimes
As raw pointers do not have lifetimes, they can be used in circumstances
where the liveness of the value being pointed to cannot be expressed stati-
cally within Rust’s lifetime system, such as a self-pointer in a self-referential
struct like the generators we discussed in Chapter 8. A pointer that points
into self is valid for as long as self is around (and doesn’t move, which is
what Pin is for), but that isn’t a lifetime you can generally name. And while
the entire self-referential type may be 'static, the self-pointer isn’t—if it
were static, then even if you gave away that pointer to someone else, they
could continue to use it forever, even after self was gone! Take the type in
Listing 9-3 as an example; here we attempt to store the raw bytes that make
up a value alongside its stored representation.

struct Person<'a> {
    name: &'a str,
    age: usize,
}
struct Parsed {
    bytes: [u8; 1024],
    parsed: Person<'???>,
}

Listing 9-3: Trying, and failing, to name the lifetime of a self-referential reference

                       The reference inside Person wants to refer to data stored in bytes in
                  Parsed, but there is no lifetime we can assign to that reference from Parsed.
                  It’s not 'static or something like 'self (which doesn’t exist), because if
                  Parsed is moved, the reference is no longer valid.
                       Since pointers do not have lifetimes, they circumvent this problem
                  because you don’t have to be able to name the lifetime. Instead, you just have
                  to make sure that when you do use the pointer, it’s still valid, which is what you
                  sign off on when you write unsafe { &*ptr }. In the example in Listing 9-3,
                  Person would instead store a *const str and then unsafely turn that into a &str
                  at the appropriate times when it can guarantee that the pointer is still valid.
                       A similar issue arises with a type like Arc, which has a pointer to a value
                  that’s shared for some duration, but that duration is known only at runtime
                  when the last Arc is dropped. The pointer is kind-of, sort-of 'static, but not
                  really—like in the self-referential case, the pointer is no longer valid when
                  the last Arc reference goes away, so the lifetime is more like 'self. In Arc’s
                  cousin, Weak, the lifetime is also “when the last Arc goes away,” but since a
                  Weak isn’t an Arc, the lifetime isn’t even tied to self. So, Arc and Weak both
                  use raw pointers internally.

                  Pointer Arithmetic
                  With raw pointers, you can do arbitrary pointer arithmetic, just like you
                  can in C, by using .offset(), .add(), and .sub() to move the pointer to any
                  byte that lives within the same allocation. This is most often used in highly
                  space-optimized data structures, like hash tables, where storing an extra
                  pointer for each element would add too much overhead and using slices
                  isn’t possible. Those are fairly niche use cases, and we won’t be talking
                  more about them in this book, but I encourage you to read the code for
                  hashbrown::RawTable (https://github.com/rust-lang/hashbrown/) if you want to
                  learn more!
                       The pointer arithmetic methods are unsafe to call even if you don’t
                  want to turn the pointer into a reference afterwards. There are a couple
                  of reasons for this, but the main one is that it is illegal to make a pointer
                  point beyond the end of the allocation that it originally pointed to. Doing
                  so triggers undefined behavior, and the compiler is allowed to decide to
                  eat your code and replace it with arbitrary nonsense that only a compiler
                  could understand. If you do use these methods, read the documentation
                  carefully!

                  To Pointer and Back Again
                  Often when you need to use pointers, it’s because you have some normal
                  Rust type, like a reference, a slice, or a string, and you have to move to the
                  world of pointers for a bit and then go back to the original normal type.
                  Some of the key standard library types therefore provide you with a way to
                  turn them into their raw constituent parts, such as a pointer and a length
                  for a slice, and a way to turn them back into the whole using those same
                  parts. For example, you can get a slice’s data pointer with as_ptr and its
                  length with []::len. You can then reconstruct the slice by providing those

same values to std::slice::from_raw_parts. Vec, Arc, and String have similar
methods that return a raw pointer to the underlying allocation, and Box has
Box::into_raw and Box::from_raw, which do the same thing.

Playing Fast and Loose with Types
Sometimes, you have a type T and want to treat it as some other type U.
Whether that’s because you need to do lightning-fast zero-copy parsing
or because you need to fiddle with some lifetimes, Rust provides you with
some (very unsafe) tools to do so.
     The first and by far most widely used of these is pointer casting: you can
cast a *const T to any other *const U (and the same for mut), and you don’t
even need unsafe to do it. The unsafety comes into play only when you later
try to use the cast pointer as a reference, as you have to assert that the raw
pointer can in fact be used as a reference to the type it’s pointing to.
     This kind of pointer type casting comes in particularly handy when work-
ing with foreign function interfaces (FFI)—you can cast any Rust pointer to a
*const std::ffi::c_void or *mut std::ffi::c_void, and then pass that to a C func-
tion that expects a void pointer. Similarly, if you get a void pointer from C that
you previously passed in, you can trivially cast it back into its original type.
     Pointer casts are also useful when you want to interpret a sequence
of bytes as plain old data—types like integers, Booleans, characters, and
arrays, or #[repr(C)] structs of these—or write such types directly out as a
byte stream without serialization. There are a lot of safety invariants to keep
in mind if you want to try to do that, but we’ll leave that for later.

Calling Unsafe Functions
Arguably unsafe’s most commonly used feature is that it enables you to
call unsafe functions. Deeper down the stack, most of those functions are
unsafe because they operate on raw pointers at some fundamental level, but
higher up the stack you tend to interact with unsafety primarily through
function calls.
     There’s really no limit to what calling an unsafe function might enable,
as it is entirely up to the libraries you interact with. But in general, unsafe
functions can be divided into three camps: those that interact with non-
Rust interfaces, those that skip safety checks, and those that have custom
invariants.

Foreign Function Interfaces
Rust lets you declare functions and static variables that are defined in a
language other than Rust using extern blocks (which we’ll discuss at length
in Chapter 11). When you declare such a block, you’re telling Rust that the
items appearing within it will be implemented by some external source when
the final program binary is linked, such as a C library you are integrating
with. Since externs exist outside of Rust’s control, they are inherently unsafe
to access. If you call a C function from Rust, all bets are off—it might over-
write your entire memory contents and clobber all your neatly arranged

                  references into random pointers into the kernel somewhere. Similarly, an
                  extern static variable could be modified by external code at any time, and
                  could be filled with all sorts of bad bytes that don’t reflect its declared type
                  at all. In an unsafe block, though, you can access externs to your heart’s
                  delight, as long as you’re willing to vouch for the other side of the extern
                  behaving according to Rust’s rules.

                  I’ll Pass on Safety Checks
                  Some unsafe operations can be made entirely safe by introducing addi-
                  tional runtime checks. For example, accessing an item in a slice is unsafe
                  since you might try to access an item beyond the length of the slice. But,
                  given how common the operation is, it’d be unfortunate if indexing into a
                  slice was unsafe. Instead, the safe implementation includes bounds checks
                  that (depending on the method you use) either panic or return an Option if
                  the index you provide is out of bounds. That way, there is no way to cause
                  undefined behavior even if you pass in an index beyond the slice’s length.
                  Another example is in hash tables, which hash the key you provide rather
                  than letting you provide the hash yourself; this ensures that you’ll never try
                  to access a key using the wrong hash.
                       However, in the endless pursuit of ultimate performance, some develop-
                  ers may find these safety checks add just a little too much overhead in their
                  tightest loops. To cater to situations where peak performance is paramount
                  and the caller knows that the indexes are in bounds, many data struc-
                  tures provide alternate versions of particular methods without these safety
                  checks. Such methods usually include the word unchecked in the name to
                  indicate that they blindly trust the provided arguments to be safe and that
                  they do not do any of those pesky, slow safety checks. Some examples are
                  NonNull::new_unchecked, slice::get_unchecked, NonZero::new_unchecked, Arc::get
                  _mut_unchecked, and str::from_utf8_unchecked.
                       In practice, the safety and performance trade-off for unchecked meth-
                  ods is rarely worth it. As always with performance optimization, measure
                  first, then optimize.

                  Custom Invariants
                  Most uses of unsafe rely on custom invariants to some degree. That is, they
                  rely on invariants beyond those provided by Rust itself, which are specific to
                  the particular application or library. Since so many functions fall into this
                  category, it’s hard to give a good general summary of this class of unsafe
                  functions. Instead, I’ll give some examples of unsafe functions with custom
                  invariants that you may come across in practice and want to use:
                  MaybeUninit::assume_init

                       The MaybeUninit type is one of the few ways in which you can store
                       values that are not valid for their type in Rust. You can think of a
                       MaybeUninit<T> as a T that may not be legal to use as a T at the moment.
                       For example, a MaybeUninit<NonNull> is allowed to hold a null pointer,
                       a MaybeUninit<Box> is allowed to hold a dangling heap pointer, and a

    MaybeUninit<bool> is allowed to hold the bit pattern for the number 3
    (normally it must be 0 or 1). This comes in handy if you are construct-
    ing a value bit by bit or are dealing with zeroed or uninitialized mem-
    ory that will eventually be made valid (such as by being filled through
    a call to std::io::Read::read). The assume_init function asserts that the
    MaybeUninit now holds a valid value for the type T and can therefore be
    used as a T.

ManuallyDrop::drop

    The ManuallyDrop type is a wrapper type around a type T that does not
    drop that T when the ManuallyDrop is dropped. Or, phrased differently, it
    decouples the dropping of the outer type (ManuallyDrop) from the drop-
    ping of the inner type (T). It implements safe access to the T through
    DerefMut<Target = T> but also provides a drop method (separately from
    the drop method of the Drop trait) to drop the wrapped T without drop-
    ping the ManuallyDrop. That is, the drop function takes &mut self despite
    dropping the T, and so leaves the ManuallyDrop behind. This comes in
    handy if you have to explicitly drop a value that you cannot move, such
    as in implementations of the Drop trait. Once that value is dropped, it
    is no longer safe to try to access the T, which is why the call to drop is
    unsafe—it asserts that the T will never be accessed again.

std::ptr::drop_in_place

    drop_in_place lets you call a value’s destructor directly through a pointer
    to that value. This is unsafe because the pointee will be left behind
    after the call, so if some code then tries to dereference the pointer, it’ll
    be in for a bad time! This method is particularly useful when you may
    want to reuse memory, such as in an arena allocator, and need to drop
    an old value in place without reclaiming the surrounding memory.

Waker::from_raw

    In Chapter 8 we talked about the Waker type and how it is made up of a
    data pointer and a RawWaker that holds a manually implemented vtable.
    Once a Waker has been constructed, the raw function pointers in the
    vtable, such as wake and drop, can be called from safe code (through
    Waker::wake and drop(waker), respectively). Waker::from_raw is where the
    asynchronous executor asserts that all the pointers in its vtable are
    in fact valid function pointers that follow the contract set forth in the
    documentation of RawWakerVTable.

std::hint::unreachable_unchecked

    The hint module holds functions that give hints to the compiler about
    the surrounding code but do not actually produce any machine code.
    The unreachable_unchecked function in particular tells the compiler that it
    is impossible for the program to reach a section of the code at runtime.
    This in turn allows the compiler to make optimizations based on that

                      knowledge, such as eliminating conditional branches to that location.
                      Unlike the unreachable! macro, which panics if the code does reach the
                      line in question, the effects of an erroneous unreachable_unchecked are
                      hard to predict. The compiler optimizations may cause peculiar and
                      hard-to-debug behavior, not to mention that your program will continue
                      running when something it believed to be true was not!

                  std::ptr::{read,write}_{unaligned,volatile}

                      The ptr module holds a number of functions that let you work with odd
                      pointers—those that do not meet the assumptions that Rust generally
                      makes about pointers. The first of these functions are read_unaligned and
                      write_unaligned, which let you access pointers that point to a T even if
                      that T is not stored according to T’s alignment (see the section on align-
                      ment in Chapter 2). This might happen if the T is contained directly in
                      a byte array or is otherwise packed in with other values without proper
                      padding. The second notable pair of functions is read_volatile and
                      write_volatile, which let you operate on pointers that don’t point to
                      normal memory. Concretely, these functions will always access the given
                      pointer (they won’t be cached in a register, for example, even if you
                      read the same pointer twice in a row), and the compiler won’t reorder
                      the volatile accesses relative to other volatile accesses. Volatile opera-
                      tions come in handy when working with pointers that aren’t backed
                      by normal DRAM memory—we’ll discuss this further in Chapter 11.
                      Ultimately, these methods are unsafe because they dereference the
                      given pointer (and to an owned T, at that), so you as the caller need to
                      sign off on all the contracts associated with doing so.

                  std::thread::Builder::spawn_unchecked

                      The normal thread::spawn that we know and love requires that the
                      provided closure is 'static. That bound stems from the fact that the
                      spawned thread might run for an indeterminate amount of time; if
                      we were allowed to use a reference to, say, the caller’s stack, the caller
                      might return well before the spawned thread exits, rendering the ref-
                      erence invalid. Sometimes, however, you know that some non-'static
                      value in the caller will outlive the spawned thread. This might happen
                      if you join the thread before dropping the value in question, or if the
                      value is dropped only strictly after you know the spawned thread will
                      no longer use it. That’s where spawn_unchecked comes in—it does not
                      have the 'static bound and thus lets you implement those use cases as
                      long as you’re willing to sign the contract saying that no unsafe accesses
                      will happen as a result. Be careful of panics, though; if the caller pan-
                      ics, it might drop values earlier than you planned and cause undefined
                      behavior in the spawned thread!
                       Note that all of these methods (and indeed all unsafe methods in the
                  standard library) provide explicit documentation for their safety invariants,
                  as should be the case for any unsafe method.

       Implementing Unsafe Traits
       Unsafe traits aren’t unsafe to use, but unsafe to implement. This is because
       unsafe code is allowed to rely on the correctness (defined by the trait’s doc-
       umentation) of the implementation of unsafe traits. For example, to imple-
       ment the unsafe trait Send, you need to write unsafe impl Send for .... Like
       unsafe functions, unsafe traits generally have custom invariants that are (or
       at least should be) specified in the documentation for the trait. Thus, it’s
       difficult to cover unsafe traits as a group, so here too I’ll give some common
       examples from the standard library that are worth going over.

       Send and Sync
       The Send and Sync traits denote that a type is safe to send or share across
       thread boundaries, respectively. We’ll talk more about these traits in
       Chapter 10, but for now what you need to know is that they are auto-traits,
       and so they’ll usually be implemented for most types for you by the com-
       piler. But, as tends to be the case with auto-traits, Send and Sync will not be
       implemented if any members of the type in question are not themselves Send
       or Sync.
           In the context of unsafe code, this problem occurs primarily due to
       raw pointers, which are neither Send nor Sync. At first glance, this might
       seem reasonable: the compiler has no way to know who else may have a raw
       pointer to the same value or how they may be using it at the moment, so
       how can the type be safe to send across threads? Now that we’re seasoned
       unsafe developers though, that argument seems weak—after all, dereferenc-
       ing a raw pointer is already unsafe, so why should handling the invariants of
       Send and Sync be any different?
           Strictly speaking, raw pointers could be both Send and Sync. The prob-
       lem is that if they were, the types that contain raw pointers would auto-
       matically be Send and Sync themselves, even though their author might not
       realize that was the case. The developer might then unsafely dereference
       the raw pointers without ever thinking about what would happen if those
       types were sent or shared across thread boundaries, and thus inadvertently
       introduce undefined behavior. Instead, the raw pointer types block these
       automatic implementations as an additional safeguard to unsafe code to
       make authors explicitly sign the contract that they have also followed the
       Send and Sync invariants.

NOTE   A common mistake with unsafe implementations of Send and Sync is to forget to add
       bounds to generic parameters: unsafe impl<T: Send> Send for MyUnsafeType<T> {}.

       GlobalAlloc
       The GlobalAlloc trait is how you implement a custom memory allocator
       in Rust. We won’t talk too much about that topic in this book, but the
       trait itself is interesting. Listing 9-4 gives the required methods for the
       GlobalAlloc trait.

                  pub unsafe trait GlobalAlloc {
                      pub unsafe fn alloc(&self, layout: Layout) -> *mut u8;
                      pub unsafe fn dealloc(&self, ptr: *mut u8, layout: Layout);
                  }

Listing 9-4: The GlobalAlloc trait with its required methods

                       At its core, the trait has one method for allocating a new chunk of
                  memory, alloc, and one for deallocating a chunk of memory, dealloc. The
                  Layout argument describes the type’s size and alignment, as we discussed in
                  Chapter 2. Each of those methods is unsafe and carries a number of safety
                  invariants that its callers must uphold.
                       GlobalAlloc itself is also unsafe because it places restrictions on the
                  implementer of the trait, not the caller of its methods. Only the unsafety
                  of the trait ensures that implementers agree to uphold the invariants that
                  Rust itself assumes of its memory allocator, such as in the standard library’s
                  implementation of Box. If the trait was not unsafe, an implementer could
                  safely implement GlobalAlloc in a way that produced unaligned pointers or
                  incorrectly sized allocations, which would trigger unsafety in otherwise safe
                  code that assumes that allocations are sane. This would break the rule that
                  safe code should not be able to trigger memory unsafety in other safe code,
                  and thus cause all sorts of mayhem.

                  Surprisingly Not Unpin
                  The Unpin trait is not unsafe, which comes as a surprise to many Rust devel-
                  opers. It may even come as a surprise to you after reading Chapter 8. After
                  all, the trait is supposed to ensure that self-referential types aren’t invali-
                  dated if they’re moved after they have established internal pointers (that is,
                  after they’ve been placed in a Pin). It seems strange, then, that Unpin can be
                  used to safely remove a type from a Pin.
                        There are two main reasons why Unpin isn’t an unsafe trait. First, it’s
                  unnecessary. Implementing Unpin for a type that you control does not grant
                  you the ability to safely pin or unpin a !Unpin type; that still requires unsafety
                  in the form of a call to Pin::new_unchecked or Pin::get_unchecked_mut. Second,
                  there is already a safe way for you to unpin any type you control: the Drop trait!
                  When you implement Drop for a type, you’re passed &mut self, even if your
                  type was previously stored in a Pin and is !Unpin, all without any unsafety. That
                  potential for unsafety is covered by the invariants of Pin::new_unchecked, which
                  must be upheld to create a Pin of such an !Unpin type in the first place.

                  When to Make a Trait Unsafe
                  Few traits in the wild are unsafe, but those that are all follow the same pat-
                  tern. A trait should be unsafe if safe code that assumes that trait is imple-
                  mented correctly can exhibit memory unsafety if the trait is not implemented
                  correctly.
                      The Send trait is a good example to keep in mind here—safe code can
                  easily spawn a thread and pass a value to that spawned thread, but if Rc were

        Send, that sequence of operations could trivially lead to memory unsafety.
        Consider what would happen if you cloned an Rc<Box> and sent it to another
        thread: the two threads could easily both try to deallocate the Box since they
        do not correctly synchronize access to the Rc’s reference count.
            The Unpin trait is a good counterexample. While it is possible to write
        unsafe code that triggers memory unsafety if Unpin is implemented incor-
        rectly, no entirely safe code can trigger memory unsafety due to an imple-
        mentation of Unpin. It’s not always easy to determine that a trait can be safe
        (indeed, the Unpin trait was unsafe throughout most of the RFC process),
        but you can always err on the side of making the trait unsafe, and then
        make it safe later on if you realize that is the case! Just keep in mind that
        that is a backward incompatible change.
             Also keep in mind that just because it feels like an incorrect (or even
        malicious) implementation of a trait would cause a lot of havoc, that’s not
        necessarily a good reason to make it unsafe. The unsafe marker should first
        and foremost be used to highlight cases of memory unsafety, not just some-
        thing that can trigger errors in business logic. For example, the Eq, Ord,
        Deref, and Hash traits are all safe, even though there is likely much code out
        in the world that would go haywire if faced with a malicious implementa-
        tion of, say, Hash that returned a different random hash each time it was
        called. This extends to unsafe code too—there is almost certainly unsafe
        code out there that would be memory-unsafe in the presence of such an
        implementation of Hash—but that does not mean Hash should be unsafe.
        The same is true for an implementation of Deref that dereferenced to a dif-
        ferent (but valid) target each time. Such unsafe code would be relying on a
        contract of Hash or Deref that does not actually hold; Hash never claimed that
        it was deterministic, and neither did Deref. Or rather, the authors of those
        implementations never used the unsafe keyword to make that claim!

 NOTE   An important implication of traits like Eq, Hash, and Deref being safe is that unsafe
        code can rely only on the safety of safe code, not its correctness. This applies not only
        to traits, but to all unsafe/safe code interactions.

Great Responsibility
        So far, we’ve looked mainly at the various things that you are allowed to do
        with unsafe code. But unsafe code is allowed to do those things only if it
        does so safely. Even though unsafe code can, say, dereference a raw pointer,
        it must do so only if it knows that pointer is valid as a reference to its poin-
        tee at that moment in time, subject to all of Rust’s normal requirements of
        references. In other words, unsafe code is given access to tools that could be
        used to do unsafe things, but it must do only safe things using those tools.
            That, then, raises the question of what safe even means in the first
        place. When is it safe to dereference a pointer? When is it safe to transmute
        between two different types? In this section, we’ll explore some of the key

                  invariants to keep in mind when wielding the power of unsafe, look at some
                  common gotchas, and get familiar with some of the tools that help you
                  write safer unsafe code.
                      The exact rules around what it means for Rust code to be safe are still
                  being worked out. At the time of writing, the Unsafe Code Guidelines
                  Working Group is hard at work nailing down all the dos and don’ts, but
                  many questions remain unanswered. Most of the advice in this section is
                  more or less settled, but I’ll make sure to call out any that isn’t. If anything,
                  I’m hoping that this section will teach you to be careful about making
                  assumptions when you write unsafe code, and prompt you to double-check
                  the Rust reference before you declare your code production-ready.

                  What Can Go Wrong?
                  We can’t really get into the rules unsafe code must abide by without talk-
                  ing about what happens if you violate those rules. Let’s say you do mutably
                  access a value from multiple threads concurrently, construct an unaligned
                  reference, or dereference a dangling pointer—now what?
                       Unsafe code that is not ultimately safe is referred to as having undefined
                  behavior. Undefined behavior generally manifests in one of three ways: not
                  at all, through visible errors, or through invisible corruption. The first is the
                  happy case—you wrote some code that is truly not safe, but the compiler
                  generated sane code that the computer you’re running the code on exe-
                  cutes in a sane way. Unfortunately, the happiness here is very brittle. Should
                  a new and slightly smarter version of the compiler come along, or some sur-
                  rounding code cause the compiler to apply another optimization, the code
                  may no longer do something sane and tip over into one of the worse cases.
                  Even if the same code is compiled by the same compiler, if it runs on a dif-
                  ferent platform or host, the program might act differently! This is why it is
                  important to avoid undefined behavior even if everything currently seems
                  to work fine. Not to do so is like playing a second round of Russian roulette
                  just because you survived the first.
                       Visible errors are the easiest undefined behavior to catch. If you deref-
                  erence a null pointer, for example, your program will (in all likelihood)
                  crash with an error, which you can then debug back to the root cause. That
                  debugging may itself be difficult, but at least you have a notification that
                  something is wrong. Visible errors can also manifest in less severe ways,
                  such as deadlocks, garbled output, or panics that are printed but don’t trig-
                  ger a program exit, all of which tell you that there is a bug in your code that
                  you have to go fix.
                       The worst manifestation of undefined behavior is when there is no
                  immediate visible effect, but the program state is invisibly corrupted.
                  Transaction amounts might be slightly off from what they should be, back-
                  ups might be silently corrupted, or random bits of internal memory could
                  be exposed to external clients. The undefined behavior could cause ongo-
                  ing corruption, or extremely infrequent outages. Part of the challenge with
                  undefined behavior is that, as the name implies, the behavior of the non-
                  safe unsafe code is not defined—the compiler might eliminate it entirely,

dramatically change the semantics of the code, or even miscompile sur-
rounding code. What that does to your program is entirely dependent on
what the code in question does. The unpredictable impact of undefined
behavior is the reason why all undefined behavior should be considered a
serious bug, no matter how it currently manifests.

                        W H Y UNDEFINED BEHAV IOR?

    An argument that often comes up in conversations about undefined behavior
    is that the compiler should emit an error if code exhibits undefined behavior
    instead of doing something weird and unpredictable. That way, it would be
    near-impossible to write bad unsafe code!
          Unfortunately, that would be impossible because undefined behavior is
    rarely explicit or obvious. Instead, what usually happens is that the compiler
    simply applies optimizations under the assumption that the code follows the
    specification. Should that turn out to not be the case—which is rarely clear until
    runtime—it’s difficult to predict what the effect might be. Maybe the optimiza-
    tion is still valid, and nothing bad happens; but maybe it’s not, and the seman-
    tics of the code end up slightly different from that of the unoptimized version.
          If we were to tell compiler developers that they aren’t allowed to assume
    anything about the underlying code, what we’d really be telling them is that
    they cannot perform a wide range of the optimizations that they implement with
    great success today. Nearly all sophisticated optimizations make assumptions
    about what the code in question can and cannot do according to the language
    specification.
          If you want a good illustration of how specifications and compiler optimi-
    zations interact in strange ways where it’s hard to assign blame, I recommend
    reading through Ralf Jung’s blog post “We Need Better Language Specs”
    (https://www.ralfj.de/blog/2020/12/14/provenance.html).

Validity
Perhaps the most important concept to understand before writing unsafe
code is validity, which dictates the rules for what values inhabit a given
type—or, less formally, the rules for a type’s values. The concept is simpler
than it sounds, so let’s dive into some concrete examples.

Reference Types
Rust is very strict about what values its reference types can hold. Specifically,
references must never dangle, must always be aligned, and must always
point to a valid value for their target type. In addition, a shared and an
exclusive reference to a given memory location can never exist at the same
time, and neither can multiple exclusive references to a location. These

                  rules apply regardless of whether your code uses the references or not—you
                  are not allowed to create a null reference even if you then immediately dis-
                  card it!
                        Shared references have the additional constraint that the pointee is
                  not allowed to change during the reference’s lifetime. That is, any value
                  the pointee contains must remain exactly the same over its lifetime. This
                  applies transitively, so if you have an & to a type that contains a *mut T, you
                  are not allowed to ever mutate the T through that *mut even though you
                  could write code to do so using unsafe. The only exception to this rule is a
                  value wrapped by the UnsafeCell type. All other types that provide interior
                  mutability, like Cell, RefCell, and Mutex, internally use an UnsafeCell.
                        An interesting result of Rust’s strict rules for references is that for many
                  years, it was impossible to safely take a reference to a field of a packed or
                  partially uninitialized struct that used repr(Rust). Since repr(Rust) leaves
                  a type’s layout undefined, the only way to get the address of a field was by
                  writing &some_struct.field as *const _. However, if some_struct is packed,
                  then some_struct.field may not be aligned, and thus creating an & to it is
                  illegal! Further, if some_struct isn’t fully initialized, then the some_struct ref-
                  erence itself cannot exist! In Rust 1.51.0, the ptr::addr_of! macro was stabi-
                  lized, which added a mechanism for directly obtaining a reference to a field
                  without first creating a reference, fixing this particular problem. Internally,
                  it is implemented using something called raw references (not to be confused
                  with raw pointers), which directly create pointers to their operands rather
                  than going via a reference. Raw references were introduced in RFC 2582
                  but haven’t been stabilized themselves yet at the time of writing.

                  Primitive Types
                  Some of Rust’s primitive types have restrictions on what values they can
                  hold. For example, a bool is defined as being 1 byte large but is only allowed
                  to hold the value 0x00 or the value 0x01, and a char is not allowed to hold
                  a surrogate or a value above char::MAX. Most of Rust’s primitive types, and
                  indeed most of Rust’s types overall, also cannot be constructed from unini-
                  tialized memory. These restrictions may seem arbitrary, but again often stem
                  from the need to enable optimizations that wouldn’t be possible otherwise.
                       A good illustration of this is the niche optimization, which we discussed
                  briefly when talking about pointer types earlier in this chapter. To recap,
                  the niche optimization tucks away the enum discriminant value in the
                  wrapped type in certain cases. For example, since a reference cannot ever
                  be all zeros, an Option<&T> can use all zeros to represent None, and thus avoid
                  spending an extra byte (plus padding) to store the discriminator byte. The
                  compiler can optimize Booleans in the same way and potentially take it
                  even further. Consider the type Option<Option<bool>>>. Since the compiler
                  knows that the bool is either 0x00 or 0x01, it’s free to use 0x02 to represent
                  Some(None) and 0x03 to represent None. Very nice and tidy! But if someone
                  were to come along and treat the byte 0x03 as a bool, and then place that
                  value in an Option<Option<bool>> optimized in this way, bad things would
                  happen.

     It bears repeating that it’s not important whether the Rust compiler cur-
rently implements this optimization or not. The point is that it is allowed to,
and therefore any unsafe code you write must conform to that contract or
risk hitting a bug later on should the behavior change.

Owned Pointer Types
Types that point to memory they own, like Box and Vec, are generally sub-
ject to the same optimizations as if they held an exclusive reference to the
pointed-to memory unless they’re explicitly accessed through a shared
reference. Specifically, the compiler assumes that the pointed-to memory
is not shared or aliased elsewhere, and makes optimizations based on
that assumption. For example, if you extracted the pointer from a Box and
then constructed two Boxes from that same pointer and wrapped them in
ManuallyDrop to prevent a double-free, you’d likely be entering undefined
behavior territory. That’s the case even if you only ever access the inner
type through shared references. (I say “likely” because this isn’t fully set-
tled in the language reference yet, but a rough consensus has arisen.)

Storing Invalid Values
Sometimes you need to store a value that isn’t currently valid for its type.
The most common example of this is if you want to allocate a chunk of
memory for some type T and then read in the bytes from, say, the network.
Until all the bytes have been read in, the memory isn’t going to be a valid T.
Even if you just tried to read the bytes into a slice of u8, you would have to
zero those u8s first, because constructing a u8 from uninitialized memory is
also undefined behavior.
     The MaybeUninit<T> type is Rust’s mechanism for working with values
that aren’t valid. A MaybeUninit<T> stores exactly a T (it is #[repr(transparent)]),
but the compiler knows to make no assumptions about the validity of that T.
It won’t assume that references are non-null, that a Box<T> isn’t dangling, or
that a bool is either 0 or 1. This means it’s safe to hold a T backed by unini-
tialized memory inside a MaybeUninit (as the name implies). MaybeUninit is
also a very useful tool in other unsafe code where you have to temporarily
store a value that may be invalid. Maybe you have to store an aliased Box<T>
or stash a char surrogate for a second— MaybeUninit is your friend.
     You will generally do only three things with a MaybeUninit: create it using
the MaybeUninit::uninit method, write to its contents using MaybeUninit::as
_mut_ptr, or take the inner T once it is valid again with MaybeUninit::assume_init.
As its name implies, uninit creates a new MaybeUninit<T> of the same size as
a T that initially holds uninitialized memory. The as_mut_ptr method gives
you a raw pointer to the inner T that you can then write to; nothing stops
you from reading from it, but reading from any of the uninitialized bits is
undefined behavior. And finally, the unsafe assume_init method consumes
the MaybeUninit<T> and returns its contents as a T following the assertion that
the backing memory now makes up a valid T.
     Listing 9-5 shows an example of how we might use MaybeUninit to safely
initialize a byte array without explicitly zeroing it.

                  fn fill(gen: impl FnMut() -> Option<u8>) {
                       let mut buf = [MaybeUninit::<u8>::uninit(); 4096];
                       let mut last = 0;
                       for (i, g) in std::iter::from_fn(gen).take(4096).enumerate() {
                           buf[i] = MaybeUninit::new(g);
                           last = i + 1;
                       }
                       // Safety: all the u8s up to last are initialized.
                  let init: &[u8] = unsafe {
                     MaybeUninit::slice_assume_init_ref(&buf[..last])
                  };
                       // ... do something with init ...
                  }

Listing 9-5: Using MaybeUninit to safely initialize an array

                       While we could have declared buf as [0; 4096] instead, that would
                  require the function to first write out all those zeros to the stack before
                  executing, even if it’s going to overwrite them all again shortly thereafter.
                  Normally that wouldn’t have a noticeable impact on performance, but if
                  this was in a sufficiently hot loop, it might! Here, we instead allow the array
                  to keep whatever values happened to be on the stack when the function was
                  called, and then overwrite only what we end up needing.

       NOTE       Be careful with dropping partially initialized memory. If a panic causes an unex-
                  pected early drop before the MaybeUninit<T> has been fully initialized, you’ll have to
                  take care to drop only the parts of T that are now valid, if any. You can just drop the
                  MaybeUninit and have the backing memory forgotten, but if it holds, say, a Box, you
                  might end up with a memory leak!

                  Panics
                  An important and often overlooked aspect of ensuring that code using
                  unsafe operations is safe is that the code must also be prepared to handle
                  panics. In particular, as we discussed briefly in Chapter 5, Rust’s default
                  panic handler on most platforms will not crash your program on a panic
                  but will instead unwind the current thread. An unwinding panic effec-
                  tively drops everything in the current scope, returns from the current func-
                  tion, drops everything in the scope that enclosed the function, and so on,
                  all the way down the stack until it hits the first stack frame for the current
                  thread. If you don’t take unwinding into account in your unsafe code, you
                  may be in for trouble. For example, consider the code in Listing 9-6, which
                  tries to efficiently push many values into a Vec at once.

                  impl<T: Default> Vec<T> {
                      pub fn fill_default(&mut self) {
                          let fill = self.capacity() - self.len();
                          if fill == 0 { return; }
                          let start = self.len();
                          unsafe {
                              self.set_len(start + n);

              for i in 0..fill {
                  *self.get_unchecked_mut(start + i) = T::default();
              }
          }
    }
}

Listing 9-6: A seemingly safe method for filling a vector with Default values

    Consider what happens to this code if a call to T::default panics. First,
fill_default will drop all its local values (which are just integers) and then
return. The caller will then do the same. At some point up the stack, we
get to the owner of the Vec. When the owner drops the vector, we have a
problem: the length of the vector now indicates that we own more Ts than
we actually produced due to the call to set_len. For example, if the very
first call to T::default panicked when we aimed to fill eight elements, that
means Vec::drop will call drop on eight Ts that actually contain uninitialized
memory!
     The fix in this case is simple: the code must update the length after writ-
ing all the elements. We wouldn’t have realized there was a problem if we
didn’t carefully consider the effect of unwinding panics on the correctness
of our unsafe code.
     When you’re combing through your code for these kinds of problems,
you’ll want to look out for any statements that may panic, and consider
whether your code is safe if they do. Alternatively, check whether you can
convince yourself that the code in question will never panic. Pay particular
attention to anything that calls user-provided code—in those cases, you have
no control over the panics and should assume that the user code will panic.
     A similar situation arises when you use the ? operator to return early
from a function. If you do this, make sure that your code is still safe if it
does not execute the remainder of the code in the function. It’s rarer for ?
to catch you off guard since you opted into it explicitly, but it’s worth keep-
ing an eye out for.

Casting
As we discussed in Chapter 2, two different types that are both #[repr(Rust)]
may be represented differently in memory even if they have fields of the
same type and in the same order. This in turn means that it’s not always
obvious whether it is safe to cast between two different types. In fact, Rust
doesn’t even guarantee that two instances of a single type with generic
arguments that are themselves laid out the same way are represented the
same way. For example, in Listing 9-7, A and B are not guaranteed to have
the same in-memory representation.

struct Foo<T> {
    one: bool,
    two: PhantomData<T>,
}
struct Bar;
struct Baz;

                  type A = Foo<Bar>;
                  type B = Foo<Baz>;

Listing 9-7: Type layout is not predictable.

                       The lack of guarantees for repr(Rust) is important to keep in mind
                  when you do type casting in unsafe code—just because two types feel like
                  they should be interchangeable, that is not necessarily the case. Casting
                  between two types that have different representations is a quick path to
                  undefined behavior. At the time of writing, the Rust community is actively
                  working out the exact rules for how types are represented, but for now, very
                  few guarantees are given, so that’s what we have to work with.
                       Even if identical types were guaranteed to have the same in-memory
                  representation, you’d still run into the same problem when types are
                  nested. For example, while UnsafeCell<T>, MaybeUninit<T>, and T all really
                  just hold a T, and you can cast between them to your heart’s delight, that
                  goes out the window once you have, for example, an Option<MaybeUninit<T>>.
                  Though Option<T> may be able to take advantage of the niche optimization
                  (using some invalid value of T to represent None for the Option), MaybeUninit<T>
                  can hold any bit pattern, so that optimization does not apply, and an extra
                  byte must be kept for the Option discriminator.
                       It’s not just optimizations that can cause layouts to diverge once wrap-
                  per types come into play. As an example, take the code in Listing 9-8; here,
                  the layout of Wrapper<PhantomData<u8>> and Wrapper<PhantomData<i8>> is com-
                  pletely different even though the provided types are both empty!

                  struct Wrapper<T: SneakyTrait> {
                      item: T::Sneaky,
                      iter: PhantomData<T>,
                  }
                  trait SneakyTrait {
                      type Sneaky;
                  }
                  impl SneakyTrait for PhantomData<u8> {
                      type Sneaky = ();
                  }
                  impl SneakyTrait for PhantomData<i8> {
                      type Sneaky = [u8; 1024];
                  }

Listing 9-8: Wrapper types make casting hard to get right.

                       All of this isn’t to say that you can never cast types in Rust. Things get a
                  lot easier, for example, when you control all of the types involved and their
                  trait implementations, or if types are #[repr(C)]. You just need to be aware
                  that Rust gives very few guarantees about in-memory representations, and
                  write your code accordingly!

                  The Drop Check
                  The Rust borrow checker is, in essence, a sophisticated tool for ensuring
                  the soundness of code at compile time, which is in turn what gives Rust a

way to express code being “safe.” How exactly the borrow checker does its
job is beyond the scope of this book, but one check, the drop check, is worth
going through in some detail since it has some direct implications for
unsafe code. To understand drop checking, let’s put ourselves in the Rust
compiler’s shoes for a second and look at two code snippets. First, take a
look at the little three-liner in Listing 9-9 that takes a mutable reference to
a variable and then mutates that same variable right after.

let mut x = true;
let foo = Foo(&mut x);
x = false;

Listing 9-9: The implementation of Foo dictates whether this code should compile

     Without knowing the definition of Foo, can you say whether this code
should compile or not? When we set x = false, there is still a foo hanging
around that will be dropped at the end of the scope. We know that foo con-
tains a mutable borrow of x, which would indicate that the mutable borrow
that’s necessary to modify x is illegal. But what’s the harm in allowing it? It
turns out that allowing the mutation of x is problematic only if Foo imple-
ments Drop—if Foo doesn’t implement Drop, then we know that Foo won’t
touch the reference to x after its last use. Since that last use is before we
need the exclusive reference for the assignment, we can allow the code! On
the other hand, if Foo does implement Drop, we can’t allow this code, since
the Drop implementation may use the reference to x.
     Now that you’re warmed up, take a look at Listing 9-10. In this not-so-
straightforward code snippet, the mutable reference is buried even deeper.

fn barify<’a>(_: &’a mut i32) -> Bar<Foo<’a>> { .. }
let mut x = true;
let foo = barify(&mut x);
x = false;

Listing 9-10: The implementations of both Foo and Bar dictate whether this code should
compile

     Again, without knowing the definitions of Foo and Bar, can you say
whether this code should compile or not? Let’s consider what happens if
Foo implements Drop but Bar does not, since that’s the most interesting case.
Usually, when a Bar goes out of scope, or otherwise gets dropped, it’ll still
have to drop Foo, which in turn means that the code should be rejected for
the same reason as before: Foo::drop might access the reference to x. However,
Bar may not contain a Foo directly at all, but instead just a PhantomData<Foo<'a>>
or a &'static Foo<'a>, in which case the code is actually okay—even though
the Bar is dropped, Foo::drop is never invoked, and the reference to x is never
accessed. This is the kind of code we want the compiler to accept because a
human will be able to identify that it’s okay, even if the compiler finds it dif-
ficult to detect that this is the case.
     The logic we’ve just walked through is the drop check. Normally it
doesn’t affect unsafe code too much as its default behavior matches user
expectations, with one major exception: dangling generic parameters.

                  Imagine that you’re implementing your own Box<T> type, and someone
                  places a &mut x into it as we did in Listing 9-9. Your Box type needs to imple-
                  ment Drop to free memory, but it doesn’t access T beyond dropping it. Since
                  dropping a &mut does nothing, it should be entirely fine for code to access
                  &mut x again after the last time the Box is accessed but before it’s dropped!
                  To support types like this, Rust has an unstable feature called dropck_eye-
                  patch (because it makes the drop check partially blind). The feature is likely
                  to remain unstable forever and is intended to serve only as a temporary
                  escape hatch until a proper mechanism is devised. The dropck_eyepatch fea-
                  ture adds a #[may_dangle] attribute, which you can add as a prefix for generic
                  lifetimes and types in a type’s Drop implementation to tell the drop check
                  machinery that you won’t use the annotated lifetime or type beyond drop-
                  ping it. You use it by writing:

                  unsafe impl<#[may_dangle] T> Drop for ..

                       This escape hatch allows a type to declare that a given generic param-
                  eter isn’t used in Drop, which enables use cases like Box<&mut T>. However,
                  it also introduces a new problem if your Box<T> holds a raw heap pointer,
                  *mut T, and allows T to dangle using #[may_dangle]. Specifically, the *mut T
                  makes Rust’s drop check think that your Box<T> doesn’t own a T, and thus
                  that it doesn’t call T::drop either. Combined with the may_dangle assertion
                  that we don’t access T when the Box<T> is dropped, the drop check now con-
                  cludes that it’s fine to have a Box<T> where the T doesn’t live until the Box
                  is dropped (like our shortened &mut x in Listing 9-10). But that’s not true,
                  since we do call T::drop, which may itself access, say, a reference to said x.
                       Luckily, the fix is simple: we add a PhantomData<T> to tell the drop check
                  that even though the Box<T> doesn’t hold any T, and won’t access T on drop,
                  it does still own a T and will drop one when the Box is dropped. Listing 9-11
                  shows what our hypothetical Box type would look like.

                  struct Box<T> {
                    t: NonNull<T>, // NonNull not *mut for covariance (Chapter 1)
                    _owned: PhantomData<T>, // For drop check to realize we drop a T
                  }
                  unsafe impl<#[may_dangle] T> for Box<T> { /* ... */ }

Listing 9-11: A definition for Box that is maximally flexible in terms of the drop check

                       This interaction is subtle and easy to miss, but it arises only when you
                  use the unstable #[may_dangle] attribute. Hopefully this subsection will serve
                  as a warning so that when you see unsafe impl Drop in the wild in the future,
                  you’ll know to look for a PhantomData<T> as well!

       NOTE       Another consideration for unsafe code concerning Drop is to make sure that you have
                  a Type<T> that lets T continue to live after self is dropped. For example, if you’re
                  implementing delayed garbage collection, you need to also add T: 'static. Otherwise,
                  if T = WriteOnDrop<&mut U>, the later access or drop of T could trigger undefined
                  behavior!

Coping with Fear
        With this chapter mostly behind you, you may now be more afraid of unsafe
        code than you were before you started. While that is understandable, it’s
        important to stress that it’s not only possible to write safe unsafe code, but
        most of the time it’s not even that difficult. The key is to make sure that you
        handle unsafe code with care; that’s half the struggle. And be really sure
        that there isn’t a safe implementation you can use instead before resorting
        to unsafe.
             In the remainder of this chapter, we’ll look at some techniques and
        tools that can help you be more confident in the correctness of your unsafe
        code when there’s no way around it.

        Manage Unsafe Boundaries
        It’s tempting to reason about unsafety locally; that is, to consider whether
        the code in the unsafe block you just wrote is safe without thinking too
        much about its interaction with the rest of the codebase. Unfortunately,
        that kind of local reasoning often comes back to bite you. A good example
        of this is the Unpin trait—you may write some code for your type that uses
        Pin::new_unchecked to produce a pinned reference to a field of the type, and
        that code may be entirely safe when you write it. But then at some later
        point in time, you (or someone else) might add a safe implementation of
        Unpin for said type, and suddenly the unsafe code is no longer safe, even
        though it’s nowhere near the new impl!
              Safety is a property that can be checked only at the privacy boundary of
        all code that relates to the unsafe block. Privacy boundary here isn’t so much
        a formal term as an attempt at describing “any part of your code that can
        fiddle with the unsafe bits.” For example, if you declare a public type Foo in
        a module bar that is marked pub or pub(crate), then any other code in the
        same crate can implement methods on and traits for Foo. So, if the safety
        of your unsafe code depends on Foo not implementing particular traits or
        methods with particular signatures, you need to remember to recheck the
        safety of that unsafe block any time you add an impl for Foo. If, on the other
        hand, Foo is not visible to the entire crate, then a much smaller set of scopes
        is able to add problematic implementations, and thus, the risk of acciden-
        tally adding an implementation that breaks the safety invariants goes down
        accordingly. If Foo is private, then only the current module and any submod-
        ules can add such implementations.
              The same rule applies to access to fields: if the safety of an unsafe block
        depends on certain invariants over a type’s fields, then any code that can
        touch those fields (including safe code) falls within the privacy boundary
        of the unsafe block. Here, too, minimizing the privacy boundary is the
        best approach—code that cannot get to the fields cannot mess up your
        invariants!
              Because unsafe code often requires this wide-reaching reasoning,
        it’s best practice to encapsulate the unsafety in your code as best you can.
        Provide the unsafety in the form of a single module, and strive to give that

                  module an interface that is entirely safe. That way you only need to audit the
                  internals of that module for your invariants. Or better yet, stick the unsafe
                  bits in their own crate so that you can’t leave any holes open by accident!
                       It’s not always possible to fully encapsulate complex unsafe interac-
                  tions to a single, safe interface, however. When that’s the case, try to narrow
                  down the parts of the public interface that have to be unsafe so that you
                  have only a very small number of them, give them names that clearly com-
                  municate that care is needed, and then document them rigorously.
                       It is sometimes tempting to remove the unsafe marker on internal APIs
                  so that you don’t have to stick unsafe {} throughout your code. After all,
                  inside your code you know never to invoke frobnify if you’ve previously
                  called bazzify, right? Removing the unsafe annotation can lead to cleaner
                  code but is usually a bad decision in the long run. A year from now, when
                  your codebase has grown, you’ve paged out some of the safety invariants,
                  and you “ just want to hack together this one feature real quick,” chances
                  are that you’ll inadvertently violate one of those invariants. And since
                  you don’t have to type unsafe, you won’t even think to check. Plus, even
                  if you never make mistakes, what about other contributors to your code?
                  Ultimately, cleaner code is not a good enough argument to remove the
                  intentionally noisy unsafe marker.

                  Read and Write Documentation
                  It goes without saying that if you write an unsafe function, you must docu-
                  ment the conditions under which that function is safe to call. Here, both
                  clarity and completeness are important. Don’t leave any invariants out, even
                  if you’ve already written them somewhere else. If you have a type or module
                  that requires certain global invariants—invariants that must always hold for
                  all uses of the type—then remind the reader that they must also uphold the
                  global invariants in every unsafe function’s documentation too. Developers
                  often read documentation in an ad hoc, on-demand manner, so you can
                  assume they have probably not read your carefully written module-level
                  documentation and need to be given a nudge to do so.
                       What may be less obvious is that you should also document all unsafe
                  implementations and blocks—think of this as providing proof that you
                  do indeed uphold the contract the operation in question requires. For
                  example, slice::get_unchecked requires that the provided index is within the
                  bounds of the slice; when you call that method, put a comment just above
                  it explaining how you know that the index is in fact guaranteed to be in
                  bounds. In some cases, the invariants that the unsafe block requires are
                  extensive, and your comments may get long. That’s a good thing. I have
                  caught mistakes many times by trying to write the safety comment for an
                  unsafe block and realizing halfway through that I actually don’t uphold
                  a key invariant. You’ll also thank yourself a year down the road when you
                  have to modify this code and ensure it’s still safe. And so will the contribu-
                  tor to your project who just stumbled across this unsafe call and wants to
                  understand what’s going on.

     Before you get too deep into writing unsafe code, I also highly recom-
mend that you go read the Rustonomicon (https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/)
cover to cover. There are so many details that are easy to miss, and will
come back to bite you if you’re not aware of them. We’ve covered many
of them in this chapter, but it never hurts to be more aware. You should
also make liberal use of the Rust reference whenever you’re in doubt. It’s
added to regularly, and chances are that if you’re even slightly unsure about
whether some assumption you have is right, the reference will call it out. If
it doesn’t, consider opening an issue so that it’ll be added!

Check Your Work
Okay, so you’ve written some unsafe code, you’ve double- and triple-checked
all the invariants, and you think it’s ready to go. Before you put it into pro-
duction, there are some automated tools that you should run your test suite
through (you have a test suite, right?).
     The first of these is Miri, the mid-level intermediate representation
interpreter. Miri doesn’t compile your code into machine code but instead
interprets the Rust code directly. This provides Miri with far more visibility
into what your program is doing, which in turn allows it to check that your
program doesn’t do anything obviously bad, like read from uninitialized
memory. Miri can catch a lot of very subtle and Rust-specific bugs and is a
lifesaver for anyone writing unsafe code.
     Unfortunately, because Miri has to interpret the code to execute it, code
run under Miri often runs orders of magnitude slower than its compiled
counterpart. For that reason, Miri should really be used only to execute your
test suite. It can also check only the code that actually runs, and thus won’t
catch issues in code paths that your test suite doesn’t reach. You should think
of Miri as an extension of your test suite, not a replacement for it.
     There are also tools known as sanitizers, which instrument machine code
to detect erroneous behavior at runtime. The overhead and fidelity of these
tools vary greatly, but one widely loved tool is Google’s AddressSanitizer.
It detects a large number of memory errors, such as use-after-free, buffer
overflows, and memory leaks, all of which are common symptoms of incor-
rect unsafe code. Unlike Miri, these tools operate on machine code and thus
tend to be fairly fast—usually within the same order of magnitude. But like
Miri, they are constrained to analyzing the code that actually runs, so here
too a solid test suite is vital.
     The key to using these tools effectively is to automate them through
your continuous integration pipeline so they’re run for every change, and
to ensure that you add regression tests over time as you discover errors.
The tools get better at catching problems as the quality of your test suite
improves, so by incorporating new tests as you fix known bugs, you’re earn-
ing double points back, so to speak!
     Finally, don’t forget to sprinkle assertions generously through unsafe
code. A panic is always better than triggering undefined behavior! Check
all of your assumptions with assertions if you can—even things like the size

                  of a usize if you rely on that for safety. If you’re concerned about runtime
                  cost, make use of the debug_assert* macros and the if cfg!(debug_assertions)
                  || cfg!(test) construct to execute them only in debug and test contexts.

                                                 A HOUSE OF CARDS?

                      Unsafe code can violate all of Rust’s safety guarantees, and this is often touted
                      as a reason why Rust’s whole safety argument is a charade. The concern is
                      that it takes only one bit of incorrect unsafe code for the whole house to come
                      crashing down and all safety to be lost. Proponents of this argument then
                      sometimes argue that at the very least only unsafe code should be able to call
                      unsafe code, so that the unsafety is visible all the way to the highest level of the
                      application.
                            The argument is understandable—it is true that the safety of Rust code
                      relies on the safety of all the transitive unsafe code it ends up invoking. And
                      indeed, if some of that unsafe code is incorrect, it may have implications for
                      the safety of the program overall. However, what this argument misses is that
                      all successful safe languages provide a facility for language extensions that are
                      not expressible in the (safe) surface language, usually in the form of code writ-
                      ten in C or assembly. Just as Rust relies on the correctness of its unsafe code,
                      the safety of those languages relies on the correctness of those extensions.
                            Rust is different in that it doesn’t have a separate extension language, but
                      instead allows extensions to be written in what amounts to a dialect of Rust
                      (unsafe Rust). This allows much closer integration between the safe and unsafe
                      code, which in turn reduces the likelihood of errors due to impedance mis-
                      matches at the interface between the two, or due to developers being familiar
                      with one but not the other. The closer integration also makes it easier to write
                      tools that analyze the correctness of the unsafe code’s interaction with the safe
                      code, as exemplified by tools like Miri. And since unsafe Rust continues to be
                      subject to the borrow checker for any operation that isn’t explicitly unsafe, there
                      remain many safety checks in place that aren’t present when developers must
                      drop down to a language like C.

      Summary
                  In this chapter, we’ve walked through the powers that come with the unsafe
                  keyword and the responsibilities we accept by leveraging those powers. We
                  also talked about the consequences of writing unsafe unsafe code, and how
                  you really should be thinking about unsafe as a way to swear to the compiler
                  that you’ve manually checked that the indicated code is still safe. In the
                  next chapter, we’ll jump into concurrency in Rust and see how you can get
                  all those cores on your shiny new computer to pull in the same direction!

