                         10
              CONCURRENCY (AND
                PA R A L L E L I S M)

            With this chapter I hope to provide you
            with all the information and tools you’ll
          need to take effective advantage of concur-
        rency in your Rust programs, to implement
support for concurrent use in your libraries, and to
use Rust’s concurrency primitives correctly. I won’t
directly teach you how to implement a concurrent
data structure or write a high-performance concur-
rent application. Instead, my goal is to give you suf-
ficient understanding of the underlying mechanisms
that you’re equipped to wield them yourself for what-
ever you may need them for.
    Concurrency comes in three flavors: single-thread concurrency (like
with async/await, as we discussed in Chapter 8), single-core multithreaded
concurrency, and multicore concurrency, which yields true parallelism.
                    Each flavor allows the execution of concurrent tasks in your program to be
                    interleaved in different ways. There are even more subflavors if you take the
                    details of operating system scheduling and preemption into account, but we
                    won’t get too deep into that.
                         At the type level, Rust represents only one aspect of concurrency: multi-
                    threading. Either a type is safe for use by more than one thread, or it is not.
                    Even if your program has multiple threads (and so is concurrent) but only
                    one core (and so is not parallel), Rust must assume that if there are multiple
                    threads, there may be parallelism. Most of the types and techniques we’ll be
                    talking about apply equally whether two threads actually execute in parallel
                    or not, so to keep the language simple, I’ll be using the word concurrency
                    in the informal sense of “things running more or less at the same time”
                    throughout this chapter. When the distinction is important, I’ll call that out.
                         What’s particularly neat about Rust’s approach to type-based safe
                    ­multi­threading is that it is not a feature of the compiler, but rather a library
                     feature that developers can extend to develop sophisticated concurrency
                     contracts. Since thread safety is expressed in the type system through Send
                     and Sync implementations and bounds, which propagate all the way out
                     to application code, the thread safety of the entire program is checked
                     through type checking alone.
                         The Rust Programming Language already covers most of the basics when it
                     comes to concurrency, including the Send and Sync traits, Arc and Mutex, and
                     channels. I therefore won’t reiterate much of that here, except where it’s
                     worth repeating something specifically in the context of some other topic.
                     Instead, we’ll look at what makes concurrency difficult and some common
                     concurrency patterns intended to deal with those difficulties. We’ll also
                     explore how concurrency and asynchrony interact (and how they don’t)
                     before diving into how to use atomic operations to implement lower-level
                     concurrent operations. Finally, I’ll close out the chapter with some advice
                     for how to retain your sanity when working with concurrent code.

      The Trouble with Concurrency
                    Before we dive into good patterns for concurrent programming and the
                    details of Rust’s concurrency mechanisms, it’s worth taking some time to
                    understand why concurrency is challenging in the first place. That is, why
                    do we need special patterns and mechanisms for concurrent code?

                    Correctness
                    The primary difficulty in concurrency is coordinating access—in particular,
                    write access—to a resource that is shared among multiple threads. If lots of
                    threads want to share a resource solely for the purposes of reading it, then
                    that’s usually easy: you stick it in an Arc or place it in something you can
                    get a &'static to, and you’re all done. But once any thread wants to write,
                    all sorts of problems arise, usually in the form of data races. Briefly, a data
                    race occurs when one thread updates shared state while a second thread is
                    also accessing that state, either to read it or to update it. Without additional

safeguards in place, the second thread may read partially overwritten state,
clobber parts of what the first thread wrote, or fail to see the first thread’s
write at all! In general, all data races are considered undefined behavior.
     Data races are a part of a broader class of problems that primarily,
though not exclusively, occur in a concurrent setting: race conditions. A race
condition occurs whenever multiple outcomes are possible from a sequence
of instructions, depending on the relative timing of other events in the
system. These events can be threads executing a particular piece of code,
a timer going off, a network packet coming in, or any other time-variable
occurrence. Race conditions, unlike data races, are not inherently bad,
and are not considered undefined behavior. However, they are a breed-
ing ground for bugs when particularly peculiar races occur, as you’ll see
throughout this chapter.

Performance
Often, developers introduce concurrency into their programs in the
hope of increasing performance. Or, to be more precise, they hope that
concurrency will enable them to perform more operations per second in
aggregate by taking advantage of more hardware resources. This can be
done on a single core by having one thread run while another is waiting,
or across multiple cores by having threads do work simultaneously, one on
each core, that would otherwise happen serially on one core. Most devel-
opers are referring to the latter kind of performance gain when they talk
about concurrency, which is often framed in terms of scalability. Scalability
in this context means “the performance of this program scales with the
number of cores,” implying that if you give your program more cores, its
performance improves.
     While achieving such a speedup is possible, it’s harder than it seems.
The ultimate goal in scalability is linear scalability, where doubling the num-
ber of cores doubles the amount of work your program completes per unit
of time. Linear scalability is also often called perfect scalability. However, in
reality, few concurrent programs achieve such speedups. Sublinear scaling
is more common, where the throughput increases nearly linearly as you go
from one core to two, but adding more cores yields diminishing returns.
Some programs even experience negative scaling, where giving the program
access to more cores reduces throughput, usually because the many threads
are all contending for some shared resource.
     It might help to think of a group of people trying to pop all the bubbles
on a piece of bubble wrap—adding more people helps initially, but at some
point you get diminishing returns as the crowding makes any one person’s
job harder. If the humans involved are particularly ineffective, your group
may end up standing around discussing who should pop next and pop no
bubbles at all! This kind of interference among tasks that are supposed to
execute in parallel is called contention and is the archnemesis of scaling well.
Contention can arise in a number of ways, but the primary offenders are
mutual exclusion, shared resource exhaustion, and false sharing.

                   Mutual Exclusion
                   When only a single concurrent task is allowed to execute a particular piece
                   of code at any one time, we say that execution of that segment of code is
                   mutually exclusive—if one thread executes it, no other thread can do so
                   at the same time. The archetypal example of this is a mutual exclusion
                   lock, or mutex, which explicitly enforces that only one thread gets to enter
                   a particular critical section of your program code at any one time. Mutual
                   exclusion can also happen implicitly, however. For example, if you spin up
                   a thread to manage a shared resource and send jobs to it over an mpsc chan-
                   nel, that thread effectively implements mutual exclusion, since only one
                   such job gets to execute at a time.
                        Mutual exclusion can also occur when invoking operating system or
                   library calls that internally enforce single-threaded access to a critical sec-
                   tion. For example, for many years, the standard memory allocator required
                   mutual exclusion for some allocations, which made memory allocation an
                   operation that incurred significant contention in otherwise highly parallel
                   programs. Similarly, many operating system operations that may seem like
                   they should be independent, such as creating two files with different names
                   in the same directory, may end up having to happen sequentially inside the
                   kernel.

       NOTE        Scalable concurrent allocations is the raison d’être for the jemalloc memory allocator!

                       Mutual exclusion is the most obvious barrier to parallel speedup since,
                   by definition, it forces serial execution of some portion of your program.
                   Even if you make the remainder of your program scale with the number of
                   cores perfectly, the total speedup you can achieve is limited by the length of
                   the mutually exclusive, serial section. Be mindful of your mutually exclusive
                   sections, and seek to restrict them to only where strictly necessary.

       NOTE        For the theoretically minded, the limits on the achievable speedup as a result of mutu-
                   ally exclusive sections of code can be computed using Amdahl’s law.

                   Shared Resource Exhaustion
                   Unfortunately, even if you achieve perfect concurrency within your tasks,
                   the environment those tasks need to interact with may itself not be perfectly
                   scalable. The kernel can handle only so many sends on a given TCP socket
                   per second, the memory bus can do only so many reads at once, and your
                   GPU has a limited capacity for concurrency. There’s no cure for this. The
                   environment is usually where perfect scalability falls apart in practice, and
                   fixes for such cases tend to require substantial re-engineering (or even new
                   hardware!), so we won’t talk much more about this topic in this chapter. Just
                   remember that scalability is rarely something you can “achieve,” and more
                   something you just strive for.

False Sharing
False sharing occurs when two operations that shouldn’t contend with one
another contend anyway, preventing efficient simultaneous execution. This
usually happens because the two operations happen to intersect on some
shared resource even though they use unrelated parts of that resource.
      The simplest example of this is lock oversharing, where a lock guards
some composite state, and two operations that are otherwise independent
both need to take the lock to update their particular parts of the state.
This in turn means the operations must execute serially instead of in paral-
lel. In some cases it’s possible to split the single lock into two, one for each
of the disjoint parts, which enables the operations to proceed in parallel.
However, it’s not always straightforward to split a lock like this—the state
may share a single lock because some third operation needs to lock over
all the parts of the state. Usually you can still split the lock, but you have to
be careful about the order in which different threads take the split locks to
avoid deadlocks that can occur when two operations attempt to take them
in different orders (look up the “dining philosophers problem,” if you’re
curious). Alternatively, for some problems, you may be able to avoid the
critical section entirely by using a lock-free version of the underlying algo-
rithm, though those are also tricky to get right. Ultimately, false sharing is a
hard problem to solve, and there isn’t a single catchall solution—but identi-
fying the problem is a good start.
      A more subtle example of false sharing occurs on the CPU level, as we
discussed briefly in Chapter 2. The CPU internally operates on memory in
terms of cache lines—longer sequences of consecutive bytes in memory—
rather than individual bytes, to amortize the cost of memory accesses. For
example, on most Intel processors, the cache line size is 64 bytes. This
means that every memory operation really ends up reading or writing some
multiple of 64 bytes. The false sharing comes into play when two cores
want to update the value of two different bytes that happen to fall on the
same cache line; those updates must execute sequentially even though the
updates are logically disjoint.
      This might seem too low-level to matter, but in practice this kind of
false sharing can decimate the parallel speedup of an application. Imagine
that you allocate an array of integer values to indicate how many operations
each thread has completed, but the integers all fall within the same cache
line—now, all your otherwise parallel threads will contend on that one
cache line for every operation they perform. If the operations are relatively
quick, most of your execution time may end up being spent contending on
those counters!
      The trick to avoiding false cache line sharing is to pad your values so
that they are the size of a cache line. That way, two adjacent values always
fall on different cache lines. But of course, this also inflates the size of your
data structures, so use this approach only when benchmarks indicate a
problem.

                                             THE COS T OF SCAL ABILIT Y

                        A somewhat orthogonal aspect of concurrency that you should be mindful of is
                        the cost of introducing concurrency in the first place. Compilers are really good
                        at optimizing single-threaded code—they’ve been doing it for a long time, after
                        all—and single-threaded code tends to get away with fewer expensive safe-
                        guards (like locks, channels, or atomic instructions) than concurrent code can.
                        In aggregate, the various costs of concurrency can make a parallel program
                        slower than its single-threaded counterpart, given any number of cores! This is
                        why it’s important to measure both before and after you optimize and parallel-
                        ize: the results may surprise you.
                              If you’re curious about this topic, I highly recommend you read Frank
                        McSherry’s 2015 paper “Scalability! But at what COST?” (https://www
                        .frankmcsherry.org/assets/COST.pdf), which uncovers some particularly
                        egregious examples of “costly scaling.”

      Concurrency Models
                    Rust has three patterns for adding concurrency to your programs that
                    you’ll come across fairly often: shared memory concurrency, worker pools,
                    and actors. Going through every way you could add concurrency in detail
                    would take a book of its own, so here I’ll focus on just these three patterns.

                    Shared Memory
                    Shared memory concurrency is, conceptually, very straightforward: the
                    threads cooperate by operating on regions of memory shared between
                    them. This might take the form of state guarded by a mutex or stored in
                    a hash map with support for concurrent access from many threads. The
                    many threads may be doing the same task on disjoint pieces of data, such
                    as if many threads perform some function over disjoint subranges of a Vec,
                    or they may be performing different tasks that require some shared state,
                    such as in a database where one thread handles user queries to a table
                    while another optimizes the data structures used to store that table in the
                    background.
                         When you use shared memory concurrency, your choice of data struc-
                    tures is significant, especially if the threads involved need to cooperate
                    very closely. A regular mutex might prevent scaling beyond a very small
                    number of cores, a reader/writer lock might allow many more concurrent
                    reads at the cost of slower writes, and a sharded reader/writer lock might
                    allow perfectly scalable reads at the cost of making writes highly disruptive.
                    Similarly, some concurrent hash maps aim for good all-round performance
                    while others specifically target, say, concurrent reads where writes are rare.
                    In general, in shared memory concurrency, you want to use data structures

       that are specifically designed for something as close to your target use case
       as possible, so that you can take advantage of optimizations that trade off
       performance aspects your application does not care about for those it does.
           Shared memory concurrency is a good fit for use cases where threads
       need to jointly update some shared state in a way that does not commute.
       That is, if one thread has to update the state s with some function f, and
       another has to update the state with some function g, and f(g(s)) != g(f(s)),
       then shared memory concurrency is likely necessary. If that is not the case,
       the other two patterns are likely better fits, as they tend to lead to simpler
       and more performant designs.

NOTE   Some problems have known algorithms that can provide concurrent shared memory
       operations without the use of locks. As the number of cores grows, these lock-free
       algorithms may scale better than lock-based algorithms, though they also often have
       slower per-core performance due to their complexity. As always with performance mat-
       ters, benchmark first, then look for alternative solutions.

       Worker Pools
       In the worker pool model, many identical threads receive jobs from a
       shared job queue, which they then execute entirely independently. Web
       servers, for example, often have a worker pool handling incoming connec-
       tions, and multithreaded runtimes for asynchronous code tend to use a
       worker pool to collectively execute all of an application’s futures (or, more
       accurately, its top-level tasks).
            The lines between shared memory concurrency and worker pools are
       often blurry, as worker pools tend to use shared memory concurrency to
       coordinate how they take jobs from the queue and how they return incom-
       plete jobs back to the queue. For example, say you’re using the data paral-
       lelism library rayon to perform some function over every element of a vector
       in parallel. Behind the scenes rayon spins up a worker pool, splits the vector
       into subranges, and then hands out subranges to the threads in the pool.
       When a thread in the pool finishes a range, rayon arranges for it to start
       working on the next unprocessed subrange. The vector is shared among all
       the worker threads, and the threads coordinate through a shared memory
       queue–like data structure that supports work stealing.
            Work stealing is a key feature of most worker pools. The basic premise
       is that if one thread finishes its work early, and there’s no more unassigned
       work available, that thread can steal jobs that have already been assigned to
       a different worker thread but haven’t been started yet. Not all jobs take the
       same amount of time to complete, so even if every worker is given the same
       number of jobs, some workers may end up finishing their jobs more quickly
       than others. Rather than sit around and wait for the threads that drew
       longer-running jobs to complete, those threads that finish early should help
       the stragglers so the overall operation is completed sooner.
            It’s quite a task to implement a data structure that supports this kind
       of work stealing without incurring significant overhead from threads con-
       stantly trying to steal work from one another, but this feature is vital to a

                   high-performance worker pool. If you find yourself in need of a worker
                   pool, your best bet is usually to use one that has already seen a lot of work
                   go into it, or at least reuse data structures from an existing one, rather than
                   to write one yourself from scratch.
                        Worker pools are a good fit when the work that each thread performs is
                   the same, but the data it performs it on varies. In a rayon parallel map opera-
                   tion, every thread performs the same map computation; they just perform
                   it on different subsets of the underlying data. In a multithreaded asynchro-
                   nous runtime, each thread simply calls Future::poll; they just call it on dif-
                   ferent futures. If you start having to distinguish between the threads in your
                   thread pool, a different design is probably more appropriate.

                                                 CONNEC TION POOL S

                       A connection pool is a shared memory construct that keeps a set of established
                       connections and hands them out to threads that need a connection. It’s a com-
                       mon design pattern in libraries that manage connections to external services.
                       If a thread needs a connection but one isn’t available, either a new connection
                       is established or the thread is forced to block. When a thread is done with a
                       connection, it returns that connection to the pool, and thus makes it available to
                       other threads that may be waiting.
                             Usually, the hardest task for a connection pool is managing connection
                       life cycles. A connection can be returned to the pool in whatever state it was
                       put in by the last thread that used it. The connection pool therefore has to make
                       sure any state associated with the connection, whether on the client or on the
                       server, has been reset so that when the connection is subsequently used by
                       another thread, that thread can act as though it was given a fresh, dedicated
                       connection.

                   Actors
                   The actor concurrency model is, in many ways, the opposite of the worker
                   pool model. Whereas the worker pool has many identical threads that
                   share a job queue, the actor model has many separate job queues, one
                   for each job “topic.” Each job queue feeds into a particular actor, which
                   handles all jobs that pertain to a subset of the application’s state. That state
                   might be a database connection, a file, a metrics collection data structure,
                   or any other structure that you can imagine many threads may need to be
                   able to access. Whatever it is, a single actor owns that state, and if some
                   task wants to interact with that state, it needs to send a message to the
                   owning actor summarizing the operation it wishes to perform. When the
                   owning actor receives that message, it performs the indicated action and
                   responds to the inquiring task with the result of the operation, if relevant.

        Since the actor has exclusive access to its inner resource, no locks or other
        synchronization mechanisms are required beyond what’s needed for the
        messaging.
              A key point in the actor pattern is that actors all talk to one another.
        If, say, an actor that is responsible for logging needs to write to a file and a
        database table, it might send off messages to the actors responsible for each
        of those, asking them to perform the respective actions, and then proceed
        to the next log event. In this way, the actor model more closely resembles a
        web than spokes on a wheel—a user request to a web server might start as a
        single request to the actor responsible for that connection but might transi-
        tively spawn tens, hundreds, or even thousands of messages to actors deeper
        in the system before the user’s request is satisfied.
              Nothing in the actor model requires that each actor is its own thread. To
        the contrary, most actor systems suggest that there should be a large number
        of actors, and so each actor should map to a task rather than a thread. After
        all, actors require exclusive access to their wrapped resources only when
        they execute, and do not care whether they are on a thread of their own
        or not. In fact, very frequently, the actor model is used in conjunction with
        the worker pool model—for example, an application that uses the multi-
        threaded asynchronous runtime Tokio can spawn an asynchronous task for
        each actor, and Tokio will then make the execution of each actor a job in its
        worker pool. Thus, the execution of a given actor may move from thread to
        thread in the worker pool as the actor yields and resumes, but every time the
        actor executes it maintains exclusive access to its wrapped resource.
              The actor concurrency model is well suited for when you have many
        resources that can operate relatively independently, and where there is
        little or no opportunity for concurrency within each resource. For example,
        an operating system might have an actor responsible for each hardware
        device, and a web server might have an actor for each backend database
        connection. The actor model does not work so well if you need only a few
        actors, if work is skewed significantly among the actors, or if some actors
        grow large—in all of those cases, your application may end up being bottle-
        necked on the execution speed of a single actor in the system. And since
        actors each expect to have exclusive access to their little slice of the world,
        you can’t easily parallelize the execution of that one bottleneck actor.

Asynchrony and Parallelism
        As we discussed in Chapter 8, asynchrony in Rust enables concurrency
        without parallelism—we can use constructs like selects and joins to have
        a single thread poll multiple futures and continue when one, some, or all
        of them complete. Because there is no parallelism involved, concurrency
        with futures does not fundamentally require those futures to be Send. Even
        spawning a future to run as an additional top-level task does not fundamen-
        tally require Send, since a single executor thread can manage the polling of
        many futures at once.

                         However, in most cases, applications want both concurrency and parallel-
                   ism. For example, if a web application constructs a future for each incoming
                   connection and so has many active connections at once, it probably wants the
                   asynchronous executor to be able to take advantage of more than one core
                   on the host computer. That won’t happen naturally: your code has to explic-
                   itly tell the executor which futures can run in parallel and which cannot.
                         In particular, two pieces of information must be given to the executor
                   to let it know that it can spread the work in the futures across a worker pool
                   of threads. The first is that the futures in question are Send—if they aren’t,
                   the executor is not allowed to send the futures to other threads for process-
                   ing, and no parallelism is possible; only the thread that constructed such
                   futures can poll them.
                         The second piece of information is how to split the futures into tasks
                   that can operate independently. This ties back to the discussion of tasks ver-
                   sus futures from Chapter 8: if one giant Future contains a number of Future
                   instances that themselves correspond to tasks that can run in parallel, the
                   executor must still call poll on the top-level Future, and it must do so from
                   a single thread, since poll requires &mut self. Thus, to achieve parallelism
                   with futures, you have to explicitly spawn the futures you want to be able to
                   run in parallel. Also, because of the first requirement, the executor func-
                   tion you use to do so will require that the passed-in Future is Send.

                            A S Y NCHRONOUS S Y NCHRONIZ ATION PRIMITI V ES

                       Most of the synchronization primitives that exist for blocking code (think
                       std::sync) also have asynchronous counterparts. There are asynchronous vari-
                       ants of channels, mutexes, reader/writer locks, barriers, and all sorts of other
                       similar constructs. We need these because, as discussed in Chapter 8, blocking
                       inside a future will hold up other work the executor may need to do, and so is
                       inadvisable.
                             However, the asynchronous versions of these primitives are often slower
                       than their synchronous counterparts because of the additional machinery
                       needed to perform the necessary wake-ups. For that reason, you may want to
                       use synchronous synchronization primitives even in asynchronous contexts when-
                       ever the use does not risk blocking the executor. For example, while it’s generally
                       true that acquiring a Mutex might block for a long time, that might not be true for
                       a particular Mutex that, perhaps, is acquired only rarely, and only ever for short
                       periods of time. In that case, blocking for the short time until the Mutex becomes
                       available again might not actually cause any problems. You will want to make
                       sure that you never yield or perform other long-running operations while holding
                       the MutexGuard, but barring that you shouldn’t run into problems.
                             As always with such optimizations, though, make sure you measure first,
                       and choose only the synchronous primitive if it nets you significant performance
                       improvements. If it does not, the additional footguns introduced by using a syn-
                       chronous primitive in an asynchronous context are probably not worth it.

Lower-Level Concurrency
        The standard library provides the std::sync::atomic module, which pro-
        vides access to the underlying CPU primitives, higher-level constructs like
        channels and mutexes are built with. These primitives come in the form
        of atomic types with names starting with Atomic— AtomicUsize, AtomicI32,
        AtomicBool, AtomicPtr, and so on—the Ordering type, and two functions
        called fence and compiler_fence. We’ll look at each of these over the next few
        sections.
             These types are the blocks used to build any code that has to communi-
        cate between threads. Mutexes, channels, barriers, concurrent hash tables,
        lock-free stacks, and all other synchronization constructs ultimately rely on
        these few primitives to do their jobs. They also come in handy on their own
        for lightweight cooperation between threads where heavyweight synchroni-
        zation like a mutex is excessive—for example, to increment a shared coun-
        ter or set a shared Boolean to true.
             The atomic types are special in that they have defined semantics for
        what happens when multiple threads try to access them concurrently. These
        types all support (mostly) the same API: load, store, fetch_*, and compare_
        exchange. In the rest of this section, we’ll look at what those do, how to use
        them correctly, and what they’re useful for. But first, we have to talk about
        low-level memory operations and memory ordering.

        Memory Operations
        Informally, we often refer to accessing variables as “reading from” or “writ-
        ing to” memory. In reality, a lot of machinery between code uses a variable
        and the actual CPU instructions that access your memory hardware. It’s
        important to understand that machinery, at least at a high level, in order to
        understand how concurrent memory accesses behave.
             The compiler decides what instructions to emit when your program
        reads the value of a variable or assigns a new value to it. It is permitted to
        perform all sorts of transformations and optimizations on your code and
        may end up reordering your program statements, eliminating operations
        it deems redundant, or using CPU registers rather than actual memory to
        store intermediate computations. The compiler is subject to a number of
        restrictions on these transformations, but ultimately only a subset of your
        variable accesses actually end up as memory access instructions.
             At the CPU level, memory instructions come in two main shapes: loads
        and stores. A load pulls bytes from a location in memory into a CPU regis-
        ter, and a store stores bytes from a CPU register into a location in memory.
        Loads and stores operate on small chunks of memory at a time: usually
        8 bytes or less on modern CPUs. If a variable access spans more bytes than
        can be accessed with a single load or store, the compiler automatically turns
        it into multiple load or store instructions, as appropriate. The CPU also has
        some leeway in how it executes a program’s instructions to make better use
        of the hardware and improve program performance. For example, modern
        CPUs often execute instructions in parallel, or even out of order, when they
        don’t have dependencies on each other. There are also several layers of caches

                   between each CPU and your computer’s DRAM, which means that a load
                   of a given memory location may not necessarily see the latest store to that
                   memory location, going by wall-clock time.
                        In most code, the compiler and CPU are permitted to transform the
                   code only in ways that don’t affect the semantics of the resulting program,
                   so these transformations are invisible to the programmer. However, in the
                   context of parallel execution, these transformations can have a significant
                   impact on application behavior. Therefore, CPUs typically provide multiple
                   different variations of the load and store instructions, each with different
                   guarantees about how the CPU may reorder them and how they may be
                   interleaved with parallel operations on other CPUs. Similarly, compilers (or
                   rather, the language the compiler compiles) provide different annotations
                   you can use to force particular execution constraints for some subset of
                   their memory accesses. In Rust, those annotations come in the form of the
                   atomic types and their methods, which we’ll spend the rest of this section
                   picking apart.

                   Atomic Types
                   Rust’s atomic types are so called because they can be accessed atomically—
                   that is, the value of an atomic-type variable is written all at once and will
                   never be written using multiple stores, guaranteeing that a load of that vari-
                   able cannot observe that only some of the bytes composing the value have
                   changed while others have not (yet). This is easiest understood by way of
                   contrast with non-atomic types. For example, reassigning a new value to a
                   tuple of type (i64, i64) typically requires two CPU store instructions, one
                   for each 8-byte value. If one thread were to perform both of those stores,
                   another thread could (if we ignore the borrow checker for a second) read
                   the tuple’s value after the first store but before the second, and thus end up
                   with an inconsistent view of the tuple’s value. It would end up reading the
                   new value for the first element and the old value for the second element, a
                   value that was never actually stored by any thread.
                        The CPU can atomically access values only of certain sizes, so there are
                   only a few atomic types, all of which live in the atomic module. Each atomic
                   type is of one of the sizes the CPU supports atomic access to, with multiple
                   variations for things like whether the value is signed and to differentiate
                   between an atomic usize and a pointer (which is of the same size as usize).
                   Furthermore, the atomic types have explicit methods for loading and stor-
                   ing the values they hold, and a handful of more complex methods we’ll get
                   back to later, so that the mapping between the code the programmer writes
                   and the resulting CPU instructions is clearer. For example, AtomicI32::load
                   performs a single load of a signed 32-bit value, and AtomicPtr::store per-
                   forms a single store of a pointer-sized (64 bits on a 64-bit platform) value.

                   Memory Ordering
                   Most of the methods on the atomic types take an argument of type Ordering,
                   which dictates the memory ordering restrictions the atomic operation is
                   subject to. Across different threads, loads and stores of an atomic value

may be sequenced by the compiler and CPU only in interleavings that are
compatible with the requested memory ordering of each of the atomic
operations on that atomic value. Over the next few sections, we’ll see some
examples of why control over the ordering is important and necessary to get
the expected semantics out of the compiler and CPU.
     Memory ordering often comes across as counterintuitive, because we
humans like to read programs from top to bottom and imagine that they
execute line by line—but that’s not how the code actually executes when
it hits the hardware. Memory accesses can be reordered, or even entirely
elided, and writes on one thread may not immediately be visible to other
threads, even if later writes in program order have already been observed.
     Think of it like this: each memory location sees a sequence of modifica-
tions coming from different threads, and the sequences of modifications for
different memory locations are independent. If two threads T1 and T2 both
write to memory location M, then even if T1 executed first as measured by
a user with a stopwatch, T2’s write to M may still appear to have happened
first for M absent any other constraints between the two threads’ execution.
Essentially, the computer does not take wall-clock time into account when it deter-
mines the value of a given memory location—all that matter are the execu-
tion constraints the programmer puts on what constitutes a valid execution.
For example, if T1 writes to M and then spawns thread T2, which then
writes to M, the computer must recognize T1’s write as having happened
first because T2’s existence depends on T1.
     If that’s hard to follow, don’t fret—memory ordering can be mind-
bending, and language specifications tend to use very precise but not very
intuitive wording to describe it. We can construct a mental model that’s
easier to grasp, if a little simplified, by instead focusing on the underlying
hardware architecture. Very basically, your computer memory is structured
as a treelike hierarchy of storage where the leaves are CPU registers and
the roots are the storage on your physical memory chips, often called main
memory. Between the two are several layers of caches, and different lay-
ers of the hierarchy can reside on different pieces of hardware. When a
thread performs a store to a memory location, what really happens is that
the CPU starts a write request for the value in a given CPU register that
then has to make its way up the memory hierarchy toward main memory.
When a thread performs a load, the request flows up the hierarchy until it
hits a layer that has the value available, and returns from there. Herein lies
the problem: writes aren’t visible everywhere until all caches of the written
memory location have been updated, but other CPUs can execute instruc-
tions against the same memory location at the same time, and weirdness
ensues. Memory ordering, then, is a way to request precise semantics for
what happens when multiple CPUs access a particular memory location for
a particular operation.
     With this in mind, let’s take a look at the Ordering type, which is the
primary mechanism by which we, as programmers, can dictate additional
constraints on what concurrent executions are valid.
     Ordering is defined as an enum with the variants shown in Listing 10-1.

                   enum Ordering {
                       Relaxed,
                       Release,
                       Acquire,
                       AcqRel,
                       SeqCst
                   }

Listing 10-1: The definition of Ordering

                      Each of these places different restrictions on the mapping from source
                   code to execution semantics, and we’ll explore each one in turn in the
                   remainder of this section.

                   Relaxed Ordering
                   Relaxed ordering essentially guarantees nothing about concurrent
                   access to the value beyond the fact that the access is atomic. In particular,
                   relaxed ordering gives no guarantees about the relative ordering of mem-
                   ory accesses across different threads. This is the weakest form of memory
                   ordering. Listing 10-2 shows a simple program in which two threads access
                   two atomic variables using Ordering::Relaxed.

                   static X: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);
                   static Y: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);

                   let t1 = spawn(|| {
                     1 let r1 = Y.load(Ordering::Relaxed);
                     2 X.store(r1, Ordering::Relaxed);
                   });
                   let t2 = spawn(|| {
                     3 let r2 = X.load(Ordering::Relaxed);
                     4 Y.store(true, Ordering::Relaxed)
                   });

Listing 10-2: Two racing threads with Ordering::Relaxed

                        Looking at the thread spawned as t2, you might expect that r2 can
                   never be true, since all values are false until the same thread assigns true to
                   Y on the line after reading X. However, with a relaxed memory ordering, that
                   outcome is completely possible. The reason is that the CPU is allowed to
                   reorder the loads and stores involved. Let’s walk through exactly what hap-
                   pens here to make r2 = true possible.
                        First, the CPU notices that 4 doesn’t have to happen after 3, since 4
                   doesn’t use any output or side effect of 3. That is, 4 has no execution depen-
                   dency on 3. So, the CPU decides to reorder them for *waves hands* reasons
                   that’ll make your program go faster. The CPU thus goes ahead and executes 4
                   first, setting Y = true, even though 3 hasn’t run yet. Then, t2 is put to sleep
                   by the operating system and thread t1 executes a few instructions, or t1 sim-
                   ply executes on another core. In t1, the compiler must indeed run 1 first and
                   then 2, since 2 depends on the value read in 1. Therefore, t1 reads true from

       Y (written by 4) into r1 and then writes that back to X. Finally, t2 executes 3,
       which reads X and gets true, as was written by 2.
             The relaxed memory ordering allows this execution because it imposes
       no additional constraints on concurrent execution. That is, under relaxed
       memory ordering, the compiler must ensure only that execution dependen-
       cies on any given thread are respected (just as if atomics weren’t involved);
       it need not make any promises about the interleaving of concurrent opera-
       tions. Reordering 3 and 4 is permitted for a single-threaded execution, so
       it is permitted under relaxed ordering as well.
             In some cases, this kind of reordering is fine. For example, if you have a
       counter that just keeps track of metrics, it doesn’t really matter when exactly
       it executes relative to other instructions, and Ordering::Relaxed is fine. In
       other cases, this could be disastrous: say, if your program uses r2 to figure
       out if security protections have already been set up, and thus ends up erro-
       neously believing that they already have been.
             You don’t generally notice this reordering when writing code that
       doesn’t make fancy use of atomics—the CPU has to promise that there is
       no observable difference between the code as written and what each thread
       actually executes, so everything seems like it runs in order just as you wrote
       it. This is referred to as respecting program order or evaluation order; the
       terms are synonyms.

       Acquire/Release Ordering
       At the next step up in the memory ordering hierarchy, we have
       Ordering::Acquire, Ordering::Release, and Ordering::AcqRel (acquire plus
       release). At a high level, these establish an execution dependency between
       a store in one thread and a load in another and then restrict how opera-
       tions can be reordered with respect to that load and store. Crucially, these
       dependencies not only establish a relationship between a store and a load of
       a single value, but also put ordering constraints on other loads and stores in
       the threads involved. This is because every execution must respect the pro-
       gram order; if a load in thread B has a dependency on some store in thread
       A (the store in A must execute before the load in B), then any read or write
       in B after that load must also happen after that store in A.

NOTE   The Acquire memory ordering can be applied only to loads, Release only to stores,
       and AcqRel only to operations that both load and store (like fetch_add).

           Concretely, these memory orderings place the following restrictions on
       execution:

       1. Loads and stores cannot be moved forward past a store with
          Ordering::Release.
       2. Loads and stores cannot be moved back before a load with
          Ordering::Acquire.
       3. An Ordering::Acquire load of a variable must see all stores that happened
          before an Ordering::Release store that stored what the load loaded.

                        To see how these memory orderings change things, Listing 10-3 shows
                   Listing 10-2 again but with the memory ordering swapped out for Acquire
                   and Release.

                   static X: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);
                   static Y: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);

                   let t1 = spawn(|| {
                       let r1 = Y.load(Ordering::Acquire);
                       X.store(r1, Ordering::Release);
                   });
                   let t2 = spawn(|| {
                     1 let r2 = X.load(Ordering::Acquire);
                     2 Y.store(true, Ordering::Release)
                   });

Listing 10-3: Listing 10-2 with Acquire/Release memory ordering

                       These additional restrictions mean that it is no longer possible for t2 to
                   see r2 = true. To see why, consider the primary cause of the weird outcome
                   in Listing 10-2: the reordering of 1 and 2. The very first restriction, on
                   stores with Ordering::Release, dictates that we cannot move 1 below 2, so
                   we’re all good!
                       But these rules are useful beyond this simple example. For example,
                   imagine that you implement a mutual exclusion lock. You want to make
                   sure that any loads and stores a thread runs while it holds the lock are exe-
                   cuted only while it’s actually holding the lock, and visible to any thread that
                   takes the lock later. This is exactly what Release and Acquire enable you to
                   do. By performing a Release store to release the lock and an Acquire load to
                   acquire the lock, you can guarantee that the loads and stores in the critical
                   section are never moved to before the lock was actually acquired or to after
                   the lock was released!

       NOTE        On some CPU architectures, like x86, Acquire/Release ordering is guaranteed
                   by the hardware, and there is no additional cost to using Ordering::Release and
                   Ordering::Acquire over Ordering::Relaxed. On other architectures that is not the
                   case, and your program may see speedups if you switch to Relaxed for atomic opera-
                   tions that can tolerate the weaker memory ordering guarantees.

                   Sequentially Consistent Ordering
                   Sequentially consistent ordering (Ordering::SeqCst) is the strongest memory
                   ordering we have access to. Its exact guarantees are somewhat hard to nail
                   down, but very broadly, it requires not only that each thread sees results
                   consistent with Acquire/Release, but also that all threads see the same order-
                   ing as one another. This is best seen by way of contrast with the behavior of
                   Acquire and Release. Specifically, Acquire/Release ordering does not guaran-
                   tee that if two threads A and B atomically load values written by two other
                   threads X and Y, A and B will see a consistent pattern of when X wrote
                   relative to Y. That’s fairly abstract, so consider the example in Listing 10-4,

which shows a case where Acquire/Release ordering can produce unexpected
results. Afterwards, we’ll see how sequentially consistent ordering avoids
that particular unexpected outcome.

static X: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);
static Y: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);
static Z: AtomicI32 = AtomicI32::new(0);

let t1 = spawn(|| {
    X.store(true, Ordering::Release);
});
let t2 = spawn(|| {
    Y.store(true, Ordering::Release);
});
let t3 = spawn(|| {
    while (!X.load(Ordering::Acquire)) {}
  1 if (Y.load(Ordering::Acquire)) {
        Z.fetch_add(1, Ordering::Relaxed); }
});
let t4 = spawn(|| {
    while (!Y.load(Ordering::Acquire)) {}
  2 if (X.load(Ordering::Acquire)) {
        Z.fetch_add(1, Ordering::Relaxed); }
});

Listing 10-4: Weird results with Acquire/Release ordering

     The two threads t1 and t2 set X and Y to true, respectively. Thread t3
waits for X to be true; once X is true, it checks if Y is true and, if so, adds 1 to
Z. Thread t4 instead waits for Y to become true, and then checks if X is true
and, if so, adds 1 to Z. At this point the question is: what are the possible
values for Z after all the threads terminate? Before I show you the answer,
try to work your way through it given the definitions of Release and Acquire
ordering in the previous section.
     First, let’s recap the conditions under which Z is incremented. Thread t3
increments Z if it sees that Y is true after it observes that X is true, which can
happen only if t2 runs before t3 evaluates the load at 1. Conversely, thread
t4 increments Z if it sees that X is true after it observes that Y is true, so only if
t1 runs before t4 evaluates the load at 2. To simplify the explanation, let’s
assume for now that each thread runs to completion once it runs.
     Logically, then, Z can be incremented twice if the threads run in the
order 1, 2, 3, 4—both X and Y are set to true, and then t3 and t4 run to find
that their conditions for incrementing Z are met. Similarly, Z can trivially
be incremented just once if the threads run in the order 1, 3, 2, 4. This sat-
isfies t4’s condition for incrementing Z, but not t3’s. Getting Z to be 0, how-
ever, seems impossible: if we want to prevent t3 from incrementing Z, t2 has
to run after t3. Since t3 runs only after t1, that implies that t2 runs after t1.
However, t4 won’t run until after t2 has run, so t1 must have run and set X
to true by the time t4 runs, and so t4 will increment Z.
     Our inability to get Z to be 0 stems mostly from our human inclina-
tion for linear explanations; this happened, then this happened, then this

                   happened. Computers aren’t limited in the same way and have no need to
                   box all events into a single global order. There’s nothing in the rules for
                   Release and Acquire that says that t3 must observe the same execution order
                   for t1 and t2 as t4 observes. As far as the computer is concerned, it’s fine
                   to let t3 observe t1 as having executed first, while having t4 observe t2 as
                   having executed first. With that in mind, an execution in which t3 observes
                   that Y is false after it observes that X is true (implying that t2 runs after t1),
                   while in the same execution t4 observes that X is false after it observes that
                   Y is true (implying that t2 runs before t1), is completely reasonable, even if
                   that seems outrageous to us mere humans.
                        As we discussed earlier, Acquire/Release requires only that an
                   Ordering::Acquire load of a variable must see all stores that happened before
                   an Ordering::Release store that stored what the load loaded. In the order-
                   ing just discussed, the computer did uphold that property: t3 sees X == true,
                   and indeed sees all stores by t1 prior to it setting X = true—there are none.
                   It also sees Y == false, which was stored by the main thread at program
                   startup, so there aren’t any relevant stores to be concerned with. Similarly,
                   t4 sees Y = true and also sees all stores by t2 prior to setting Y = true—again,
                   there are none. It also sees X == false, which was stored by the main thread
                   and has no preceding store. No rules are broken, yet it just seems wrong
                   somehow.
                        Our intuitive expectation was that we could put the threads in some
                   global order to make sense of what every thread saw and did, but that was
                   not the case for Acquire/Release ordering in this example. To achieve some-
                   thing closer to that intuitive expectation, we need sequential consistency.
                   Sequential consistency requires all the threads taking part in an atomic
                   operation to coordinate to ensure that what each thread observes corre-
                   sponds to (or at least appears to correspond to) some single, common execu-
                   tion order. This makes it easier to reason about but also makes it costly.
                        Atomic loads and stores marked with Ordering::SeqCst instruct the com-
                   piler to take any extra precautions (such as using special CPU instructions)
                   needed to guarantee sequential consistency for those loads and stores. The
                   exact formalism around this is fairly convoluted, but sequential consistency
                   essentially ensures that if you looked at all the related SeqCst operations
                   from across all your threads, you could put the thread executions in some
                   order so that the values that were loaded and stored would all match up.
                        If we replaced all the memory ordering arguments in Listing 10-4 with
                   SeqCst, Z could not possibly be 0 after all the threads have exited, just as we
                   originally expected. Under sequential consistency, it must be possible to say
                   either that t1 definitely ran before t2 or that t2 definitely ran before t1, so
                   the execution where t3 and t4 see different orders is not allowed, and thus Z
                   cannot be 0.

                   Compare and Exchange
                   In addition to load and store, all of Rust’s atomic types provide a method
                   called compare_exchange. This method is used to atomically and condition-
                   ally replace a value. You provide compare_exchange with the last value you

observed for an atomic variable and the new value you want to replace the
original value with, and it will replace the value only if it is still the same as
it was when you last observed it. To see why this is important, take a look
at the (broken) implementation of a mutual exclusion lock in Listing 10-5.
This implementation keeps track of whether the lock is held in the static
atomic variable LOCK. We use the Boolean value true to represent that the
lock is held. To acquire the lock, a thread waits for LOCK to be false, then
sets it to true again; it then enters its critical section and sets LOCK to false
to release the lock when its work (f) is done.

static LOCK: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);

fn mutex(f: impl FnOnce()) {
    // Wait for the lock to become free (false).
    while LOCK.load(Ordering::Acquire)
      { /* .. TODO: avoid spinning .. */ }
    // Store the fact that we hold the lock.
    LOCK.store(true, Ordering::Release);
    // Call f while holding the lock.
    f();
    // Release the lock.
    LOCK.store(false, Ordering::Release);
}

Listing 10-5: An incorrect implementation of a mutual exclusion lock

     This mostly works, but it has a terrible flaw—two threads might both
see LOCK == false at the same time and both leave the while loop. Then they
both set LOCK to true and both enter the critical section, which is exactly
what the mutex function was supposed to prevent!
     The issue in Listing 10-5 is that there is a gap between when we load
the current value of the atomic variable and when we subsequently update
it, during which another thread might get to run and read or touch its
value. It is exactly this problem that compare_exchange solves—it swaps out the
value behind the atomic variable only if its value still matches the previous
read, and otherwise notifies you that the value has changed. Listing 10-6
shows the corrected implementation using compare_exchange.

static LOCK: AtomicBool = AtomicBool::new(false);

fn mutex(f: impl FnOnce()) {
    // Wait for the lock to become free (false).
    loop {
      let take = LOCK.compare_exchange(
           false,
           true,
           Ordering::AcqRel,
           Ordering::Relaxed
      );
      match take {
         Ok(false) => break,
         Ok(true) | Err(false) => unreachable!(),

                             Err(true) => { /* .. TODO: avoid spinning .. */ }
                         }
                       }
                       // Call f while holding the lock.
                       f();
                       // Release the lock.
                       LOCK.store(false, Ordering::Release);
                   }

Listing 10-6: A corrected implementation of a mutual exclusion lock

                       This time around, we use compare_exchange in the loop, and it takes care
                   of both checking that the lock is currently not held and storing true to take
                   the lock as appropriate. This happens through the first and second argu-
                   ments to compare_exchange, respectively: in this case, false and then true. You
                   can read the invocation as “Store true only if the current value is false.”
                   The compare_exchange method returns a Result that indicates either that the
                   value was successfully updated (Ok) or that it could not be updated (Err).
                   In either case, it also returns the current value. This isn’t too useful with
                   an AtomicBool since we know what the value must be if the operation failed,
                   but for something like an AtomicI32, the updated current value will let you
                   quickly recompute what to store and then try again without having to do
                   another load.

       NOTE        Note that compare_exchange checks only whether the value is the same as the one that
                   was passed in as the current value. If some other thread modifies the atomic variable’s
                   value and then resets it to the original value again, a compare_exchange on that vari-
                   able will still succeed. This is often referred to as the A-B-A problem.

                        Unlike simple loads and stores, compare_exchange takes two Ordering argu-
                   ments. The first is the “success ordering,” and it dictates what memory
                   ordering should be used for the load and store that the compare_exchange
                   represents in the case that the value was successfully updated. The second
                   is the “failure ordering,” and it dictates the memory ordering for the load
                   if the loaded value does not match the expected current value. These two
                   orderings are kept separate so that the developer can give the CPU leeway
                   to improve execution performance by reordering loads and stores on fail-
                   ure when appropriate, but still get the correct ordering on success. In this
                   case, it’s okay to reorder loads and stores across failed iterations of the lock
                   acquisition loop, but it’s not okay to reorder loads and stores inside the criti-
                   cal section in such a way that they end up outside of it.
                        Even though its interface is simple, compare_exchange is a very powerful
                   synchronization primitive—so much so that it’s been theoretically proven
                   that you can build all other distributed consensus primitives using only
                   compare_exchange! For that reason, it is the workhorse of many, if not most,
                   synchronization constructs when you really dig into the implementation
                   details.
                        Be aware, though, that a compare_exchange requires that a single CPU has
                   exclusive access to the underlying value, and it is therefore a form of mutual
                   exclusion at the hardware level. This in turn means that compare_exchange

can quickly become a scalability bottleneck: only one CPU can make prog-
ress at a time, so there’s a portion of your code that will not scale with the
number of cores. In fact, it’s probably worse than that—the CPUs have to
coordinate to ensure that only one CPU succeeds at a compare_exchange for a
variable at a time (take a look at the MESI protocol if you’re curious about
how that works), and that coordination grows quadratically more costly the
more CPUs are involved!

                        COMPARE _ E XCHANGE _W E AK

    The careful documentation reader will notice that compare_exchange has a suspi-
    ciously named cousin, compare_exchange_weak, and wonder what the difference
    is. The weak variant of compare_exchange is allowed to fail even if the atomic
    variable’s value does still match the expected value that the user passed in,
    whereas the strong variant must succeed in this case.
          This might seem odd—how could an atomic value swap fail except if the
    value has changed? The answer lies in system architectures that do not have a
    native compare_exchange operation. For example, ARM processors instead have
    locked load and conditional store operations, where a conditional store will fail
    if the value read by an associated locked load has not been written to since
    the load. The Rust standard library implements compare_exchange on ARM by
    calling this pair of instructions in a loop and returning only once the conditional
    store succeeds. This makes the code in Listing 10-6 needlessly inefficient—we
    end up with a nested loop, which requires more instructions and is harder to
    optimize. Since we already have a loop in this case, we could instead use com-
    pare_exchange_weak, remove the unreachable!() on Err(false), and get better
    machine code on ARM and the same compiled code on x86!

The Fetch Methods
Fetch methods (fetch_add, fetch_sub, fetch_and, and the like) are designed to
allow more efficient execution of atomic operations that commute—that
is, operations that have meaningful semantics regardless of the order they
execute in. The motivation for this is that the compare_exchange method
is powerful, but also costly—if two threads both want to update a single
atomic variable, one will succeed, while the other will fail and have to retry.
If many threads are involved, they all have to mediate sequential access to
the underlying value, and there will be plenty of spinning while threads
retry on failure.
     For simple operations that commute, rather than fail and retry just
because another thread modified the value, we can tell the CPU what
operation to perform on the atomic variable. It’ll then perform that opera-
tion on whatever the current value happens to be when the CPU eventually
gets exclusive access. Think of an AtomicUsize that counts the number of

                    operations a pool of threads has completed. If two threads both complete a
                    job at the same time, it doesn’t matter which one updates the counter first
                    as long as both their increments are counted.
                         The fetch methods implement these kinds of commutative opera-
                    tions. They perform a read and a store operation in a single step and
                    guarantee that the store operation was performed on the atomic variable
                    when it held exactly the value returned by the method. As an example,
                    AtomicUsize::fetch_add(1, Ordering::Relaxed) never fails—it always adds 1 to
                    the current value of the AtomicUsize, no matter what it is, and returns the
                    value of the AtomicUsize precisely when this thread’s 1 was added.
                         The fetch methods tend to be more efficient than compare_exchange
                    because they don’t require threads to fail and retry when multiple threads
                    contend for access to a variable. Some hardware architectures even have
                    specialized fetch method implementations that scale much better as the
                    number of involved CPUs grows. Nevertheless, if enough threads try to
                    operate on the same atomic variable, those operations will begin to slow
                    down and exhibit sublinear scaling due to the coordination required. In
                    general, the best way to significantly improve the performance of a concur-
                    rent algorithm is to split contended variables into more atomic variables
                    that are each less contended, rather than switching from compare_exchange to
                    a fetch method.

        NOTE        The fetch_update method is somewhat deceptively named—behind the scenes, it is
                    really just a compare_exchange_weak loop, so its performance profile will more closely
                    match that of compare_exchange than the other fetch methods.

      Sane Concurrency
                    Writing correct and performant concurrent code is harder than writing
                    sequential code; you have to consider not only possible execution interleav-
                    ings but also how your code interacts with the compiler, the CPU, and the
                    memory subsystem. With such a wide array of footguns at your disposal, it’s
                    easy to want to throw your hands in the air and just give up on concurrency
                    altogether. In this section we’ll explore some techniques and tools that can
                    help ensure that you write correct concurrent code without (as much) fear.

                    Start Simple
                    It is a fact of life that simple, straightforward, easy-to-follow code is more
                    likely to be correct. This principle also applies to concurrent code—always
                    start with the simplest concurrent design you can think of, then measure,
                    and only if measurement reveals a performance problem should you opti-
                    mize your algorithm.
                          To follow this tip in practice, start out with concurrency patterns that
                    do not require intricate use of atomics or lots of fine-grained locks. Begin
                    with multiple threads that run sequential code and communicate over
                    channels, or that cooperate through locks, and then benchmark the result-
                    ing performance with the workload you care about. You’re much less likely

to make mistakes this way than by implementing fancy lockless algorithms
or by splitting your locks into a thousand pieces to avoid false sharing. For
many use cases, these designs are plenty fast enough; it turns out a lot of
time and effort has gone into making channels and locks perform well!
And if the simple approach is fast enough for your use case, why introduce
more complex and error-prone code?
     If your benchmarks indicate a performance problem, then figure out
exactly which part of your system scales poorly. Focus on fixing that bottle-
neck in isolation where you can, and try to do so with small adjustments
where possible. Maybe it’s enough to split a lock in two rather than move
to a concurrent hash table, or to introduce another thread and a channel
rather than implement a lock-free work stealing queue. If so, do that.
     Even when you do have to work directly with atomics and the like, keep
things simple until there’s a proven need to optimize—use Ordering::SeqCst
and compare_exchange at first, and then iterate if you find concrete evidence
that those are becoming bottlenecks that must be taken care of.

Write Stress Tests
As the author, you have a lot of insight into where bugs in your code
may hide, without necessarily knowing what those bugs are (yet, anyway).
Writing stress tests is a good way to shake out some of the hidden bugs.
Stress tests don’t necessarily perform a complex sequence of steps but
instead have lots of threads doing relatively simple operations in parallel.
     For example, if you were writing a concurrent hash map, one stress test
might be to have N threads insert or update keys and M threads read keys
in such a way that those M+N threads are likely to often choose the same
keys. Such a test doesn’t test for a particular outcome or value but instead
tries to trigger many possible interleavings of operations in the hopes that
buggy interleavings might reveal themselves.
     Stress tests resemble fuzz tests in many ways; whereas fuzzing gener-
ates many random inputs to a given function, the stress test instead gen­
erates many random thread and memory access schedules. Just like fuzzers,
stress tests are therefore only as good as the assertions in your code; they
can’t tell you about a bug that doesn’t manifest in some easy-to-spot way
like an assertion failure or some other kind of panic. For that reason, it’s a
good idea to litter your low-level concurrency code with assertions, or debug_
assert_* if you’re worried about runtime cost in particularly hot loops.

Use Concurrency Testing Tools
The primary challenge in writing concurrent code is to handle all the pos-
sible ways the execution of different threads can interleave. As we saw in the
Ordering::SeqCst example in Listing 10-4, it’s not just the thread scheduling
that matters, but also which memory values are possible for a given thread
to observe at any given point in time. Writing tests that execute every pos-
sible legal execution is not only tedious but also difficult—you need very
low-level control over which threads execute when and what values their
reads return, which the operating system likely doesn’t provide.

                   Model Checking with Loom
                   Luckily, a tool already exists that can simplify this execution exploration
                   for you in the form of the loom crate. Given the relative release cycles of this
                   book and that of a Rust crate, I won’t give any examples of how to use Loom
                   here, as they’d likely be out of date by the time you read this book, but I will
                   give an overview of what it does.
                        Loom expects you to write dedicated test cases in the form of closures
                   that you pass into a Loom model. The model keeps track of all cross-thread
                   interactions and tries to intelligently explore all possible iterations of those
                   interactions by executing the test case closure multiple times. To detect
                   and control thread interactions, Loom provides replacement types for all
                   the types in the standard library that allow threads to coordinate with one
                   another; that includes most types under std::sync and std::thread as well
                   as UnsafeCell and a few others. Loom expects your application to use those
                   replacement types whenever you run the Loom tests. The replacement
                   types tie into the Loom executor and perform a dual function: they act as
                   rescheduling points so that Loom can choose which operation to run next
                   after each possible thread interaction point, and they inform Loom of new
                   possible interleavings to consider. Essentially, Loom builds up a tree of all
                   the possible future executions for each point at which multiple execution
                   interleavings are possible and then tries to execute all of them, one after
                   the other.
                        Loom attempts to fully explore all possible executions of the test
                   cases you provide it with, which means it can find bugs that occur only in
                   extremely rare executions that stress testing would not find in a hundred
                   years. While that’s great for smaller test cases, it’s generally not feasible
                   to apply that kind of rigorous testing to larger test cases that test more
                   involved sequences of operations or require many threads to run at once.
                   Loom would simply take too long to get decent coverage of the code. In
                   practice, you may therefore want to tell Loom to consider only a subset of
                   the possible executions, which Loom’s documentation has more details on.
                        Like with stress tests, Loom can catch only bugs that manifest as panics,
                   so that’s yet another reason to spend some time placing strategic assertions
                   in your concurrent code! In many cases, it may even be worthwhile to add
                   additional state tracking and bookkeeping instructions to your concurrent
                   code to give you better assertions.

                   Runtime Checking with ThreadSanitizer
                   For larger test cases, your best bet is to run the test through a couple of itera-
                   tions under Google’s excellent ThreadSanitizer, also known as TSan. TSan
                   automatically augments your code by placing extra bookkeeping instructions
                   prior to every memory access. Then, as your code runs, those bookkeeping
                   instructions update and check a special state machine that flags any con-
                   current memory operations that indicate a problematic race condition. For
                   example, if thread B writes to some atomic value X, but has not synchronized
                   (lots of hand waving here) with the thread that wrote the previous value of X
                   that indicates a write/write race, which is nearly always a bug.

     Since TSan only observes your code running and does not execute
it over and over again like Loom, it generally only adds a constant-factor
overhead to the runtime of your program. While that factor can be signifi-
cant (5–15 times at the time of writing), it’s still small enough that you can
execute even most complex test cases in a reasonable amount of time.
     At the time of writing, to use TSan you need to use a nightly version of
the Rust compiler and pass in the -Zsanitizer=thread command-line argu-
ment (or set it in RUSTFLAGS), though hopefully in time this will be a standard
supported option. Other sanitizers are also available that check things like
out-of-bounds memory accesses, use-after-free, memory leaks, and reads of
uninitialized memory, and you may want to run your concurrent test suite
through those too!

                                     HEISENBUGS

    Heisenbugs are bugs that seem to disappear when you try to study them. This
    happens quite frequently when trying to debug highly concurrent code; the
    additional instrumentation to debug the problem changes the relative timing of
    concurrent events and might cause the execution interleaving that triggered the
    bug to no longer happen.
          A particularly common cause of disappearing concurrency bugs is using
    print statements, which is by far one of the most common debugging techniques.
    There are two reasons why print statements have such an outsized effect on
    concurrency bugs. The first, and perhaps most obvious, is that relatively speak-
    ing, printing something to the user’s terminal (or wherever standard output
    points) takes quite a long time, especially if your program is producing a lot
    of output. Writing to the terminal requires, at the very least, a round-trip to the
    operating system kernel to perform the write, but the write may also have to
    wait for the terminal itself to read from the process’s output into its own buffers.
    All that extra time might so much delay the operation that previously raced with
    an operation in some other thread that the race condition disappears.
          The second reason why print statements disturb concurrent execution pat-
    terns is that writing to standard output is (generally) guarded by a lock. If you look
    inside the Stdout type in the standard library, you’ll see that it holds a Mutex that
    guards access to the output stream. It does this so that the output isn’t garbled too
    badly if multiple threads try to write at the same time—without a lock, a given
    line might have characters interspersed from multiple thread writes, but with the
    lock the threads will take turns writing instead. Unfortunately, acquiring the output
    lock, is another thread synchronization point, and one that every printing thread is
    involved in. This means that if your code was previously broken due to missing syn-
    chronization between two threads, or just because a particular race between two
    threads was possible, adding print statements might fix that bug as a side effect!
          In general, when you spot what seems like a Heisenbug, try to find other
    ways to narrow down the problem. That might involve using Loom or TSan,
                                                                                (continued)

                       using gdb or lldb, or using a per-thread in-memory log that you print only at the
                       end. Many logging frameworks also work hard to avoid synchronization points
                       on the critical path of issuing log events, so switching to one of those might
                       make your life easier. As an added bonus, good logging that you leave behind
                       after fixing a particular bug might come in handy later. Personally I’m a big fan
                       of the tracing crate, but there are many good options out there.

      Summary
                   In this chapter, we first covered common correctness and performance pit-
                   falls in concurrent Rust, and some of the high-level concurrency patterns
                   that successful concurrent applications tend to use to work around them.
                   We also explored how asynchronous Rust enables concurrency without par-
                   allelism, and how to explicitly introduce parallelism in asynchronous Rust
                   code. We then dove deeper into Rust’s many different lower-level concur-
                   rency primitives, including how they work, how they differ, and what they’re
                   all for. Finally, we explored techniques for writing better concurrent code
                   and looked at tools like Loom and TSan that can help you vet that code. In
                   the next chapter we’ll continue our journey through the lower levels of Rust
                   by digging into foreign function interfaces, which allow Rust code to link
                   directly against code written in other languages.

