                           11
F O R E I G N F U N C T I O N I N T E R FACE S

           Not all code is written in Rust. It’s shocking,
           I know. Every so often, you’ll need to inter-
          act with code written in other languages,
       either by calling into such code from Rust or
by allowing that code to call your Rust code. You can
achieve this through foreign function interfaces (FFI).
     In this chapter we’ll first look at the primary mechanism Rust provides
for FFI: the extern keyword. We’ll see how to use extern both to expose Rust
functions and statics to other languages and to give Rust access to func-
tions and static variables provided from outside the Rust bubble. Then, we’ll
walk through how to align Rust types with types defined in other languages
and explore some of the intricacies of allowing data to flow across the FFI
boundary. Finally, we’ll talk about some of the tools you’ll likely want to use
if you’re doing any nontrivial amount of FFI.
        NOTE        While I often refer to FFI as being about crossing the boundary between one language
                    and another, FFI can also occur entirely inside Rust-land. If one Rust program shares
                    memory with another Rust program but the two aren’t compiled together—say, if you’re
                    using a dynamically linked library in your Rust program that happens to be written in
                    Rust, but you just have the C-compatible .so file—the same complications arise.

      Crossing Boundaries with extern
                    FFI is, ultimately, all about accessing bytes that originate somewhere out-
                    side your application’s Rust code. For that, Rust provides two primary build-
                    ing blocks: symbols, which are names assigned to particular addresses in a
                    given segment of your binary that allow you to share memory (be it for data
                    or code) between the external origin and your Rust code, and calling conven-
                    tions that provide a common understanding of how to call functions stored
                    in such shared memory. We’ll look at each of these in turn.

                    Symbols
                    Any binary artifact that the compiler produces from your code is filled with
                    symbols—every function or static variable you define has a symbol that
                    points to its location in the compiled binary. Generic functions may even
                    have multiple symbols, one for each monomorphization of the function the
                    compiler generates!
                         Normally, you don’t have to think about symbols—they’re used inter-
                    nally by the compiler to pass around the final address of a function or
                    static variable in your binary. This is how the compiler knows what location
                    in memory each function call should target when it generates the final
                    machine code, or where to read from if your code accesses a static variable.
                    Since you don’t usually refer to symbols directly in your code, the compiler
                    defaults to choosing semirandom names for them—you may have two func-
                    tions called foo in different parts of your code, but the compiler will gener-
                    ate distinct symbols from them so that there’s no confusion.
                         However, using random names for symbols won’t work when you want
                    to call a function or access a static variable that isn’t compiled at the same
                    time, such as code that’s written in a different language and thus compiled
                    by a different compiler. You can’t tell Rust about a static variable defined in
                    C if the symbol for that variable has a semirandom name that keeps chang-
                    ing. Conversely, you can’t tell Python’s FFI interface about a Rust function if
                    you can’t produce a stable name for it.
                         To use a symbol with an external origin, we also need some way to tell
                    Rust about a variable or function in such a manner that the compiler will
                    look for that same symbol defined elsewhere rather than defining its own
                    (we’ll talk about how that search happens later). Otherwise, we would just
                    end up with two identical symbols for that function or static variable, and
                    no sharing would take place. In fact, in all likelihood, compilation would
                    fail since any code that referred to that symbol wouldn’t know which defini-
                    tion (that is, which address) to use for it!

NOTE   A quick note about terminology: a symbol can be declared multiple times but
       defined only once. Every declaration of a symbol will link to the same single defini-
       tion for that symbol at linking time. If no definition for a declaration is found, or if
       there are multiple definitions, the linker will complain.

       An Aside on Compilation and Linking
       Compiler crash course time! Having a rough idea of the complicated pro-
       cess of turning code into a runnable binary will help you understand FFI
       better. You see, the compiler isn’t one monolithic program but is (typically)
       broken down into a handful of smaller programs that each perform distinct
       tasks and run one after the other. At a high level, there are three distinct
       phases to compilation—compilation, code generation, and linking—handled by
       three different components.
            The first phase is performed by what most people tend to think of
       as “the compiler”; it deals with type checking, borrow checking, mono-
       morphization, and other features we associate with a given programming
       language. This phase generates no machine code but rather a low-level
       representation of the code that uses heavily annotated abstract machine
       operations. That low-level representation is then passed to the code genera-
       tion tool, which is what produces machine code that can actually run on a
       given CPU.
            These two operations, taken together, do not have to be run in a single
       big pass over the whole codebase all at once. Instead, the codebase can be
       sliced into smaller chunks that are then run through compilation concur-
       rently. For example, Rust generally compiles different crates independently
       and in parallel as long as there isn’t a dependency between them. It can also
       invoke the code generation tool for independent crates separately to pro-
       cess them in parallel. Rust can often even compile multiple smaller slices of
       a single crate separately!
            Once the machine code for every piece of the application has been
       generated, those pieces can then be wired together. This is done in the
       linking phase by, unsurprisingly, the linker. The linker’s primary job is to
       take all the binary artifacts, called object files, produced by code generation,
       stitch them together into a single file, and then replace every reference to a
       symbol with the final memory address of that symbol. This is how you can
       define a function in one crate and call it from another but still compile the
       two crates separately.
            The linker is what enables FFI to work. It doesn’t care how each of the
       input object files were constructed; it just dutifully links together all the
       object files and then resolves any shared symbols. One object file may origi-
       nally have been Rust code, one originally C code, and one may be a binary
       blob downloaded from the internet; as long as they all use the same symbol
       names, the linker will make sure that the resulting machine code uses the
       correct cross-referenced addresses for any shared symbols.
            A symbol can be linked either statically or dynamically. Static linking
       is the simplest, as each reference to a symbol is simply replaced with the
       address of that symbol’s definition. Dynamic linking, on the other hand,

                   ties each reference to a symbol to a bit of generated code that tries to find
                   the symbol’s definition when the program runs. We’ll talk more about these
                   linking modes a little later. Rust generally defaults to static linking for Rust
                   code, and dynamic linking for FFI.

                   Using extern
                   The extern keyword is the mechanism that allows us to declare a symbol as
                   residing within a foreign interface. Specifically, it declares the existence of
                   a symbol that’s defined elsewhere. In Listing 11-1 we define a static variable
                   called RS_DEBUG in Rust that we make available to other code via FFI. We also
                   declare a static variable called FOREIGN_DEBUG whose definition is unspecified
                   but will be resolved at linking time.

                   #[no_mangle]
                   pub static RS_DEBUG: bool = true;

                   extern {
                       static FOREIGN_DEBUG: bool;
                   }

Listing 11-1: Exposing a Rust static variable, and accessing one declared elsewhere,
                   through FFI

                         The #[no_mangle] attribute ensures that RS_DEBUG retains that name dur-
                   ing compilation rather than having the compiler assign it another symbol
                   name to, for example, distinguish it from another (non-FFI) RS_DEBUG static
                   variable elsewhere in the program. The variable is also declared as pub since
                   it’s a part of the crate’s public API, though that annotation isn’t strictly
                   necessary on items marked #[no_mangle]. Note that we don’t use extern for
                   RS_DEBUG, since it’s defined here. It will still be accessible to link against from
                   other languages.
                         The extern block surrounding the FOREIGN_DEBUG static variable denotes
                   that this declaration refers to a location that Rust will learn at linking
                   time based on where the definition of the same symbol is located. Since
                   it’s defined elsewhere, we don’t give it an initialization value, just a type,
                   which should match the type used at the definition site. Because Rust
                   doesn’t know anything about the code that defines the static variable,
                   and thus can’t check that you’ve declared the correct type for the symbol,
                   FOREIGN_DEBUG can be accessed only inside an unsafe block.

       NOTE        Static variables in Rust aren’t mutable by default, regardless of whether they’re in an
                   extern block. These variables are always available from any thread, so mutable access
                   would pose a data race risk. You can declare a static as mut, but if you do, it becomes
                   unsafe to access.

                       The procedure to declare FFI functions is very similar. In Listing 11-2,
                   we make hello_rust accessible to non-Rust code and pull in the external
                   hello_foreign function.

#[no_mangle]
pub extern fn hello_rust(i: i32) { ... }

extern {
    fn hello_foreign(i: i32);
}

Listing 11-2: Exposing a Rust function, and accessing one defined elsewhere, through FFI

     The building blocks are all the same as in Listing 11-1 with the excep-
tion that the Rust function is declared using extern fn, which we’ll explore
in the next section.
     If there are multiple definitions of a given extern symbol like FOREIGN_
DEBUG or hello_foreign, you can explicitly specify which library the symbol
should link against using the #[link] attribute. If you don’t, the linker will
give you an error saying that it’s found multiple definitions for the symbol
in question. For example, if you prefix an extern block with #[link(name =
"crypto")], you’re telling the linker to resolve any symbols (whether statics
or functions) against a linked library named “crypto.” You can also rename
an external static or function in your Rust code by annotating its declara-
tion with #[link_name = "<actual_symbol_name>"], and then the item links to
whatever name you wish. Similarly, you can rename a Rust item for export
using #[export_name = "<export_symbol_name>"].

Link Kinds
#[link] also accepts the argument kind, which dictates how the items in the
block should be linked. The argument defaults to "dylib", which signifies
C-compatible dynamic linking. The alternative kind value is "static", which
indicates that the items in the block should be linked fully at compile time
(that is, statically). This essentially means that the external code is wired
directly into the binary produced by the compiler , and thus doesn’t need to
exist at runtime. There are a few other kinds as well, but they are much less
common and outside the scope of this book.
     There are several trade-offs between static and dynamic linking, but the
main considerations are security, binary size, and distribution. First, dynamic
linking tends to be more secure because it makes it easier to upgrade librar-
ies independently. Dynamic linking allows whoever deploys a binary that con-
tains your code to upgrade libraries your code links against without having
to recompile your code. If, say, libcrypto gets a security update, the user can
update the crypto library on the host and restart the binary, and the updated
library code will be used automatically. With static compilation, the library’s
code is hardwired into the binary, so the user would have to recompile your
code against an upgraded version of the library to get the update.
     Dynamic linking also tends to produce smaller binaries. Since static
compilation includes any linked code into the final binary output, and any
code that code in turn pulls in, it produces larger binaries. With dynamic
linking, each external item includes just a small bit of wrapper code that
loads the indicated library at runtime and then forwards the access.

                       So far, static linking may not seem very attractive, but it has one big advan-
                   tage over dynamic linking: ease of distribution. With dynamic linking, anyone
                   who wants to run a binary that includes your code must also have any libraries
                   your code links against. Not only that, but they must make sure the version of
                   each such library they have is compatible with what your code expects. This
                   may be fine for libraries like glibc or OpenSSL that are available on most sys-
                   tems, but it poses a problem for more obscure libraries. The user then needs
                   to be aware that they should install that library and must hunt for it in order to
                   run your code! With static linking, the library’s code is embedded directly into
                   the binary output, so the user doesn’t need to install it themselves.
                       Ultimately, there isn’t a right choice between static and dynamic linking.
                   Dynamic linking is usually a good default, but static compilation may be a
                   better option for particularly constrained deployment environments or for
                   very small or niche library dependencies. Use your best judgment!

                   Calling Conventions
                   Symbols dictate where a given function or variable is defined, but that’s not
                   enough to allow function calls across FFI boundaries. To call a foreign
                   function in any language, the compiler also needs to know its calling conven-
                   tion, which dictates the assembly code to use to invoke the function. We
                   won’t get into the actual technical details of each calling convention here,
                   but as a general overview, the convention dictates:

                   •   How the stack frame for the call is set up
                   •   How arguments are passed (whether on the stack or in registers, in
                       order or in reverse)
                   •   How the function is told where to jump back to when it returns
                   •   How various CPU states, like registers, are restored in the caller after
                       the function completes

                        Rust has its own unique calling convention that isn’t standardized and
                   is allowed to be changed by the compiler over time. This works fine as long
                   as all function definitions and calls are compiled by the same Rust com-
                   piler, but it is problematic if you want interoperability with external code
                   because that external code doesn’t know about the Rust calling convention.
                        Every Rust function is implicitly declared with extern "Rust" if you don’t
                   declare anything else. Using extern on its own, as in Listing 11-2, is short-
                   hand for extern "C", which means “use the standard C calling convention.”
                   The shorthand is there because the C calling convention is what you want
                   in nearly every case of FFI.

       NOTE        Unwinding generally works only with regular Rust functions. If you unwind
                   across the end of a Rust function that isn’t extern "Rust", your program will abort.
                   Unwinding across the FFI boundary into external code is undefined behavior. With
                   RFC 2945, Rust gained a new extern declaration, extern "C-unwind"; this permits
                   unwinding across FFI boundaries in particular situations, but if you wish to use it
                   you should read the RFC carefully.

            Rust also supports a number of other calling conventions that you supply
       as a string following the extern keyword (in both fn and block context). For
       example, extern "system" says to use the calling convention of the operating
       system’s standard library interface, which at the time of writing is the same
       as "C" everywhere except on Win32, which uses the "stdcall" calling conven-
       tion. In general, you’ll rarely need to supply a calling convention explicitly
       unless you’re working with particularly platform-specific or highly optimized
       external interfaces, so just extern (which is extern "C") will be fine.

NOTE   A function’s calling convention is part of its type. That is, the type extern "C" fn()
       is not the same as fn() (or extern "Rust" fn()), which is different again from extern
       "system" fn().

                                  OTHER BINARY ARTIFAC T S

           Normally, you compile Rust code only to run its tests or build a binary that
           you’re then going to distribute or run. Unlike in many other languages, you
           don’t generally compile a Rust library to distribute it to others—if you run a com-
           mand like cargo publish, it just wraps up your crate’s source code and uploads
           it to crates.io. This is mostly because it is difficult to distribute generic code as
           anything but source code. Since the compiler monomorphizes each generic
           function to the provided type arguments, and those types may be defined in
           the caller’s crate, the compiler must have access to the function’s generic form,
           which means no optimized machine code!
                  Technically speaking, Rust does compile binary library artifacts, called rlibs,
           of each dependency that it combines in the end. These rlibs include the informa-
           tion necessary to resolve generic types, but they are specific to the exact com-
           piler used and can’t generally be distributed in any meaningful way.
                  So what do you do if you want to write a library in Rust that you then
           want to interface with from another programming language? The solution is to
           produce C-compatible library files in the form of dynamically linked libraries
           (.so files on Unix, .dylib files on macOS, and .dll files on Windows) and stati-
           cally linked libraries (.a files on Unix/macOS and .lib files on Windows). Those
           files look like files produced by C code, so they can also be used by other lan-
           guages that know how to interact with C.
                  To produce these C-compatible binary artifacts, you set the crate-type
           field of the [lib] section of your Cargo.toml file. The field takes an array of val-
           ues, which would normally just be "lib" to indicate a standard Rust library (an
           rlib). Cargo applies some heuristics that will set this value automatically if your
           crate is clearly not a library (for example, if it's a procedural macro), but best
           practice is to set this value explicitly if you’re producing anything but a good ol’
           Rust library.
                  There are a number of different crate types, but the relevant ones here are
           "cdylib" and "staticlib", which produce C-compatible library files that are
           dynamically and statically linked, respectively. Keep in mind that when you
                                                                                        (continued)

                        produce one of these artifact types, only publicly available symbols are avail-
                        able—that is, public and #[no_mangle] static variables and functions. Things like
                        types and constants won’t be available, even if they’re marked pub, since they
                        have no meaningful representation in a binary library file.

      Types Across Language Boundaries
                    With FFI, type layout is crucial; if one language lays out the memory for
                    some shared data one way but the language on the other side of the FFI
                    boundary expects it to be laid out differently, then the two sides will inter-
                    pret the data inconsistently. In this section, we’ll look at how to make types
                    match up over FFI, and other aspects of types to be aware of when you cross
                    the boundaries between languages.

                    Type Matching
                    Types aren’t shared across the FFI boundary. When you declare a type in
                    Rust, that type information is lost entirely upon compilation. All that’s com-
                    municated to the other side is the bits that make up values of that type.
                    You therefore need to declare the type for those bits on both sides of the
                    boundary. When you declare the Rust version of the type, you first must
                    make sure the primitives contained within the type match up. For example,
                    if C is used on the other side of the boundary, and the C type uses an int,
                    the Rust code had better use the exact Rust equivalent: an i32. To take
                    some of the guesswork out of that process, for interfaces that use C-like
                    types the Rust standard library provides you with the correct C types in
                    the std::os::raw module, which defines type c_int = i32, type c_char = i8/
                    u8 depending on whether char is signed, type c_long = i32/i64 depending on
                    the target pointer width, and so on.

        NOTE        Take particular note of quirky integer types in C like __be32. These often do not trans-
                    late directly to Rust types and may be best left as something like [u8; 4]. For example,
                    __be32 is always encoded as big-endian, whereas Rust’s i32 uses the endianness of the
                    current platform.

                         With more complex types like vectors and strings, you usually need
                    to do the mapping manually. For example, since C tends to represent
                    a string as a sequence of bytes terminated with a 0 byte, rather than a
                    UTF-8–encoded string with the length stored separately, you cannot gen-
                    erally use Rust’s string types over FFI. Instead, assuming the other side
                    uses a C-style string representation, you should use the std::ffi::CStr and
                    std::ffi::CString types for borrowed and owned strings, respectively. For
                    vectors, you’ll likely want to use a raw pointer to the first element and then
                    pass the length separately—the Vec::into_raw_parts method may come in
                    handy for that.

            For types that contain other types, such as structs and unions, you also
       need to deal with layout and alignment. As we discussed in Chapter 2, Rust
       lays out types in an undefined way by default, so at the very least you will
       want to use #[repr(C)] to ensure that the type has a deterministic layout and
       alignment that mirrors what’s (likely and hopefully) used across the FFI
       boundary. If the interface also specifies other configurations for the type,
       such as manually setting its alignment or removing padding, you’ll need to
       adjust your #[repr] accordingly.
            A Rust enum has multiple possible C-style representations depending
       on whether the enum contains data or not. Consider an enum without data,
       like this:

       enum Foo { Bar, Baz }

            With #[repr(C)], the type Foo is encoded using just a single integer of
       the same size that a C compiler would choose for an enum with the same
       number of variants. The first variant has the value 0, the second the value 1,
       and so on. You can also manually assign values to each variant, as shown in
       Listing 11-3.

       #[repr(C)]
       enum Foo {
           Bar = 1,
           Baz = 2,
       }

Listing 11-3: Defining explicit variant values for a dataless enum

NOTE   Technically, the specification says that the first variant’s value is 0 and every subse-
       quent variant’s value is one greater than that of the previous one. This makes a dif-
       ference if you manually set the value for some variants but not others—those you do
       not set will continue from the last one you did set.

            You should be careful about mapping enum-like types in C to Rust
       this way, however, as only the values for defined variants are valid for an
       instance of the enum type. This tends to get you into trouble with C-style
       enumerations that often function more like bitsets, where variants can be
       bitwise ORed together to produce a value that encapsulates multiple vari-
       ants at once. In the example from Listing 11-3, for instance, a value of 3 pro-
       duced by taking Bar | Baz would not be valid for Foo in Rust! If you need to
       model a C API that uses an enumeration for a set of bitflags that can be set
       and unset individually, consider using a newtype wrapper around an inte-
       ger type, with associated constants for each variant and implementations of
       the various Bit* traits for improved ergonomics. Or use the bitflags crate.

NOTE   For fieldless enums, you can also pass a numeric type to #[repr] to use a different
       type than isize for the discriminator. For example, #[repr(u8)] will encode the dis-
       criminator using a single unsigned byte. For a data-carrying enum, you can pass
       #[repr(C, u8)] to get the same effect.

                        On an enum that contains data, the #[repr(C)] attribute causes the enum
                   to be represented using a tagged union. That is, it is represented in memory
                   by a #[repr(C)] struct with two fields, where the first is the discriminator as
                   it would be encoded if none of the variants had fields, and the second is a
                   union of the data structures for each variant. For a concrete example, con-
                   sider the enum and associated representation in Listing 11-4.

                   #[repr(C)]
                   enum Foo {
                       Bar(i32),
                       Baz { a: bool, b: f64 }
                   }
                   // is represented as
                   #[repr(C)]
                   enum FooTag { Bar, Baz }
                   #[repr(C)]
                   struct FooBar(i32);
                   #[repr(C)]
                   struct FooBaz{ a: bool, b: f64 }
                   #[repr(C)]
                   union FooData {
                     bar: FooBar,
                     baz: FooBaz,
                   }
                   #[repr(C)]
                   struct Foo {
                       tag: FooTag,
                       data: FooData
                   }

Listing 11-4: Rust enums with #[repr(C)] are represented as tagged unions.

                                         THE NICHE OP TIMIZ ATION IN FFI

                       In Chapter 9 we talked about the niche optimization, where the Rust compiler
                       uses invalid bit patterns to represent enum variants that hold no data. The fact
                       that this optimization is guaranteed leads to an interesting interaction with FFI.
                       Specifically, it means that nullable pointers can always be represented in FFI types
                       using an Option-wrapped pointer type. For example, a nullable function pointer
                       can be represented as Option<extern fn(...)>, and a nullable data pointer can
                       be represented as Option<*mut T>. These will transparently do the right thing if an
                       all-zero bit pattern value is provided, and will represent it as None in Rust.

                   Allocations
                   When you allocate memory, that allocation belongs to its allocator and can
                   be freed only by that same allocator. This is the case if you use multiple

allocators within Rust and also if you are allocating memory both in Rust
and with some allocator on the other side of the FFI boundary. You’re
free to send pointers across the boundary and access that memory to your
heart’s content, but when it comes to releasing the memory again, it needs
to be returned to the appropriate allocator.
    Most FFI interfaces will have one of two configurations for handling
allocation: either the caller provides data pointers to chunks of memory
or the interface exposes dedicated freeing methods to which any allocated
resources should be returned when they are no longer needed. Listing 11-5
shows an example of Rust declarations of some signatures from the
OpenSSL library that use implementation-managed memory.

// One function allocates memory for a new object.
extern fn ECDSA_SIG_new() -> *mut ECDSA_SIG;

// And another accepts a pointer created by new
// and deallocates it when the caller is done with it.
extern fn ECDSA_SIG_free(sig: *mut ECDSA_SIG);

Listing 11-5: An implementation-managed memory interface

     The functions ECDSA_SIG_new and ECDSA_SIG_free form a pair, where the
caller is expected to call the new function, use the returned pointer for as
long as it needs (likely by passing it to other functions in turn), and then
finally pass the pointer to the free function once it’s done with the ref-
erenced resource. Presumably, the implementation allocates memory in
the new function and deallocates it in the free function. If these functions
were defined in Rust, the new function would likely use Box::new, and the
free function would invoke Box::from_raw and then drop the value to run its
destructor.
     Listing 11-6 shows an example of caller-managed memory.

// An example of caller-managed memory.
// The caller provides a pointer to a chunk of memory,
// which the implementation then uses to instantiate its own types.
// No free function is provided, as that happens in the caller.
extern fn BIO_new_mem_buf(buf: *const c_void, len: c_int) -> *mut BIO

Listing 11-6: A caller-managed memory interface

    Here, the BIO_new_mem_buf function instead has the caller supply the
backing memory. The caller can choose to allocate memory on the heap,
or use whatever other mechanism it deems fit for obtaining the required
memory, and then passes it to the library. The onus is then on the caller to
ensure that the memory is later deallocated, but only once it is no longer
needed by the FFI implementation!
    You can use either of these approaches in your FFI APIs or even mix
and match them if you wish. As a general rule of thumb, allow the caller to
pass in memory when doing so is feasible, since it gives the caller more free-
dom to manage memory as it deems appropriate. For example, the caller
may be using a highly specialized allocator on some custom operating

                   system, and may not want to be forced to use the standard allocator your
                   implementation would use. If the caller can pass in the memory, it might
                   even avoid allocations entirely if it can instead use stack memory or reuse
                   already allocated memory. However, keep in mind that the ergonomics of a
                   caller-managed interface are often more convoluted, since the caller must
                   now do all the work to figure out how much memory to allocate and then
                   set that up before it can call into your library.
                        In some instances, it may even be impossible for the caller to know
                   ahead of time how much memory to allocate—for example, if your library’s
                   types are opaque (and thus not known to the caller) or can change over
                   time, the caller won’t be able to predict the size of the allocation. Similarly,
                   if your code has to allocate more memory while it is running, such as if
                   you’re building a graph on the fly, the amount of memory needed may vary
                   dynamically at runtime. In such cases, you will have to use implementation-
                   managed memory.
                        When you’re forced to make a trade-off, go with caller-allocated mem-
                   ory for anything that is either large or frequent. In those cases the caller is
                   likely to care the most about controlling the allocations itself. For anything
                   else, it’s probably okay for your code to allocate and then expose destructor
                   functions for each relevant type.

                   Callbacks
                   You can pass function pointers across the FFI boundary and call the ref-
                   erenced function through those pointers as long as the function pointer’s
                   type has an extern annotation that matches the function’s calling conven-
                   tion. That is, you can define an extern "C" fn(c_int) -> c_int in Rust and
                   then pass a reference to that function to C code as a callback that the C
                   code will eventually invoke.
                         You do need to be careful using callbacks around panics, as having a
                   panic unwind past the end of a function that is anything but extern "Rust"
                   is undefined behavior. The Rust compiler will currently automatically abort
                   if it detects such a panic, but that may not always be the behavior you want.
                   Instead, you may want to use std::panic::catch_unwind to detect the panic in
                   any function marked extern, and then translate the panic into an error that
                   is FFI-compatible.

                   Safety
                   When you write Rust FFI bindings, most of the code that actually interfaces
                   with the FFI will be unsafe and will mainly revolve around raw pointers.
                   However, your goal should be to ultimately present a safe Rust interface on
                   top of the FFI. Doing so mainly comes down to reading carefully through
                   the invariants of the unsafe interface you are wrapping and then ensuring
                   you uphold them all through the Rust type system in the safe interface. The
                   three most important elements of safely encapsulating a foreign interface
                   are capturing & versus &mut accurately, implementing Send and Sync appro-
                   priately, and ensuring that pointers cannot be accidentally confused. I’ll go
                   over how to enforce each of these next.

References and Lifetimes
If there’s a chance external code will modify data behind a given pointer,
make sure that the safe Rust interface has an exclusive reference to the
relevant data by taking &mut. Otherwise a user of your safe wrapper might
accidentally read from memory that the external code is simultaneously
modifying, and all hell will break loose!
     You’ll also want to make good use of Rust lifetimes to ensure that all
pointers live for as long as the FFI requires. For example, imagine an external
interface that lets you create a Context and then lets you create a Device from
that Context with the requirement that the Context remain valid for as long as
the Device lives. In that case, any safe wrapper for the interface should enforce
that requirement in the type system by having Device hold a lifetime associ-
ated with the borrow of Context that the Device was created from.

Send and Sync
Do not implement Send and Sync for types from an external library unless
that library explicitly documents that those types are thread-safe! It is the
safe Rust wrapper’s job to ensure that safe Rust code cannot violate the
invariants of the external code and thus trigger undefined behavior.
    Sometimes, you may even want to introduce dummy types to enforce
external invariants. For example, say you have an event loop library with the
interface given in Listing 11-7.

extern fn start_main_loop();
extern fn next_event() -> *mut Event;

Listing 11-7: A library that expects single-threaded use

     Now suppose that the documentation for the external library states that
next_event may be called only by the same thread that called start_main_loop.
However, here we have no type that we can avoid implementing Send for!
Instead, we can take a page out of Chapter 3 and introduce additional
marker state to enforce the invariant, as shown in Listing 11-8.

pub struct EventLoop(std::marker::PhantomData<*const ()>);
pub fn start() -> EventLoop {
    unsafe { ffi::start_main_loop() };
    EventLoop(std::marker::PhantomData)
}
impl EventLoop {
    pub fn next_event(&self) -> Option<Event> {
        let e = unsafe { ffi::next_event() };
        // ...
    }
}

Listing 11-8: Enforcing an FFI invariant by introducing auxiliary types

   The empty type EventLoop doesn’t actually connect with anything in the
underlying external interface but rather enforces the contract that you call

                   next_event only after calling start_main_loop, and only on the same thread.
                   You enforce the “same thread” part by making EventLoop neither Send nor
                   Sync, by having it hold a phantom raw pointer (which itself is neither Send
                   nor Sync).
                       Using PhantomData<*const ()> to “undo” the Send and Sync auto-traits as
                   we do here is a bit ugly and indirect. Rust does have an unstable compiler
                   feature that enables negative trait implementations like impl !Send for
                   EventLoop {}, but it’s surprisingly difficult to get its implementation right,
                   and it likely won’t stabilize for some time.
                       You may have noticed that nothing prevents the caller from invoking
                   start_main_loop multiple times, either from the same thread or from another
                   thread. How you’d handle that would depend on the semantics of the
                   library in question, so I’ll leave it to you as an exercise.

                   Pointer Confusion
                   In many FFI APIs, you don’t necessarily want the caller to know the internal
                   representation for each and every chunk of memory you give it pointers to.
                   The type might have internal state that the caller shouldn’t fiddle with, or
                   the state might be difficult to express in a cross-language-compatible way.
                   For these kinds of situations, C-style APIs usually expose void pointers, writ-
                   ten out as the C type void*, which is equivalent to *mut std::ffi::c_void in
                   Rust. A type-erased pointer like this is, effectively, just a pointer, and does
                   not convey anything about the thing it points to. For that reason, these
                   kinds of pointers are often referred to as opaque.
                        Opaque pointers effectively serve the role of visibility modifiers for
                   types across FFI boundaries—since the method signature does not say
                   what’s being pointed to, the caller has no option but to pass around the
                   pointer as is and use any available FFI methods to provide visibility into
                   the referenced data. Unfortunately, since one *mut c_void is indistinguish-
                   able from another, there’s nothing stopping a user from taking an opaque
                   pointer as is returned from one FFI method and supplying it to a method
                   that expects a pointer to a different opaque type.
                        We can do better than this in Rust. To mitigate this kind of pointer
                   type confusion, we can avoid using *mut c_void directly for opaque point-
                   ers in FFI, even if the actual interface calls for a void*, and instead con-
                   struct different empty types for each distinct opaque type. For example,
                   in Listing 11-9 I use two distinct opaque pointer types that cannot be
                   confused.

                   #[non_exhaustive] #[repr(transparent)] pub struct Foo(c_void);
                   #[non_exhaustive] #[repr(transparent)] pub struct Bar(c_void);
                   extern {
                       pub fn foo() -> *mut Foo;
                       pub fn take_foo(arg: *mut Foo);
                       pub fn take_bar(arg: *mut Bar);
                   }

Listing 11-9: Opaque pointer types that cannot be confused

             Since Foo and Bar are both zero-sized types, they can be used in place of
        () in the extern method signatures. Even better, since they are now distinct
        types, Rust won’t let you use one where the other is required, so it’s now
        impossible to call take_bar with a pointer you got back from foo. Adding the
        #[non_exhaustive] annotation ensures that the Foo and Bar types cannot be
        constructed outside of this crate.

bindgen and Build Scripts
        Mapping out the Rust types and externs for a larger external library can be
        quite a chore. Big libraries tend to have a large enough number of type and
        method signatures to match up that writing out all the Rust equivalents is
        time-consuming. They also have enough corner cases and C oddities that
        some patterns are bound to require more careful thought to translate.
             Luckily, the Rust community has developed a tool called bindgen that
        significantly simplifies this process as long as you have C header files avail-
        able for the library you want to interface with. bindgen essentially encodes all
        the rules and best practices we’ve discussed in this chapter, plus a number
        of others, and wraps them up in a configurable code generator that takes in
        C header files and spits out appropriate Rust equivalents.
             bindgen provides a stand-alone binary that generates the Rust code for C
        headers once, which is convenient when you want to check in the bindings.
        This process allows you to hand-tune the generated bindings, should that
        be necessary. If, on the other hand, you want to generate the bindings auto-
        matically on every build and just include the C header files in your source
        code, bindgen also ships as a library that you can invoke in a custom build
        script for your package.

 NOTE   If you check in the bindings directly, keep in mind that they will be correct only on
        the platform they were generated for. Generating the bindings in a build script will
        generate them specifically for the current target platform, which is less likely to cause
        platform-related layout inconsistencies.

            You declare a build script by adding build = "<some-file.rs>" to the
        [package] section of your Cargo.toml. This tells Cargo that, before compiling
        your crate, it should compile <some-file.rs> as a stand-alone Rust program
        and run it; only then should it compile the source code of your crate. The
        build script also gets its own dependencies, which you declare in the [build-
        dependencies] section of your Cargo.toml.

 NOTE   If you name your build script build.rs, you don’t need to declare it in your Cargo.toml.

             Build scripts come in very handy with FFI—they can compile a bundled
        C library from source, dynamically discover and declare additional build
        flags to be passed to the compiler, declare additional files that Cargo
        should check for changes for the purposes of recompilation, and, you
        guessed it, generate additional source files on the fly!

                        Though build scripts are very versatile, beware of making them too
                   aware of the environment they run in. While you can use a build script
                   to detect if the Rust compiler version is a prime or if it’s going to rain in
                   Istanbul tomorrow, making your compilation dependent on such conditions
                   may make builds fail unexpectedly for other developers, which leads to a
                   poor development experience.
                        The build script can write files to a special directory supplied through
                   the OUT_DIR environment variable. The same directory and environment
                   variable are also accessible in the Rust source code at compile time so that
                   it can pick up files generated by the build script. To generate and use Rust
                   types from a C header, you first have your build script use the library ver-
                   sion of bindgen to read in a .h file and turn it into a file called, say, bindings.rs
                   inside OUT_DIR. You then add the following line to any Rust file in your crate
                   to include bindings.rs at compilation time:

                   include!(concat!(env!("OUT_DIR"), "/bindings.rs"));

                        Since the code in bindings.rs is autogenerated, it’s generally best prac-
                   tice to place the bindings in their own crate and give the crate the same
                   name as the library the bindings are for, with the suffix -sys (for example,
                   openssl-sys). If you don’t follow this practice, releasing new versions of your
                   library will be much more painful, as it is illegal for two crates that link
                   against the same external library through the links key in Cargo.toml to
                   coexist in a given build. You would essentially have to upgrade the entire
                   ecosystem to the new major version of your library all at once. Separating
                   just the bindings into their own crate allows you to issue new major versions
                   of the wrapper crate that can be adopted incrementally. The separation
                   also allows you to cut a breaking release of the crate with those bindings if
                   the Rust bindings change—say, if the header files themselves are upgraded
                   or a bindgen upgrade causes the generated Rust code to change slightly—
                   without also having to cut a breaking release of the crate that safely wraps
                   the FFI bindings.

       NOTE        Remember that if you include any of the types from the -sys crate in the public inter-
                   face of your main library crate, changing the dependency on the -sys crate to a new
                   major version still constitutes a breaking change for your main library!

                        If your crate instead produces a library file that you intend others to
                   use through FFI, you should also publish a C header file for its interface
                   to make it easier to generate native bindings to your library from other
                   languages. However, that C header file then needs to be kept up to date as
                   your crate changes, which can become cumbersome as your library grows in
                   size. Fortunately, the Rust community has also developed a tool to automate
                   this task: cbindgen. Like bindgen, cbindgen is a build tool, and it also comes
                   as both a binary and a library for use in build scripts. Instead of taking
                   in a C header file and producing Rust, it takes Rust in and produces a C
                   header file. Since the C header file represents the main computer-readable

      description of your crate’s FFI, I recommend manually looking it over to
      make sure the autogenerated C code isn’t too unwieldy, though in general
      cbindgen tends to produce fairly reasonable code. If it doesn’t, file a bug!

                                                 C++

          I’ve mainly focused on C in this chapter as it’s the language most commonly
          used to describe cross-language interfaces for libraries you can link against.
          Nearly every programming language provides some way to interact with C
          libraries, since they are so ubiquitous. While C++ feels closely related to C,
          and many high-profile libraries are written in C++, it’s a very different beast
          when it comes to FFI. Generating types and signatures to match a C header is
          relatively straightforward, but that is not at all the case for C++. At the time of
          writing, bindgen has decent support for generating bindings to C++, but they
          are often lacking in ergonomics. For example, you generally have to manually
          call constructors, destructors, overloaded operators, and the like. Some C++
          features like template specialization also aren’t supported at all. If you do have
          to interface with C++, I recommend you give the cxx crate a try.

Summary
      In this chapter, we’ve covered how to use the extern keyword to call out of
      Rust into external code, as well as how to use it to make Rust code accessible
      to external code. We’ve also discussed how to align Rust types with types on
      the other side of the FFI boundary, and some of the common pitfalls in try-
      ing to get code written in two different languages to mesh well. Finally, we
      talked about the bindgen and cbindgen tools, which make the experience of
      keeping FFI bindings up to date much more pleasant. In the next chapter,
      we’ll look at how to use Rust in more restricted environments, like embed-
      ded devices, where the standard library may not be available and where
      even a simple operation like allocating memory may not be possible.

