                          12
               RUST WITHOUT THE
               S TA N DA R D L I B R A RY

            Rust is intended to be a language for sys-
            tems programming, but it isn’t always clear
           what that really means. At the very least,
        a systems programming language is usually
expected to allow the programmer to write programs
that do not rely on the operating system and can run
directly on the hardware, whether that is a thousand-
core supercomputer or an embedded device with
a ­single-core ARM processor with a clock speed of
72MHz and 256KiB of memory.
    In this chapter, we’ll take a look at how you can use Rust in unorthodox
environments, such as those without an operating system, or those that
don’t even have the ability to dynamically allocate memory! Much of our
discussion will focus on the #![no_std] attribute, but we’ll also investigate
                    Rust’s alloc module, the Rust runtime (yes, Rust does technically have a
                    runtime), and some of the tricks you have to play to write up a Rust binary
                    for use in such an environment.

      Opting Out of the Standard Library
                    As a language, Rust consists of multiple independent pieces. First there’s
                    the compiler, which dictates the grammar of the Rust language and imple-
                    ments type checking, borrow checking, and the final conversion into
                    machine-runnable code. Then there’s the standard library, std, which
                    implements all the useful common functionality that most programs
                    need—things like file and network access, a notion of time, facilities for
                    printing and reading user input, and so on. But std itself is also a compos-
                    ite, building on top of two other, more fundamental libraries called core
                    and alloc. In fact, many of the types and functions in std are just re-exports
                    from those two libraries.
                          The core library sits at the bottom of the standard library pyramid and
                    contains any functionality that depends on nothing but the Rust language
                    itself and the hardware the resulting program is running on—things like
                    sorting algorithms, marker types, fundamental types such as Option and
                    Result, low-level operations such as atomic memory access methods, and
                    compiler hints. The core library works as if the operating system does
                    not exist, so there is no standard input, no filesystem, and no network.
                    Similarly, there is no memory allocator, so types like Box, Vec, and HashMap
                    are nowhere to be seen.
                          Above core sits alloc, which holds all the functionality that depends
                    on dynamic memory allocation, such as collections, smart pointers, and
                    dynamically allocated strings (String). We’ll get back to alloc in the next
                    section.
                          Most of the time, because std re-exports everything in core and
                    alloc, developers do not need to know about the differences among the
                    three libraries. This means that even though Option technically lives in
                    core::option::Option, you can access it through std::option::Option.
                          However, in an unorthodox environment, such as on an embedded
                    device where there is no operating system, the distinction is crucial. While
                    it’s fine to use an Iterator or to sort a list of numbers, an embedded device
                    may simply have no meaningful way to access a file (as that requires a file-
                    system) or print to the terminal (as that requires a terminal)—so there’s
                    no File or println!. Furthermore, the device may have so little memory that
                    dynamic memory allocation is a luxury you can’t afford, and thus anything
                    that allocates memory on the fly is a no-go—say goodbye to Box and Vec.
                          Rather than force developers to carefully avoid those basic constructs
                    in such environments, Rust provides a way to opt out of anything but the
                    core functionality of the language: the #![no_std] attribute. This is a crate-
                    level attribute (#!) that switches the prelude (see the box on page 213) for
                    the crate from std::prelude to core::prelude so that you don’t accidentally
                    depend on anything outside of core that might not work in your target
                    environment.

             However, that is all the #![no_std] attribute does—it does not prevent
        you from bringing in the standard library explicitly with extern std. This
        may be surprising, as it means a crate marked #![no_std] may in fact not be
        compatible with a target environment that does not support std, but this
        design decision was intentional: it allows you to mark your crate as being
        no_std-compatible but to still use features from the standard library when
        certain features are enabled. For example, many crates have a feature named
        std that, when enabled, gives access to more sophisticated APIs and integra-
        tions with types that live in std. This allows crate authors to both supply the
        core implementation for constrained use cases and add bells and whistles
        for consumers on more standard platforms.

 NOTE   Since features should be additive, prefer an std-enabling feature to an std-disabling
        one. Otherwise, if any crate in a consumer’s dependency graph enables the no- std
        feature, all consumers will be given access only to the bare-bones API without std sup-
        port, which may then mean that APIs they depend on aren’t available, causing them
        to no longer compile.

                                           THE PRELUDE

            Have you ever wondered why there are some types and traits—like Box, Iterator,
            Option, and Clone—that are available in every Rust file without you needing to
            use them? Or why you don’t need to use any of the macros in the standard library
            (like vec![])? The reason is that every Rust module automatically imports the Rust
            standard prelude with an implicit use std::prelude::rust_2021::* (or similar
            for other editions), which brings all the exports from the crate’s chosen edition’s
            prelude into scope. The prelude modules themselves aren’t special beyond this
            ­auto-inclusion—they are merely collections of pub use statements for key types,
             traits, and macros that the Rust developers expect to be commonly used.

Dynamic Memory Allocation
        As we discussed in Chapter 1, a machine has many different regions of
        memory, and each one serves a distinct purpose. There’s static memory for
        your program code and static variables, there’s the stack for function-local
        variables and function arguments, and there’s the heap for, well, every-
        thing else. The heap supports allocating variably sized regions of memory
        at runtime, and those allocations stick around for however long you want
        them to. This makes heap memory extremely versatile, and as a result, you
        find it used everywhere. Vec, String, Arc and Rc, and the collection types are
        all implemented in heap memory, which allows them to grow and shrink
        over time and to be returned from functions without the borrow checker
        complaining.

                        Behind the scenes, the heap is really just a huge chunk of contiguous
                   memory that is managed by an allocator. It’s the allocator that provides the
                   illusion of distinct allocations in the heap, ensuring that those allocations do
                   not overlap and that regions of memory that are no longer in use are reused.
                   By default Rust uses the system allocator, which is generally the one dictated
                   by the standard C library. This works well for most use cases, but if necessary,
                   you can override which allocator Rust will use through the GlobalAlloc trait
                   combined with the #[global_allocator] attribute, which requires an imple-
                   mentation of an alloc method for allocating a new segment of memory and
                   dealloc for returning a past allocation to the allocator to reuse.
                        In environments without an operating system, the standard C library
                   is also generally not available, and so neither is the standard system alloca-
                   tor. For that reason, #![no_std] also excludes all types that rely on dynamic
                   memory allocation. But since it’s entirely possible to implement a memory
                   allocator without access to a full-blown operating system, Rust allows you
                   to opt back into just the part of the Rust standard library that requires an
                   allocator without opting into all of std through the alloc crate. The alloc
                   crate comes with the standard Rust toolchain (just like core and std) and
                   contains most of your favorite heap-allocation types, like Box, Arc, String,
                   Vec, and BTreeMap. HashMap is not among them, since it relies on random num-
                   ber generation for its key hashing, which is an operating system facility. To
                   use types from alloc in a no_std context, all you have to do is replace any
                   imports of those types that previously had use std:: with use alloc:: instead.
                   Do keep in mind, though, that depending on alloc means your #![no_std]
                   crate will no longer be usable by any program that disallows dynamic mem-
                   ory allocation, either because it doesn’t have an allocator or because it has
                   too little memory to permit dynamic memory allocation in the first place.

       NOTE        Some programming domains, like the Linux kernel, may allow dynamic memory
                   allocation only if out-of-memory errors are handled gracefully (that is, without pan-
                   icking). For such use cases, you’ll want to provide try_ versions of any methods you
                   expose that might allocate. The try_ methods should use fallible methods of any inner
                   types (like the currently unstable Box::try_new or Vec::try_reserve) rather than ones
                   that just panic (like Box::new or Vec::reserve) and propagate those errors out to the
                   caller, who can then handle them appropriately.

                        It might strike you as odd that it’s possible to write nontrivial crates that
                   use only core. After all, they can’t use collections, the String type, the net-
                   work, or the filesystem, and they don’t even have a notion of time! The trick
                   to core-only crates is to utilize the stack and static allocations. For example,
                   for a heapless vector, you allocate enough memory up front—either in static
                   memory or in a function’s stack frame—for the largest number of elements
                   you expect the vector to be able to hold, and then augment it with a usize
                   that tracks how many elements it currently holds. To push to the vector, you
                   write to the next element in the (statically sized) array and increment a vari-
                   able that tracks the number of elements. If the vector’s length ever reaches
                   the static size, the next push fails. Listing 12-1 gives an example of such a
                   heapless vector type implemented using const generics.

        struct ArrayVec<T, const N: usize> {
            values: [Option<T>; N],
            len: usize,
        }
        impl<T, const N: usize> ArrayVec<T, N> {
            fn try_push(&mut self, t: T) -> Result<(), T> {
                if self.len == N {
                    return Err(t);
                }
                self.values[self.len] = Some(t);
                self.len += 1;
                return Ok(());
            }
        }

Listing 12-1: A heapless vector type

             We make ArrayVec generic over both the type of its elements, T, and the
        maximum number of elements, N, and then represent the vector as an array
        of N optional Ts. This structure always stores N Option<T>, so it has a size known
        at compile time and can be stored on the stack, but it can still act like a vec-
        tor by using runtime information to inform how we access the array.

 NOTE   We could have implemented ArrayVec using [MaybeUninit<T>; N] to avoid the over-
        head of the Option, but that would require using unsafe code, which isn’t warranted
        for this example.

The Rust Runtime
        You may have heard the claim that Rust doesn’t have a runtime. While
        that’s true at a high level—it doesn’t have a garbage collector, an inter-
        preter, or a built-in user-level scheduler—it’s not really true in the strictest
        sense. Specifically, Rust does have some special code that runs before your
        main function and in response to certain special conditions in your code,
        which really is a form of bare-bones runtime.

        The Panic Handler
        The first bit of such special code is Rust’s panic handler. When Rust code
        panics by invoking panic! or panic_any, the panic handler dictates what
        happens next. When the Rust runtime is available—as is the case on most
        targets that supply std—the panic handler first invokes the panic hook set
        via std::panic::set_hook, which prints a message and optionally a backtrace
        to standard error by default. It then either unwinds the current thread’s
        stack or aborts the process, depending on the panic setting chosen for cur-
        rent compilation (either through Cargo configuration or arguments passed
        directly to rustc).
             However, not all targets provide a panic handler. For example, most
        embedded targets do not, as there isn’t necessarily a single implementation
        that makes sense across all the uses for such a target. For targets that don’t

                   supply a panic handler, Rust still needs to know what to do when a panic
                   occurs. To that end, we can use the #[panic_handler] attribute to decorate a
                   single function in the program with the signature fn(&PanicInfo) -> !. That
                   function is called whenever the program invokes a panic, and it is passed
                   information about the panic in the form of a core::panic::PanicInfo. What
                   the function does with that information is entirely unspecified, but it can
                   never return (as indicated by the ! return type). This is important, since the
                   Rust compiler assumes that no code that follows a panic is run.
                        There are many valid ways for a panic handler to avoid returning. The
                   standard panic handler unwinds the thread’s stack and then terminates the
                   thread, but a panic handler can also halt the thread using loop {}, abort the
                   program, or do anything else that makes sense for the target platform, even
                   as far as resetting the device.

                   Program Initialization
                   Contrary to popular belief, the main function is not the first thing that runs
                   in a Rust program. Instead, the main symbol in a Rust binary actually points
                   to a function in the standard library called lang_start. That function per-
                   forms the (fairly minimal) setup for the Rust runtime, including stashing
                   the program’s command-line arguments in a place where std::env::args can
                   get to them, setting the name of the main thread, handling panics in the
                   main function, flushing standard output on program exit, and setting up sig-
                   nal handlers. The lang_start function in turn calls the main function defined
                   in your crate, which then doesn’t need to think about how, for example,
                   Windows and Linux differ in how command-line arguments are passed in.
                        This arrangement works well on platforms where all of that setup is sen-
                   sible and supported, but it presents a problem on embedded platforms where
                   main memory may not even be accessible when the program starts. On such
                   platforms, you’ll generally want to opt out of the Rust initialization code
                   entirely using the #![no_main] crate-level attribute. This attribute completely
                   omits lang_start, meaning you as the developer must figure out how the pro-
                   gram should be started, such as by declaring a function with #[export_name =
                   "main"] that matches the expected launch sequence for the target platform.

       NOTE        On platforms that truly run no code before they jump to the defined start symbol,
                   like most embedded devices, the initial values of static variables may not even match
                   what’s specified in the source code. In such cases, your initialization function will
                   need to explicitly initialize the various static memory segments with the initial data
                   values specified in your program binary.

                   The Out-of-Memory Handler
                   If you write a program that wishes to use alloc but is built for a platform
                   that does not supply an allocator, you must dictate which allocator to use
                   using the #[global_allocator] attribute mentioned earlier in the chapter.
                   But you also have to specify what happens if that global allocator fails

        to allocate memory. Specifically, you need to define an out-of-memory handler
        to say what should happen if an infallible operation like Vec::push needs to
        allocate more memory, but the allocator cannot supply it.
             The default behavior of the out-of-memory handler on std-enabled
        platforms is to print an error message to standard error and then abort the
        process. However, on a platform that, for example, doesn’t have standard
        error, that obviously won’t work. At the time of writing, on such platforms
        your program must explicitly define an out-of-memory handler using the
        unstable attribute #[lang = "oom"]. Keep in mind that the handler should
        almost certainly prevent future execution, as otherwise the code that tried
        to allocate will continue executing without knowing that it did not receive
        the memory it asked for!

 NOTE   By the time you read this, the out-of-memory handler may already have been stabilized
        under a permanent name (#[alloc_error_handler], most likely). Work is also under-
        way to give the default std out-of-memory handler the same kind of “hook” function-
        ality as Rust’s panic handler, so that code can change the out-of-memory behavior on
        the fly through a method like set_alloc_error_hook.

Low-Level Memory Accesses
        In Chapter 10, we discussed the fact that the compiler is given a fair amount
        of leeway in how it turns your program statements into machine instruc-
        tions, and that the CPU is allowed some wiggle room to execute instruc-
        tions out of order. Normally, the shortcuts and optimizations that the
        compiler and CPU can take advantage of are invisible to the semantics of
        the program—you can’t generally tell whether, say, two reads have been
        reordered relative to each other or whether two reads from the same mem-
        ory location actually result in two CPU load instructions. This is by design.
        The language and hardware designers carefully specified what semantics
        programmers commonly expect from their code when it runs so that your
        code generally does what you expect it to.
             However, no_std programming sometimes takes you beyond the usual
        border of “invisible optimizations.” In particular, you’ll often communicate
        with hardware devices through memory mapping, where the internal state
        of the device is made available in carefully chosen regions in memory. For
        example, while your computer starts up, the memory address range 0xA0000–
        0xBFFFF maps to a crude graphics rendering pipeline; writes to individual
        bytes in that range will change particular pixels (or blocks, depending on
        the mode) on the screen.
             When you’re interacting with device-mapped memory, the device
        may implement custom behavior for each memory access to that region of
        memory, so the assumptions your CPU and compiler make about regular
        memory loads and stores may no longer hold. For instance, it is common
        for hardware devices to have memory-mapped registers that are modified

                   when they’re read, meaning the reads have side effects. In such cases, the
                   compiler can’t safely elide a memory store operation if you read the same
                   memory address twice in a row!
                        A similar issue arises when program execution is suddenly diverted in
                   ways that aren’t represented in the code and thus that the compiler can-
                   not expect. Execution might be diverted if there is no underlying operat-
                   ing system to handle processor exceptions or interrupts, or if a process
                   receives a signal that interrupts execution. In those cases, the execution
                   of the active segment of code is stopped, and the CPU starts executing
                   instructions in the event handler for whatever event triggered the diversion
                   instead. Normally, since the compiler can anticipate all possible executions,
                   it arranges its optimizations so that executions cannot observe when opera-
                   tions have been performed out of order or optimized away. However, since
                   the compiler can’t predict these exceptional jumps, it also cannot plan for
                   them to be oblivious to its optimizations, so these event handlers might
                   actually observe instructions that have run in a different order than those
                   in the original program code.
                        To deal with these exceptional situations, Rust provides volatile memory
                   operations that cannot be elided or reordered with respect to other vola-
                   tile operations. These operations take the form of std::ptr::read_volatile
                   and std::ptr::write_volatile. Volatile operations are exactly the right fit
                   for accessing memory-mapped hardware resources: they map directly to
                   memory access operations with no compiler trickery, and the guarantee
                   that volatile operations aren’t reordered relative to one another ensures
                   that hardware operations with possible side effects don’t happen out of
                   order even when they would normally look interchangeable (such as a load
                   of one address and a store to a different address). The no-reordering guar-
                   antee also helps the exceptional execution situation, as long as any code
                   that touches memory accessed in an exceptional context uses only volatile
                   memory operations.

       NOTE        There is also a std::sync::atomic::compiler_fence function that prevents the com-
                   piler from reordering non-volatile memory accesses. You’ll very rarely need a compiler
                   fence, but its documentation is an interesting read.

                                            INCLUDING A SSEMBLY CODE

                       These days, you rarely need to drop down to writing assembly code to accom-
                       plish any given task. But for low-level hardware programming where you need
                       to initialize CPUs at boot or issue strange instructions to manipulate memory
                       mappings, assembly code is still sometimes required. At the time of writing,
                       there is an RFC and a mostly complete implementation of inline assembly syntax
                       on nightly Rust, but nothing has been stabilized yet, so I won’t discuss the syntax
                       in this book.

                  It’s still possible to write assembly on stable Rust—you just need to get a lit-
            tle creative. Specifically, remember build scripts from Chapter 11? Well, Cargo
            build scripts can emit certain special directives to standard output to augment
            Cargo’s standard build process, including cargo:rustc-link-lib=static=xyz
            to link the static library file libxyz.a into the final binary, and cargo:rustc-link-
            search:/some/path to add /some/path to the search path for link objects.
            Using those, we can add a build.rs to the project that compiles a standalone
            assembly file (.s) to an object file (.o) using the target platform’s compiler and
            then repackages it into a static archive (.a) using the appropriate archiving
            tool (usually ar). The project then emits those two Cargo directives, pointing at
            where it placed the static archive—probably in OUT_DIR—and we’re off to the
            races! If the target platform doesn’t change, you can even include the precom-
            piled .a when publishing your crate so that consumers don’t need to rebuild it.

Misuse-Resistant Hardware Abstraction
        Rust’s type system excels at encapsulating unsafe, hairy, and otherwise
        unpleasant code behind safe, ergonomic interfaces. Nowhere is that
        more important than in the infamously complex world of low-level sys-
        tems programming, littered with magic hardware-defined values pulled
        from obscure manuals and mysterious undocumented assembly instruc-
        tion incantations to get devices into just the right state. And all that in a
        space where a runtime error might crash more than just a user program!
            In no_std programs, it is immensely important to use the type system to
        make illegal states impossible to represent, as we discussed in Chapter 3. If
        certain combinations of register values cannot occur at the same time, then
        create a single type whose type parameters indicate the current state of the
        relevant registers, and implement only legal transitions on it, like we did for
        the rocket example in Listing 3-2.

 NOTE   Make sure to also review the advice from Chapter 3 on API design—all of that
        applies in the context of no_std programs as well!

            For example, consider a pair of registers where at most one register
        should be “on” at any given point in time. Listing 12-2 shows how you can
        represent that in a (single-threaded) program in a way makes it impossible
        to write code that violates that invariant.

        // raw register address -- private submodule
        mod registers;
        pub struct On;
        pub struct Off;
        pub struct Pair<R1, R2>(PhantomData<(R1, R2)>);
        impl Pair<Off, Off> {
            pub fn get() -> Option<Self> {

                             static mut PAIR_TAKEN: bool = false;
                             if unsafe { PAIR_TAKEN } {
                                 None
                             } else {
                                 // Ensure initial state is correct.
                                 registers::off("r1");
                                 registers::off("r2");
                                 unsafe { PAIR_TAKEN = true };
                                 Some(Pair(PhantomData))
                             }
                        }

                        pub fn first_on(self) -> Pair<On, Off> {
                            registers::set_on("r1");
                            Pair(PhantomData)
                        }
                        // .. and inverse for -> Pair<Off, On>
                    }
                    impl Pair<On, Off> {
                        pub fn off(self) -> Pair<Off, Off> {
                            registers::set_off("r1");
                            Pair(PhantomData)
                        }
                    }
                    // .. and inverse for Pair<Off, On>

Listing 12-2: Statically ensuring correct operation

                         There are a few noteworthy patterns in this code. The first is that we
                    ensure only a single instance of Pair ever exists by checking a private static
                    Boolean in its only constructor and making all methods consume self. We
                    then ensure that the initial state is valid and that only valid state transitions
                    are possible to express, and therefore the invariant must hold globally.
                         The second noteworthy pattern in Listing 12-2 is that we use PhantomData
                    to take advantage of zero-sized types and represent runtime information
                    statically. That is, at any given point in the code the types tell us what the
                    runtime state must be, and therefore we don’t need to track or check any
                    state related to the registers at runtime. There’s no need to check that r2
                    isn’t already on when we’re asked to enable r1, since the types prevent writ-
                    ing a program in which that is the case.

      Cross-Compilation
                    Usually, you’ll write no_std programs on a computer with a full-fledged
                    operating system running and all the niceties of modern hardware, but ulti-
                    mately run it on a dinky hardware device with 93/4 bits of RAM and a sock
                    for a CPU. That calls for cross-compilation—you need to compile the code in
                    your development environment, but compile it for the sock. That’s not the
                    only context in which cross-compilation is important, though. For exam-
                    ple, it’s increasingly common to have one build pipeline produce binary

       artifacts for all consumer platforms rather than trying to have a build pipe-
       line for every platform your consumers may be using, and that means using
       cross-compilation.

NOTE   If you’re actually compiling for something sock-like with limited memory, or even
       something as fancy as a potato, you may want to set the opt-level Cargo configura-
       tion to "s" to optimize for smaller binary sizes.

            Cross-compiling involves two platforms: the host platform and the target
       platform. The host platform is the one doing the compiling, and the target
       platform is the one that will eventually run the output of the compilation.
       We specify platforms as target triples, which take the form machine-­vendor-os.
       The machine part dictates the machine architecture the code will run on,
       such as x86_64, armv7, or wasm32, and tells the compiler what instruction set to
       use for the emitted machine code. The vendor part generally takes the value
       of pc on Windows, apple on macOS and iOS, and unknown everywhere else,
       and doesn’t affect compilation in any meaningful way; it’s mostly irrelevant
       and can even be left out. The os part tells the compiler what format to use
       for the final binary artifacts, so a value of linux dictates Linux .so files, win-
       dows dictates Windows .dll files, and so on.

NOTE   By default, Cargo assumes that the target platform is the same as the host platform,
       which is why you generally never have to tell Cargo to, say, compile for Linux when
       you’re already on Linux. Sometimes you may want to use --target even if the CPU
       and OS of the target are the same, though, such as to target the musl implementation
       of libc.

            To tell Cargo to cross-compile, you simply pass it the --target <target
       ­triple> argument with your triple of choice. Cargo will then take care of
       forwarding that information to the Rust compiler so that it generates binary
       artifacts that will work on the given target platform. Cargo will also take care
       to use the appropriate version of the standard library for that platform—after
       all, the standard library contains a lot of conditional compilation directives
       (using #[cfg(...)]) so that the right system calls get invoked and the right
       architecture-specific implementations are used, so we can’t use the standard
       library for the host platform on the target.
             The target platform also dictates what components of the standard
       library are available. For example, while x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu includes
       the full std library, something like thumbv7m-none-eabi does no, and doesn’t
       even define an allocator, so if you use alloc without defining one explicitly,
       you’ll get a build error. This comes in handy for testing that code you write
       actually doesn’t require std (recall that even with #![no_std] you can still have
       use std::, since no_std opts out of only the std prelude). If you have your con-
       tinuous integration pipeline build your crate with --target thumbv7m-none-eabi,
       any attempt to access components from anything but core will trigger a build
       failure. Crucially, this will also check that your crate doesn’t accidentally
       bring in dependencies that themselves use items from std (or alloc).

                                                  PL ATFORM SUPPORT

                       The standard Rust installer, Rustup, doesn’t install the standard library for all the
                       target triples that Rust supports by default. That would be a waste of space and
                       bandwidth. Instead, you have to use the command rustup target add to install
                       the appropriate standard library versions for additional targets. If no version of
                       the standard library exists for your target platform, you’ll have to compile it from
                       source yourself by adding the rust-src Rustup component and using Cargo’s
                       (currently unstable) build-std feature to also build std (and/or core and alloc)
                       when building any crate.
                            If your target is not supported by the Rust compiler—that is, if rustc doesn’t
                       even know about your target triple—you’ll have to go one step further and teach
                       rustc about the properties of the triple using a custom target specification. How
                       you do that is both currently unstable and beyond the scope of this book, but a
                       search for “custom target specification json” is a good place to start.

      Summary
                   In this chapter, we’ve covered what lies beneath the standard library—or,
                   more precisely, beneath std. We’ve gone over what you get with core, how
                   you can extend your non-std reach with alloc, and what the (tiny) Rust run-
                   time adds to your programs to make fn main work. We’ve also taken a look
                   at how you can interact with device-mapped memory and otherwise handle
                   the unorthodox execution patterns that can happen at the very lowest level
                   of hardware programming, and how to safely encapsulate at least some of
                   the oddities of hardware in the Rust type system. Next, we’ll move from the
                   very small to the very large by discussing how to navigate, understand, and
                   maybe even contribute to the larger Rust ecosystem.

