                          13
             THE RUST ECOSYSTEM

           Programming rarely happens in a vacuum
           these days—nearly every Rust crate you
          build is likely to take dependencies on some
       code that wasn’t written by you. Whether this
trend is good, bad, or a little of both is a subject of
heavy debate, but either way, it’s a reality of today’s
developer experience.
    In this brave new interdependent world, it’s more important than ever
to have a solid grasp of what libraries and tools are available and to stay up
to date on the latest and greatest of what the Rust community has to offer.
This chapter is dedicated to how you can leverage, track, understand, and
contribute back to the Rust ecosystem. Since this is the final chapter, in the
closing section I’ll also provide some suggestions of additional resources
you can explore to continue developing your Rust skills.
      What’s Out There?
                    Despite its relative youth, Rust already has an ecosystem large enough that
                    it’s hard to keep track of everything that’s available. If you know what you
                    want, you may be able to search your way to a set of appropriate crates and
                    then use download statistics and superficial vibe-checks on each crate’s
                    repository to determine which may make for reasonable dependencies.
                    However, there’s also a plethora of tools, crates, and general language fea-
                    tures that you might not necessarily know to look for that could potentially
                    save you countless hours and difficult design decisions.
                          In this section, I’ll go through some of the tools, libraries, and Rust fea-
                    tures I have found helpful over the years in the hopes that they may come
                    in useful for you at some point too!

                    Tools
                    First off, here are some Rust tools I find myself using regularly that you
                    should add to your toolbelt:
                    cargo-deny

                        Provides a way to lint your dependency graph. At the time of writing,
                        you can use cargo-deny to allow only certain licenses, deny-list crates or
                        specific crate versions, detect dependencies with known vulnerabilities
                        or that use Git sources, and detect crates that appear multiple times
                        with different versions in the dependency graph. By the time you’re
                        reading this, there may be even more handy lints in place.

                    cargo-expand

                        Expands macros in a given crate and lets you inspect the output, which
                        makes it much easier to spot mistakes deep down in macro transcrib-
                        ers or procedural macros. cargo-expand is an invaluable tool when you’re
                        writing your own macros.

                    cargo-hack

                        Helps you check that your crate works with any combination of features
                        enabled. The tool presents an interface similar to that of Cargo itself
                        (like cargo check, build, and test) but gives you the ability to run a given
                        command with all possible combinations (the powerset) of the crate’s
                        features.

                    cargo-llvm-lines

                        Analyzes the mapping from Rust code to the intermediate representa-
                        tion (IR) that’s passed to the part of the Rust compiler that actually
                        generates machine code (LLVM), and tells you which bits of Rust code
                        produce the largest IR. This is useful because a larger IR means longer
                        compile times, so identifying what Rust code generates a bigger IR (due

      to, for example, monomorphization) can highlight opportunities for
      reducing compile times.

cargo-outdated

      Checks whether any of your dependencies, either direct or transitive,
      have newer versions available. Crucially, unlike cargo update, it even
      tells you about new major versions, so it’s an essential tool for check-
      ing if you’re missing out on newer versions due to an outdated major
      version specifier. Just keep in mind that bumping the major version of
      a dependency may be a breaking change for your crate if you expose
      that dependency’s types in your interface!

cargo-udeps

      Identifies any dependencies listed in your Cargo.toml that are never actu-
      ally used. Maybe you used them in the past but they’ve since become
      redundant, or maybe they should be moved to dev-dependencies; what-
      ever the case, this tool helps you trim down bloat in your dependency
      closure.
    While they’re not specifically tools for developing Rust, I highly recom-
mend fd and ripgrep too—they’re excellent improvements over their prede-
cessors find and grep and also happen to be written in Rust themselves. I use
both every day.

Libraries
Next up are some useful but lesser-known crates that I reach for regularly,
and that I suspect I will continue to depend on for a long time:
bytes

      Provides an efficient mechanism for passing around subslices of a single
      piece of contiguous memory without having to copy or deal with life-
      times. This is great in low-level networking code where you may need
      multiple views into a single chunk of bytes, and copying is a no-no.

criterion

      A statistics-driven benchmarking library that uses math to eliminate
      noise from benchmark measurements and reliably detect changes in
      performance over time. You should almost certainly be using it if you’re
      including micro-benchmarks in your crate.

cxx

      Provides a safe and ergonomic mechanism for calling C++ code from
      Rust and Rust code from C++. If you’re willing to invest some time into
      declaring your interfaces more thoroughly in advance in exchange for
      much nicer cross-language compatibility, this library is well worth your
      attention.

                   flume

                          Implements a multi-producer, multi-consumer channel that is faster,
                          more flexible, and simpler than the one included with the Rust stan-
                          dard library. It also supports both asynchronous and synchronous oper-
                          ation and so is a great bridge between those two worlds.

                   hdrhistogram

                          A Rust port of the High Dynamic Range (HDR) histogram data struc-
                          ture, which provides a compact representation of histograms across a
                          wide range of values. Anywhere you currently track averages or min/
                          max values, you should most likely be using an HDR histogram instead;
                          it can give you much better insight into the distribution of your metrics.

                   heapless

                          Supplies data structures that do not use the heap. Instead, heapless’s
                          data structures are all backed by static memory, which makes them
                          perfect for embedded contexts or other situations in which allocation is
                          undesirable.

                   itertools

                          Extends the Iterator trait from the standard library with lots of new
                          convenient methods for deduplication, grouping, and computing pow-
                          ersets. These extension methods can significantly reduce boilerplate in
                          code, such as where you manually implement some common algorithm
                          over a sequence of values, like finding the min and max at the same
                          time (Itertools::minmax), or where you use a common pattern like check-
                          ing that an iterator has exactly one item (Itertools::exactly_one).

                   nix

                          Provides idiomatic bindings to system calls on Unix-like systems,
                          which allows for a much better experience than trying to cobble
                          together the C-compatible FFI types yourself when working with
                          something like libc directly.

                   pin-project

                          Provides macros that enforce the pinning safety invariants for anno-
                          tated types, which in turn provide a safe pinning interface to those
                          types. This allows you to avoid most of the hassle of getting Pin and
                          Unpin right for your own types. There’s also pin-project-lite, which
                          avoids the (currently) somewhat heavy dependency on the procedural
                          macro machinery at the cost of slightly worse ergonomics.

                   ring

                          Takes the good parts from the cryptography library BoringSSL,
                          written in C, and brings them to Rust through a fast, simple, and

       hard-to-misuse interface. It’s a great starting point if you need to use
       cryptography in your crate. You’ve already most likely come across this
       in the rustls library, which uses ring to provide a modern, secure-by-
       default TLS stack.

slab

       Implements an efficient data structure to use in place of HashMap<Token, T>,
       where Token is an opaque type used only to differentiate between entries in
       the map. This kind of pattern comes up a lot when managing resources,
       where the set of current resources must be managed centrally but indi-
       vidual resources must also be accessible somehow.

static_assertions

       Provides static assertions—that is, assertions that are evaluated at, and
       thus may fail at, compile time. You can use it to assert things like that
       a type implements a given trait (like Send) or is of a given size. I highly
       recommend adding these kinds of assertions for code where those
       guarantees are likely to be important.

structopt

       Wraps the well-known argument parsing library clap and provides a way
       to describe your application’s command line interface entirely using the
       Rust type system (plus macro annotations). When you parse your appli-
       cation’s arguments, you get a value of the type you defined, and you
       thus get all the type checking benefits, like exhaustive matching and
       IDE auto-complete.

thiserror

       Makes writing custom enumerated error types, like the ones we discussed
       in Chapter 4, a joy. It takes care of implementing the recommended traits
       and following the established conventions and leaves you to define just
       the critical bits that are unique to your application.

tower

       Effectively takes the function signature async fn(Request) -> Response and
       implements an entire ecosystem on top of it. At its core is the Service
       trait, which represents a type that can turn a request into a response
       (something I suspect may make its way into the standard library one
       day). This is a great abstraction to build anything that looks like a ser-
       vice on top of.

tracing

       Provides all the plumbing needed to efficiently trace the execution of
       your applications. Crucially, it is agnostic to the types of events you’re
       tracing and what you want to do with those events. This library can be

                       used for logging, metrics collection, debugging, profiling, and obvi-
                       ously tracing, all with the same machinery and interfaces.

                   Rust Tooling
                   The Rust toolchain has a few features up its sleeve that you may not know
                   to look for. These are usually for very specific use cases, but if they match
                   yours, they can be lifesavers!

                   Rustup
                   Rustup, the Rust toolchain installer, does its job so efficiently that it tends
                   to fade into the background and get forgotten about. You’ll occasionally
                   use it to update your toolchain, set a directory override, or install a com-
                   ponent, but that’s about it. However, Rustup supports one very handy trick
                   that it’s worthwhile to know about: the toolchain override shorthand. You
                   can pass +toolchain as the first argument to any Rustup-managed binary,
                   and the binary will work as if you’d set an override for the given toolchain,
                   run the command, and then reset the override back to what it was previ-
                   ously. So, cargo +nightly miri will run Miri using the nightly toolchain, and
                   cargo +1.53.0 check will check if the code compiles with Rust 1.53.0. The lat-
                   ter comes in particularly handy for checking that you haven’t broken your
                   minimum supported Rust version contract.
                        Rustup also has a neat subcommand, doc, that opens a local copy of the
                   Rust standard library documentation for the current version of the Rust
                   compiler in your browser. This is invaluable if you’re developing on the go
                   without an internet connection!

                   Cargo
                   Cargo also has some handy features that aren’t always easy to discover.
                   The first of these is cargo tree, a Cargo subcommand built right into Cargo
                   itself for inspecting a crate’s dependency graph. This command’s primary
                   purpose is to print the dependency graph as a tree. This can be useful on
                   its own, but where cargo tree really shines is through the --invert option:
                   it takes a crate identifier and produces an inverted tree showing all the
                   dependency paths from the current crate that bring in that dependency.
                   So, for example, cargo tree -i rand will print all of the ways in which the
                   current crate depends on any version of rand, including through transitive
                   dependencies. This is invaluable if you want to eliminate a dependency, or
                   a particular version of a dependency, and wonder why it still keeps being
                   pulled in. You can also pass the -e features option to include information
                   about why each Cargo feature of the crate in question is enabled.
                        Speaking of Cargo subcommands, it’s really easy to write your own,
                   whether for sharing with other people or just for your own local develop-
                   ment. When Cargo is invoked with a subcommand it doesn’t recognize, it
                   checks whether a program by the name cargo-$subcommand exists. If it does,
                   Cargo invokes that program and passes it any arguments that were passed

       on the command line—so, cargo foo bar will invoke cargo-foo with the argu-
       ment bar. Cargo will even integrate this command with cargo help by trans-
       lating cargo help foo into a call to cargo-foo --help.
            As you work on more Rust projects, you may notice that Cargo (and
       Rust more generally) isn’t exactly forgiving when it comes to disk space.
       Each project gets its own target directory for its compilation artifacts, and
       over time you end up accumulating several identical copies of compiled
       artifacts for common dependencies. Keeping artifacts for each project sepa-
       rate is a sensible choice, as they aren’t necessarily compatible across projects
       (say, if one project uses different compiler flags than another). But in most
       developer environments, sharing build artifacts is entirely reasonable and
       can save a fair amount of compilation time when switching between proj-
       ects. Luckily, configuring Cargo to share build artifacts is simple: just set
       [build] target in your ~/.cargo/config.toml file to the directory you want those
       shared artifacts to go in, and Cargo will take care of the rest. No more tar-
       get directories in sight! Just make sure you clean out that directory every
       now and again too, and be aware that cargo clean will now clean all of your
       projects’ build artifacts.

NOTE   Using a shared build directory can cause problems for projects that assume that com-
       piler artifacts will always be under the target/ subdirectory, so watch out for that.
       Also note that if a project does use different compiler flags, you’ll end up recompiling
       affected dependencies every time you move into or out of that project. In such cases,
       you’re best off overriding the target directory in that project’s Cargo configuration to a
       distinct location.

            Finally, if you ever feel like Cargo is taking a suspiciously long time to
       build your crate, you can reach for the currently unstable Cargo -Ztimings
       flag. Running Cargo with that flag outputs information about how long it
       took to process each crate, how long build scripts took to run, what crates
       had to wait for what other crates to finish compiling, and tons of other
       useful metrics. This might highlight a particularly slow dependency chain
       that you can then work to eliminate, or reveal a build script that compiles
       a native dependency from scratch that you can make use system libraries
       instead. If you want to dive even deeper, there’s also rustc -Ztime-passes,
       which emits information about where time is spent inside of the compiler
       for each crate—though that information is likely only useful if you’re look-
       ing to contribute to the compiler itself.

       rustc
       The Rust compiler also has some lesser-known features that can prove use-
       ful to enterprising developers. The first is the currently unstable -Zprint-
       type-sizes argument, which prints the sizes of all the types in the current
       crate. This produces a lot of information for all but the tiniest crates but
       is immensely valuable when trying to determine the source of unexpected
       time spent in calls to memcpy or to find ways to reduce memory use when allo-
       cating lots of objects of a particular type. The -Zprint-type-sizes argument

                   also displays the computed alignment and layout for each type, which may
                   point you to places where turning, say, a usize into a u32 could have a sig-
                   nificant impact on a type’s in-memory representation. After you debug a
                   particular type’s size, alignment, and layout, I recommend adding static
                   assertions to make sure that they don’t regress over time. You may also be
                   interested in the variant_size_differences lint, which issues a warning if a
                   crate contains enum types whose variants significantly differ in size.

       NOTE        To call rustc with particular flags, you have a few options: you can either set them in
                   the RUSTFLAGS environment variable or [build] rustflags in your .cargo/config.toml
                   to have them apply to every invocation of rustc from Cargo, or you can use cargo
                   rustc, which will pass any arguments you provide only to the rustc invocation for the
                   current crate.

                        If your profiling samples look weird, with stack frames reordered or
                   entirely missing, you could also try -Cforce-frame-pointers = yes. Frame point-
                   ers provide a more reliable way to unwind the stack—which is done a lot
                   during profiling—at the cost of an extra register being used for function
                   calls. Even though stack unwinding should work fine with just regular debug
                   symbols enabled (remember to set debug = true when using the release pro-
                   file), that’s not always the case, and frame pointers may take care of any
                   issues you do encounter.

                   The Standard Library
                   The Rust standard library is generally considered to be small compared
                   to those of other programming languages, but what it lacks in breadth, it
                   makes up for in depth; you won’t find a web server implementation or an
                   X.509 certificate parser in Rust’s standard library, but you will find more
                   than 40 different methods on the Option type alongside over 20 trait imple-
                   mentations. For the types it does include, Rust does its best to make avail-
                   able any relevant functionality that meaningfully improves ergonomics, so
                   you avoid all that verbose boilerplate that can so easily arise otherwise. In
                   this section, I’ll present some types, macros, functions, and methods from
                   the standard library that you may not have come across before, but that can
                   often simplify or improve (or both) your code.

                   Macros and Functions
                   Let’s start off with a few free-standing utilities. First up is the write! macro,
                   which lets you use format strings to write into a file, a network socket, or any-
                   thing else that implements Write. You may already be familiar with it—but
                   one little-known feature of write! is that it works with both std::io::Write and
                   std::fmt::Write, which means you can use it to write formatted text directly into
                   a String. That is, you can write use std::fmt::Write; write!(&mut s, "{}+1={}", x,
                   x + 1); to append the formatted text to the String s!
                        The iter::once function takes any value and produces an iterator that
                   yields that value once. This comes in handy when calling functions that take

iterators if you don’t want to allocate, or when combined with Iterator::chain
to append a single item to an existing iterator.
     We briefly talked about mem::replace in Chapter 1, but it’s worth bring-
ing up again in case you missed it. This function takes an exclusive refer-
ence to a T and an owned T, swaps the two so that the referent is now the
owned T, and returns ownership of the previous referent. This is useful
when you need to take ownership of a value in a situation where you have
only an exclusive reference, such as in implementations of Drop. See also
mem::take for when T: Default.

Types
Next, let’s look at some handy standard library types. The BufReader and
BufWriter types are a must for I/O operations that issue many small read or
write calls to the underlying I/O resource. These types wrap the respec-
tive underlying Read or Write and implement Read and Write themselves, but
they additionally buffer the operations to the I/O resource such that many
small reads do only one large read, and many small writes do only one large
write. This can significantly improve performance as you don’t have to cross
the system call barrier into the operating system as often.
     The Cow type, mentioned in Chapter 3, is useful when you want flex-
ibility in what types you hold or need flexibility in what you return. You’ll
rarely use Cow as a function argument (recall that you should let the caller
allocate if necessary), but it’s invaluable as a return type as it allows you
to accurately represent the return types of functions that may or may not
allocate. It’s also a perfect fit for types that can be used as inputs or outputs,
such as core types in RPC-like APIs. Say we have a type EntityIdentifier like
in Listing 13-1 that is used in an RPC service interface.

struct EntityIdentifier {
    namespace: String,
    name: String,
}

Listing 13-1: A representation of a combined input/output type that requires allocation

      Now imagine two methods: get_entity takes an EntityIdentifier as an
argument, and find_by returns an EntityIdentifier based on some search
parameters. The get_entity method requires only a reference since the
identifier will (presumably) be serialized before being sent to the server.
But for find_by, the entity will be deserialized from the server response and
must therefore be represented as an owned value. If we make get_entity
take &EntityIdentifier, it will mean callers must still allocate owned Strings
to call get_entity even though that’s not required by the interface, since
it’s required to construct an EntityIdentifier in the first place! We could
instead introduce a separate type for get_entity, EntityIdenifierRef, that
holds only &str types, but then we’d have two types to represent one thing.
Cow to the rescue! Listing 13-2 shows an EntityIdentifier that instead holds
Cows internally.

                   struct EntityIdentifier<'a> {
                       namespace: Cow<'a, str>,
                       name: Cow<'a str>,
                   }

Listing 13-2: A representation of a combined input/output type that does not require
                   allocation

                       With this construction, get_entity can take any EntityIdentifier<'_>,
                   which allows the caller to use just references to call the method. And find_
                   by can return EntityIdentifier<'static>, where all the fields are Cow::Owned.
                   One type shared across both interfaces, with no unnecessary allocation
                   requirements!

       NOTE        If you implement a type this way, I recommend you also provide an into_owned
                   method that turns an <'a> instance into a <'static> instance by calling Cow::into_
                   owned on all the fields. Otherwise, users will have no way to make longer-lasting
                   clones of your type when all they have is an <'a>.

                        The std::sync::Once type is a synchronization primitive that lets you run
                   a given piece of code exactly once, at initialization time. This is great for
                   initialization that’s part of an FFI where the library on the other side of the
                   FFI boundary requires that the initialization is performed only once.
                        The VecDeque type is an oft-neglected member of std::collections that
                   I find myself reaching for surprisingly often—basically, whenever I need
                   a stack or a queue. Its interface is similar to that of a Vec, and like Vec its
                   in-memory representation is a single chunk of memory. The difference is
                   that VecDeque keeps track of both the start and end of the actual data in that
                   single allocation. This allows constant-time push and pop from either side of
                   the VecDeque, meaning it can be used as a stack, as a queue, or even both at
                   the same time. The cost you pay is that the values are no longer necessarily
                   contiguous in memory (they may have wrapped around), which means that
                   VecDeque<T> does not implement AsRef<[T]>.

                   Methods
                   Let’s round off with a rapid-fire look at some neat methods. First up is
                   Arc::make_mut, which takes a &mut Arc<T> and gives you a &mut T. If the Arc is
                   the last one in existence, it gives you the T that was behind the Arc; other-
                   wise, it allocates a new Arc<T> that holds a clone of the T, swaps that in for
                   the currently referenced Arc, and then gives &mut to the T in the new single-
                   ton Arc.
                        The Clone::clone_from method is an alternative form of .clone() that
                   lets you reuse an instance of the type you clone rather than allocate a new
                   one. In other words, if you already have an x: T, you can do x.clone_from(y)
                   rather than x = y.clone(), and you might save yourself some allocations.
                        std::fmt::Formatter::debug_* is by far the easiest way to implement Debug
                   yourself if #[derive(Debug)] won’t work for your use case, such as if you want
                   to include only some fields or expose information that isn’t exposed by the

        Debug implementations of your type’s fields. When implementing the fmt
        method of Debug, simply call the appropriate debug_ method on the Formatter
        that’s passed in (debug_struct or debug_map, for example), call the included
        methods on the resulting type to fill in details about the type (like field to
        add a field or entries to add a key/value entry), and then call finish.
            Instant::elapsed returns the Duration since an Instant was created. This
        is much more concise than the common approach of creating a new Instant
        and subtracting the earlier instance.
              Option::as_deref takes an Option<P> where P: Deref and returns
        Option<&P::Target> (there’s also an as_deref_mut method). This simple opera-
        tion can make functional transformation chains that operate on Option
        much cleaner by avoiding the inscrutable .as_ref().map(|r| &**r).
              Ord::clamp lets you take any type that implements Ord and clamp it
        between two other values of a given range. That is, given a lower limit min
        and an upper limit max, x.clamp(min, max) returns min if x is less than min, max
        if x is greater than max, and x otherwise.
              Result::transpose and its counterpart Option::transpose invert types that
        nest Result and Option. That is, transposing a Result<Option<T>, E> gives an
        Option<Result<T, E>>, and vice versa. When combined with ?, this operation
        can make for cleaner code when working with Iterator::next and similar
        methods in fallible contexts.
              Vec::swap_remove is Vec::remove’s faster twin. Vec::remove preserves the
        order of the vector, which means that to remove an element in the middle,
        it must shift all the later elements in the vector down by one. This can be
        very slow for large vectors. Vec::swap_remove, on the other hand, swaps the
        to-be-removed element with the last element and then truncates the vector’s
        length by one, which is a constant-time operation. Be aware, though, that it
        will shuffle your vector around and thus invalidate old indexes!

Patterns in the Wild
        As you start exploring codebases that aren’t your own, you’ll likely come
        across a couple of common Rust patterns that we haven’t discussed in the
        book so far. Knowing about them will make it easier to recognize them, and
        thus understand their purpose, when you do encounter them. You may even
        find use for them in your own codebase one day!

        Index Pointers
        Index pointers allow you to store multiple references to data within a data
        structure without running afoul of the borrow checker. For example, if you
        want to store a collection of data so that it can be efficiently accessed in
        more than one way, such as by keeping one HashMap keyed by one field and
        one keyed by a different field, you don’t want to store the underlying data
        multiple times too. You could use Arc or Rc, but they use dynamic reference
        counting that introduces unnecessary overhead, and the extra bookkeeping
        requires you to store additional bytes per entry. You could use references,
        but the lifetimes become difficult if not impossible to manage because the

                   data and the references live in the same data structure (it’s a self-referential
                   data structure, as we discussed in Chapter 8). You could use raw pointers
                   combined with Pin to ensure the pointers remain valid, but that introduces
                   a lot of complexity as well as unsafety you then need to carefully consider.
                        Most crates use index pointers—or, as I like to call them, indeferences—
                   instead. The idea is simple: store each data entry in some indexable data
                   structure like a Vec, and then store just the index in a derived data struc-
                   ture. To then perform an operation, first use the derived data structure
                   to efficiently find the data index, and then use the index to retrieve the
                   referenced data. No lifetimes needed—and you can even have cycles in the
                   derived data representation if you wish!
                        The indexmap crate, which provides a HashMap implementation where the
                   iteration order matches the map insertion order, provides a good example
                   of this pattern. The implementation has to store the keys in two places,
                   both in the map of keys to values and in the list of all the keys, but it obvi-
                   ously doesn’t want to keep two copies in case the key type itself is large. So,
                   it uses index pointers. Specifically, it keeps all the key/value pairs in a single
                   Vec and then keeps a mapping from key hashes to Vec indexes. To iterate
                   over all the elements of the map, it just walks the Vec. To look up a given
                   key, it hashes that key, looks that hash up in the mapping, which yields the
                   key’s index in the Vec (the index pointer), and then uses that to get the key’s
                   value from the Vec.
                        The petgraph crate, which implements graph data structures and algo-
                   rithms, also uses this pattern. The crate stores one Vec of all node values
                   and another of all edge values and then only ever uses the indexes into
                   those Vecs to refer to a node or edge. So, for example, the two nodes associ-
                   ated with an edge are stored in that edge simply as two u32s, rather than as
                   references or reference-counted values.
                        The trick lies in how you support deletions. To delete a data entry, you
                   first need to search for its index in all of the derived data structures and
                   remove the corresponding entries, and then you need to remove the data
                   from the root data store. If the root data store is a Vec, removing the entry
                   will also change the index of one other data entry (when using swap_remove),
                   so you then need to go update all the derived data structures to reflect the
                   new index for the entry that moved.

                   Drop Guards
                   Drop guards provide a simple but reliable way to ensure that a bit of code
                   runs even in the presence of panics, which is often essential in unsafe code.
                   An example is a function that takes a closure f: FnOnce and executes it under
                   mutual exclusion using atomics. Say the function uses compare_exchange (dis-
                   cussed in Chapter 10) to set a Boolean from false to true, calls f, and then
                   sets the Boolean back to false to end the mutual exclusion. But consider
                   what happens if f panics—the function will never get to run its cleanup, and
                   no other call will be able to enter the mutual exclusion section ever again.
                        It’s possible to work around this using catch_unwind, but drop guards
                   provide an alternative that is often more ergonomic. Listing 13-3 shows

       how, in our current example, we can use a drop guard to ensure the
       Boolean always gets reset.

       fn mutex(lock: &AtomicBool, f: impl FnOnce()) {
           // .. while lock.compare_exchange(false, true).is_err() ..
           struct DropGuard<'a>(&'a AtomicBool);
           impl Drop for DropGuard<'_> {
                fn drop(&mut self) {
                    lock.store(true, Ordering::Release);
                }
           }
           let _guard = DropGuard(lock);
           f();
       }

Listing 13-3: Using a drop guard to ensure code gets run after an unwinding panic

            We introduce the local type DropGuard that implements Drop and place
       the cleanup code in its implementation of Drop::drop. Any necessary state
       can be passed in through the fields of DropGuard. Then, we construct an
       instance of the guard type just before we call the function that might
       panic, which is f here. When f returns, whether due to a panic or because
       it returns normally, the guard is dropped, its destructor runs, the lock is
       released, and all is well.
            It’s important that the guard is assigned to a variable that is dropped
       at the end of the scope, after the user-provided code has been executed.
       This means that even though we never refer to the guard’s variable again, it
       needs to be given a name, as let _ = DropGuard(lock) would drop the guard
       immediately—before the user-provided code even runs!

NOTE   Like catch_unwind, drop guards work only when panics unwind. If the code is com-
       piled with panic=abort, no code gets to run after the panic.

            This pattern is frequently used in conjunction with thread locals,
       when library code may wish to set the thread local state so that it’s valid
       only for the duration of the execution of the closure, and thus needs to
       be cleared afterwards. For example, at the time of writing, Tokio uses this
       pattern to provide information about the executor calling Future::poll to
       leaf resources like TcpStream without having to propagate that information
       through function signatures that are visible to users. It’d be no good if the
       thread local state continued to indicate that a particular executor thread
       was active even after Future::poll returned due to a panic, so Tokio uses a
       drop guard to ensure that the thread local state is reset.

NOTE   You’ll often see Cell or Rc<RefCell> used in thread locals. This is because thread
       locals are accessible only through shared references, since a thread might access a
       thread local again that it is already referencing somewhere higher up in the call stack.
       Both types provide interior mutability without incurring much overhead because
       they’re intended only for single-threaded use, and so are ideal for this use case.

                   Extension Traits
                   Extension traits allow crates to provide additional functionality to types
                   that implement a trait from a different crate. For example, the itertools
                   crate provides an extension trait for Iterator, which adds a number of con-
                   venient shortcuts for common (and not so common) iterator operations. As
                   another example, tower provides ServiceExt, which adds several more ergo-
                   nomic operations to wrap the low-level interface in the Service trait from
                   tower-service.
                       Extension traits tend to be useful either when you do not control the
                   base trait, as with Iterator, or when the base trait lives in a crate of its own
                   so that it rarely sees breaking releases and thus doesn’t cause unnecessary
                   ecosystem splits, as with Service.
                       An extension trait extends the base trait it is an extension of (trait
                   ServiceExt: Service) and consists solely of provided methods. It also comes
                   with a blanket implementation for any T that implements the base trait
                   (impl<T> ServiceExt for T where T: Service {}). Together, these conditions
                   ensure that the extension trait’s methods are available on anything that
                   implements the base trait.

                   Crate Preludes
                   In Chapter 12, we talked about the standard library prelude that makes a
                   number of types and traits automatically available without you having to
                   write any use statements. Along similar lines, crates that export multiple
                   types, traits, or functions that you’ll often use together sometimes define
                   their own prelude in the form of a module called prelude, which re-exports
                   some particularly common subset of those types, traits, and functions.
                   There’s nothing magical about that module name, and it doesn’t get used
                   automatically, but it serves as a signal to users that they likely want to add
                   use somecrate::prelude::* to files that want to use the crate in question. The *
                   is a glob import and tells Rust to use all publicly available items from the indi-
                   cated module. This can save quite a bit of typing when the crate has a lot of
                   items you’ll usually need to name.

       NOTE        Items used through * have lower precedence than items that are used explicitly by
                   name. This is what allows you to define items in your own crate that overlap with
                   what’s in the standard library prelude without having to specify which one to use.

                       Preludes are also great for crates that expose a lot of extension traits,
                   since trait methods can be called only if the trait that defines them is in
                   scope. For example, the diesel crate, which provides ergonomic access to
                   relational databases, makes extensive use of extension traits so you can
                   write code like:

                   posts.filter(published.eq(true)).limit(5).load::<Post>(&connection)

                   This line will work only if all the right traits are in scope, which the prelude
                   takes care of.

             In general, you should be careful when adding glob imports to your
        code, as they can potentially turn additions to the indicated module into
        backward-incompatible changes. For example, if someone adds a new trait
        to a module you glob-import from, and that new trait makes a method foo
        available on a type that already had some other foo method, code that calls
        foo on that type will no longer compile as the call to foo is now ambiguous.
        Interestingly enough, while the existence of glob imports makes any mod-
        ule addition a technically breaking change, the Rust RFC on API evolution
        (RFC 1105; see https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/1105-api-evolution.html) does not
        require a library to issue a new major version for such a change. The RFC
        goes into great detail about why, and I recommend you read it, but the gist
        is that minor releases are allowed to require minimally invasive changes to
        dependents, like having to add type annotations in edge cases, because oth-
        erwise a large fraction of changes would require new major versions despite
        being very unlikely to actually break any consumers.
             Specifically in the case of preludes, using glob imports is usually fine
        when recommended by the vending crate, since its maintainers know that
        their users will use glob imports for the prelude module and thus will take
        that into account when deciding whether a change requires a major version
        bump.

Staying Up to Date
        Rust, being such a young language, is evolving rapidly. The language itself,
        the standard library, the tooling, and the broader ecosystem are all still in
        their infancy, and new developments happen every day. While staying on
        top of all the changes would be infeasible, it’s worth your time to keep up
        with significant developments so that you can take advantage of the latest
        and greatest features in your projects.
             For monitoring improvements to Rust itself, including new language
        features, standard library additions, and core tooling upgrades, the official
        Rust blog at https://blog.rust-lang.org/ is a good, low-volume place to start. It
        mainly features announcements for each new Rust release. I recommend
        you make a habit of reading these, as they tend to include interesting tid-
        bits that will slowly but surely deepen your knowledge of the language. To
        dig a little deeper, I highly recommend reading the detailed changelogs
        for Rust and Cargo as well (links can usually be found near the bottom of
        each release announcement). The changelogs surface changes that weren’t
        large enough to warrant a paragraph in the release notes but that may be
        just what you need two weeks from now. For a less frequently updated news
        source, check in on The Edition Guide at https://doc.rust-lang.org/edition-guide/,
        which outlines what’s new in each Rust edition. Rust editions tend to be
        released every three years.

 NOTE   Clippy is often able to tell you when you can take advantage of a new language or
        standard library feature—always enable Clippy!

                         If you’re curious about how Rust itself is developed, you may also want
                    to subscribe to the Inside Rust blog at https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/. It
                    includes updates from the various Rust teams, as well as incident reports,
                    larger change proposals, edition planning information, and the like. To get
                    involved in Rust development yourself—which I highly encourage, as it’s
                    a lot of fun and a great learning experience—you can check out the vari-
                    ous Rust working groups at https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/, which each
                    focus on improving a specific aspect of Rust. Find one that appeals to you,
                    check in with the group wherever it meets and ask how you may be able to
                    help. You can also join the community discussion about Rust internals over
                    at https://internals.rust-lang.org/; this is another great way to get insight into
                    the thought that goes into every part of Rust’s design and development.
                         As is the case for most programming languages, much of Rust’s value
                    is derived from its community. Not only do the members of the Rust com-
                    munity constantly develop new work-saving crates and discover new Rust-
                    specific techniques and design patterns, but they also collectively and
                    continuously help one another understand, document, and explain how
                    to take best advantage of the Rust language. Everything I have covered in
                    this book, and much more, has already been discussed by the community
                    in thousands of comment threads, blog posts, and Twitter and Discord con-
                    versations. Dipping into these discussions even just once in a while is almost
                    guaranteed to show you new things about a language feature, a technique,
                    or a crate that you didn’t already know.
                         The Rust community lives in a lot of places, but some good places to
                    start are the Users forum (https://users.rust-lang.org/), the Rust subreddit
                    (https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/), the Rust Community Discord (https://discord
                    .gg/rust-lang-community), and the Rust Twitter account (https://twitter.com/
                    rustlang). You don’t have to engage with all of these, or all of the time—
                    pick one you like the vibe of, and check in occasionally!
                         A great single location for staying up to date with ongoing developments
                    is the This Week in Rust blog (https://this-week-in-rust.org/), a “weekly summary
                    of [Rust’s] progress and community.” It links to official announcements and
                    changelogs as well as popular community discussions and resources, interest-
                    ing new crates, opportunities for contributions, upcoming Rust events, and
                    Rust job opportunities. It even lists interesting language RFCs and compiler
                    PRs, so this site truly has it all! Discerning what information is valuable to
                    you and what isn’t may be a little daunting, but even just scrolling through
                    and clicking occasional links that appear interesting is a good way to keep a
                    steady stream of new Rust knowledge trickling into your brain.

        NOTE        Want to look up when a particular feature landed on stable? Can I Use…
                    (https://caniuse.rs/) has you covered.

      What Next?
                    So, you’ve read this book front to back, absorbed all the knowledge it
                    imparts, and are still hungry for more? Great! There are a number of other

       excellent resources out there for broadening and deepening your knowledge
       and understanding of Rust, and in this very final section I’ll give you a sur-
       vey of some of my favorites so that you can keep learning. I’ve divided them
       into subsections based on how different people prefer to learn so that you
       can find resources that’ll work for you.

NOTE   A challenge with learning on your own, especially in the beginning, is that progress
       is hard to perceive. Implementing even the simplest of things can take an outsized
       amount of time when you have to constantly refer to documentation and other
       resources, ask for help, or debug to learn how some aspect of Rust works. All of that
       non-coding work can make it seem like you’re treading water and not really improv-
       ing. But you’re learning, which is progress in and of itself—it’s just harder to notice
       and appreciate.

       Learn by Watching
       Watching experienced developers code is essentially a life hack to remedy
       the slow starting phase of solo learning. It allows you to observe the pro-
       cess of designing and building while utilizing someone else’s experience.
       Listening to experienced developers articulate their thinking and explain
       tricky concepts or techniques as they come up can be an excellent alter-
       native to struggling through problems on your own. You’ll also pick up a
       variety of auxiliary knowledge like debugging techniques, design patterns,
       and best practices. Eventually you will have to sit down and do things your-
       self—it’s the only way to check that you actually understand what you’ve
       observed—but piggybacking on the experience of others will almost cer-
       tainly make the early stages more pleasant. And if the experience is interac-
       tive, that’s even better!
            So, with that said, here are some Rust video channels that I recommend:
           Perhaps unsurprisingly, my own channel: https://www.youtube.com/c/
           JonGjengset/. I have a mix of long-form coding videos and short(er) code-
           based theory/concept explanation videos, as well as occasional videos
           that dive into interesting Rust coding stories.
           The Awesome Rust Streaming listing: https://github.com/jamesmunns/­
           awesome-rust-streaming/. This resource lists a wide variety of developers
           who stream Rust coding or other Rust content.
           The channel of Tim McNamara, the author of Rust in Action: https://
           www.youtube.com/c/timClicks/. Tim’s channel, like mine, splits its time
           between implementation and theory, though Tim has a particular
           knack for creative visual projects, which makes for fun viewing.
           Jonathan Turner’s Systems with JT channel: https://www.youtube.com/c/
           SystemswithJT/. Jonathan’s videos document their work on Nushell,
           their take on a “new type of shell,” providing a great sense of what it’s
           like to work on a nontrivial existing codebase.
           Ryan Levick’s channel: https://www.youtube.com/c/RyanLevicksVideos/. Ryan
           mainly posts videos that tackle particular Rust concepts and walks

                       through them using concrete code examples, but he also occasionally
                       does implementation videos (like FFI for Microsoft Flight Simulator!)
                       and deep dives into how well-known crates work under the hood.
                        Given that I make Rust videos, it should come as no surprise that I am
                   a fan of this approach to teaching. But this kind of receptive or interactive
                   learning doesn’t have to come in the form of videos. Another great avenue
                   for learning from experienced developers is pair programming. If you have
                   a colleague or friend with expertise in a particular aspect of Rust you’d like
                   to learn, ask if you can do a pair-programming session with them to solve a
                   problem together!

                   Learn by Doing
                   Since your ultimate goal is to get better at writing Rust, there’s no substitute
                   for programming experience. No matter what or how many resources you
                   learn from, you need to put that learning into practice. However, finding a
                   good place to start can be tricky, so here I’ll give some suggestions.
                        Before I dive into the list, I want to provide some general guidance on
                   how to pick projects. First, choose a project that you care about, without
                   worrying too much whether others care about it. While there are plenty
                   of popular and established Rust projects out there that would love to have
                   you as a contributor, and it’s fun to be able to say “I contributed to the well-
                   known library X,” your first priority must be your own interest. Without
                   concrete motivation, you’ll quickly lose steam and find contributing to be
                   a chore. The very best targets are projects that you use yourself and have
                   experienced problems with—go fix them! Nothing is more satisfying than
                   getting rid of a long-standing personal nuisance while also contributing
                   back to the community.
                        Okay, so back to project suggestions. First and foremost, consider con-
                   tributing to the Rust compiler and its associated tools. It’s a high-quality
                   codebase with good documentation and an endless supply of issues (you
                   probably know of some yourself), and there are several great mentors who
                   can provide outlines for how to approach solving issues. If you look through
                   the issue tracker for issues marked E-easy or E-mentor, you’ll likely find a
                   good candidate quickly. As you gain more experience, you can keep level-
                   ing up to contribute to trickier parts.
                        If that’s not your cup of tea, I recommend finding something you use
                   frequently that’s written in another language and porting it to Rust—not
                   necessarily with the intention of replacing the original library or tool, but
                   just because the experience will allow you to focus on writing Rust without
                   having to spend too much time coming up with all the functionality your-
                   self. If it turns out well, the fact that it already exists suggests that someone
                   else also needed it, so there may be a wider audience for your port too! Data
                   structures and command-line tools often make for great porting subjects,
                   but find a niche that appeals to you.
                        Should you be more of a “build it from scratch” kind of person, I recom-
                   mend looking back at your own development experience so far and thinking
                   about similar code you’ve ended up writing in multiple projects (whether

       in Rust or in other languages). Such repetition tends to be a good signal
       that something is reusable and could be turned into a library. If nothing
       comes to mind, David Tolnay maintains a list of smaller utility crates that
       other Rust developers have requested at https://github.com/dtolnay/request-for-
       implementation/ that may provide a source of inspiration. If you’re looking for
       something more substantial and ambitious, there’s also the Not Yet Awesome
       list at https://github.com/not-yet-awesome-rust/not-yet-awesome-rust/ that lists
       things that should exist in Rust but don’t (yet).

       Learn by Reading
       Although the state of affairs is constantly improving, finding good Rust
       reading material beyond the beginner level can still be tricky. Here’s a col-
       lection of pointers to some of my favorite resources that continue to teach
       me new things or serve as good references when I have particularly niche or
       nuanced questions.
            First, I recommend looking through the official virtual Rust books
       linked from https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/. Some, like the Cargo book, are
       more reference-like while others, like the Embedded book, are more guide-
       like, but they’re all deep sources of solid technical information about their
       respective topics. The Rustonomicon (https://doc.rust-lang.org/nomicon/), in par-
       ticular, is a lifesaver when you’re writing unsafe code.
            Two more books that are worth checking out are the Guide to rustc
       Development (https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/) and the Standard Library
       Developers Guide (https://std-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/). These are fantastic
       resources if you’re curious about how the Rust compiler does what it does
       or how the standard library is designed, or if you want some pointers before
       you try your hand at contributing to Rust itself. The official Rust guidelines
       are also a treasure trove of information; I’ve already mentioned the Rust
       API Guidelines (https://rust-lang.github.io/api-guidelines/) in the book, but a
       Rust Unsafe Code Guidelines Reference is also available (https://rust-lang.github
       .io/unsafe-code-guidelines/), and by the time you read this book there may
       be more.

NOTE   One of the resources listed at https://www.rust-lang.org/learn/ is the Rust
       Reference, which is essentially a full specification for the Rust language. While parts
       of it are quite dry, like the exact grammar used for parsing or basics about the in-
       memory representations of the primitive types, some of it is fascinating reading, like
       the section on type layout and the enumeration of behavior considered undefined.

            There are also a number of unofficial virtual Rust books that are
       enormously valuable collections of experience and knowledge. The Little
       Book of Rust Macros (https://veykril.github.io/tlborm/), for example, is indis-
       pensable if you want to write nontrivial declarative macros, and The Rust
       Performance Book (https://nnethercote.github.io/perf-book/) is filled with tips and
       tricks for improving the performance of Rust code both at the micro and
       the macro level. Other great resources include the Rust Fuzz Book (https://
       rust-fuzz.github.io/book/), which explores fuzz testing in more detail, and

                   the Rust Cookbook (https://rust-lang-nursery.github.io/rust-cookbook/), which sug-
                   gests idiomatic solutions to common programming tasks. There’s even a
                   resource for finding more books, The Little Book of Rust Books (https://lborb.
                   github.io/book/unofficial.html)!
                        If you prefer more hands-on reading, the Tokio project has published
                   mini-redis (https://github.com/tokio-rs/mini-redis/), an incomplete but idiomatic
                   implementation of a Redis client and server that’s extremely well docu-
                   mented and specifically written to serve as a guide to writing asynchronous
                   code. If you’re more of a data structures person, Learn Rust with Entirely Too
                   Many Linked Lists (https://rust-unofficial.github.io/too-many-lists/) is an enlight-
                   ening and fun read that gets into lots of gnarly details about ownership and
                   references. If you’re looking for something closer to the hardware, Philipp
                   Oppermann’s Writing an OS in Rust (https://os.phil-opp.com/) goes through
                   the whole operating system stack in great detail while teaching you good
                   Rust patterns in the process. I also highly recommend Amos’s collection of
                   articles (https://fasterthanli.me/tags/rust/) if you want a wide sampling of inter-
                   esting deep dives written in a conversational style.
                        When you feel more confident in your Rust abilities and need more of
                   a quick reference than a long tutorial, I’ve found the Rust Language Cheat
                   Sheet (https://cheats.rs/) great for looking things up quickly. It also provides
                   very nice visual explanations for most topics, so even if you’re looking up
                   something you’re not intimately familiar with already, the explanations are
                   pretty approachable.
                        And finally, if you want to put all of your Rust understanding to the
                   test, go give David Tolnay’s Rust Quiz (https://dtolnay.github.io/rust-quiz/) a try.
                   There are some real mind-benders in there, but each question comes with
                   a thorough explanation of what’s going on, so even if you get one wrong,
                   you’ll have learned from the experience!

                   Learn by Teaching
                   My experience has been that the best way to learn something well and
                   thoroughly, by far, is to try to teach it to others. I have learned an enor-
                   mous amount from writing this book, and I learn new things every time
                   I make a new Rust video or podcast episode. So, I wholeheartedly recom-
                   mend that you try your hand at teaching others about some of the things
                   you’ve learned from reading this book or that you learn from here on out.
                   It can take whatever form you prefer: in person, writing a blog post, tweet-
                   ing, making a video or podcast, or giving a talk. The important thing is
                   that you try to convey your newfound knowledge in your own words to
                   someone who doesn’t already understand the topic—in doing so, you also
                   give back to the community so that the next you that comes along has a
                   slightly easier time getting up to speed. Teaching is a humbling and deeply
                   educational experience, and I cannot recommend it highly enough.

       NOTE        Whether you’re looking to teach or be taught, make sure to visit Awesome Rust
                   Mentors (https://rustbeginners.github.io/awesome-rust-mentors/).

Summary
      In this chapter, we’ve covered Rust beyond what exists in your local work-
      space. We surveyed useful tools, libraries, and Rust features; looked at how
      to stay up to date as the ecosystem continues to evolve; and then discussed
      how you can get your hands dirty and contribute back to the ecosystem
      yourself. Finally, we discussed where you can go next to continue your Rust
      journey now that this book has reached its end. And with that, there’s little
      more to do than to declare:

      }

