                            FOREWORD

“Dead simple concurrency? Seriously?”
  That was my reaction when I first heard about this book. Python in
general is a wonderful language and easier to grok than most, but many (or
even most) things in the world of programming are still anything but “dead
simple.”
   But then Jason explained what he had in mind in writing a book with
those two words in the title. It’s not dead simple in the sense of being a
dumbed-down book that presents Python in overly simplistic terms. Rather,
it’s dead simple in the sense of being a book that people will read and say,
“This topic initially seemed hard to understand, but now that you’ve
explained it, it’s really obvious to me.” Having studied and taught coding in
general and Python in particular for 30 years, I’d say that this is absolutely
the best goal for any form of teaching: to present the concepts so clearly
that the way even the tricky topics work seems inevitable.
  But that’s not the only area where Dead Simple Python is ambitious. The
sheer amount of material presented here is equally impressive. This book
covers virtually every aspect of Python that someone who wants to write
useful code might need. These include everything from the basics of
variables, data structures, and loops, to, yes, things like concurrency and
parallelism. As I’ve looked through this book, every single chapter has
impressed me with its completeness and wealth of detail.
  So, does this book really make concurrency (and everything else) seem
dead simple? After years of teaching and writing, I know I can’t answer that
question for anyone else, but I can say for sure that the examples are
engaging and well thought out, the explanations are clear and accessible,
and the coverage is outstanding. That’s a really tough combination to beat.
                                                                    Naomi Ceder
                  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

You’ve heard the expression “It takes a village to
raise a child.” In the same way, it takes a village to
write a book. In the case of Dead Simple Python,
several villages were involved!
   The Python community, especially those residing in #python on
Libera.Chat IRC, have been been supporting, informing, and challenging
me ever since my first “Hello, world” in Python. Most of my knowledge
about this language traces back to the lovable nerds in that chatroom. I’m
thankful for all the feedback and insight they’ve provided on Dead Simple
Python, from its inception through this whole process.
   I’m deeply grateful to Forem and the DEV Community (https://dev.to/)
for their enthusiastic reception of my articles, especially the Dead Simple
Python article series this book is based on. Special thanks goes to DEV co-
founders Ben Halpern and Jess Lee and community manager Michael
Tharrington, for encouraging and promoting my writing on that platform. If
it hadn’t been for the visibility and positive feedback I’ve been blessed
with, I’d never have considered writing this as a book.
  Particular thanks to my delightfully pedantic technical editors: Daniel
Foerster (pydsigner), Ryan Palo, Denis Pobedrya (deniska), and Simon de
Vlieger (supakeen). Andrew Svetlov gave me excellent insight into the
ever-changing landscape of asynchrony. Bernát Gábor of the Python
Packaging Authority made sure my chapter on packaging was as shiny as a
wet platypus. Kyle Altendorf (altendky) taught me the value of src-based
project structure and provided feedback on my object-oriented
programming chapter. James Gerity (SnoopJ) helped me disambiguate my
section on multiple inheritance. Additional technical edits were provided by
Gil Gonçalves, grym, and TheAssassin. I can’t begin to enumerate all the
people involved in the deep technical debates that manifested as
recommendations in this book. You know who you are.
  A special thank-you to the (herein unnamed) editor whose enthusiasm
about my writing first gave me the confidence to pursue writing Dead
Simple Python in book form in the first place.
  Thanks to all my friends in the Python and Ubuntu communities,
MousePaw Media, Canonical, and beyond—especially Naomi Ceder,
Richard Schneiderman (johnjohn101), James Beecham, Laís Carvalho,
Cheuk Ting Ho, Sangarshanan Veera, Raquel Dou, David Bush, John
Chittum, Pat Viafore, Éric St-Jean, Chloé Smith, Jess Jang, Scott Taylor,
Wilfrantz Dede, Anna Dunster, Tianlin Fu, Gerar Almonte, LinStatSDR,
and leaftype. It’s always encouraging to be greeted with inquiries about the
book’s progress!
   Last, and certainly most of all, I want to thank those closest to me for
their unending support. My mother, Anne McDonald, who contributed
valuable editorial and creative feedback, taught me everything I know about
writing and has been encouraging my dreams since day one. I’m grateful
for the support of my best friend Daniel Harrington, the Tolkien to my
Lewis. Muchas gracias a mi hermanito mayor Jaime López (Tacoder), the
lord of chaos and tacos. Thank you to Bojan Miletić, my unicorn-obsessed
brother and co-host on The Bug Hunters Café, for his unbounded
enthusiasm and support. Deep love and gratitude to my beloved aunt and
self-proclaimed biggest fan, Jane McArthur, and my partner-in-
troublemaking, Chris “Fox” Frasier—both of whom I miss ferociously.
