                         INTRODUCTION

             Python is a unique language. As a
             software developer, I have come to
             appreciate it for its particularities. There
             is a certain artistic beauty about a well-
written Python program. I love when I find the most
“Pythonic” solution to a problem and then look back
and wonder how I thought any other answer would
do.
   Unfortunately, for years, I was crippled by an instinctual desire to view
Python through the lens of the other languages I knew. Although I could
read and write in Python, I failed to see the “obviousness” of a particular
practice. It was like trying to speak Spanish using only a translation
dictionary. I could write Python, but I couldn’t really think in Python. The
essential qualities of the language were lost on me.
   Once I started to truly understand Python—to think in it—I found a new
delight in the language. Solutions became obvious. Design was a joy, rather
than an enigma.
   When a brand-new developer cuts their teeth on Python, they have few
preconceptions. They have no “native tongue” to hamper their introduction
to the language. But for an established developer who picks up Python as a
second or third language, the transition is in some ways far rougher. They
must not only learn something new, but in many ways, they must unlearn
something old.
  Dead Simple Python is the guidebook for that journey.
Who Is This Book For?
If you are already familiar with another programming language and now
wish to learn Python for the first time, without slogging through beginner-
oriented courses, this book is for you. I’ll be focusing specifically on the
“Pythonic” way of doing things, with minimal, targeted explanations of the
underlying general programming concepts.
  If you’re an intermediate-level Python developer, you’ll also find this
book useful. Although I’ve been working with Python for many years
myself, some of these topics didn’t “click” for me until more recently. This
book gives the explanations I wish I’d gotten.
   If you don’t already know programming, despair not. There are hundreds
of excellent books and resources for learning Python as a first programming
language. I particularly recommend either Python Crash Course, 2nd
Edition, by Eric Matthes (No Starch Press, 2019) or Automate the Boring
Stuff with Python, 2nd Edition, by Al Sweigart (No Starch Press, 2019).
Afterward, you can return to this book to reinforce and expand upon your
newfound knowledge.

What Does “Simple” Mean?
The topics discussed herein may, at first blush, appear anything but simple.
You may be wondering how simple a book this thick could actually be!
   When I titled this book Dead Simple Python, I was describing a
retrospective view of the topics, rather than a forward-looking one. One
should recognize that any topic worth learning, when first approached, will
feel insurmountable. Similarly, any explanation worthy of an existing
software developer should possess enough depth to utterly disqualify it
from the forward-looking label of “simple.”
   Instead, I aim to unpack each topic in such a manner that, by the
conclusion of the section, the reader cannot help but feel the concept is
altogether obvious. Regardless of the topic’s initial appearance of
complexity, the reader should be ultimately left with an impression that it is
actually “dead simple,” at which point, they may be assured they are
thinking like a native Python developer.
   To achieve this level of understanding, I generally start by unpacking the
lowest-level, most explicit form of the topic. Once that is established, I add
layer upon layer, ultimately reaching the implicit, idiomatic form most
commonly used. In this way, I hope to help you, the reader, come away with
a solid, comfortable understanding of precisely why and how each feature
of the language works.

What’s in This Book?
Dead Simple Python is divided into five sections. Unlike many beginner-
oriented courses, I’m going to assume you want to start writing production-
quality code (rather than just oversimplified tutorial examples) as soon as
possible. My approach requires you to do some initial work, but it pays off
by ensuring you can apply your new knowledge to live projects more
readily.
   Part I, “The Python Environment” (Chapters 1–4), firmly establishes you
in the world of Python: its philosophy, tools, basic syntax, and project
layout. This will provide a solid foundation for writing real, substantial
code.
   Part II, “Essential Structures” (Chapters 5–8), explores Python’s basic
structural elements—variables, functions, classes, and exceptions—and
teaches you how to use them to their fullest potential.
   Part III, “Data and Flow” (Chapters 9–12), covers the many unique ways
of controlling execution flow and manipulating data. It discusses data
structures, loops, iteration, generators, coroutines, files, and binary data.
   Part IV, “Advanced Concepts” (Chapters 13–17), unlocks advanced
tactics that can make your code more powerful, including inheritance,
introspection, and concurrency. It addresses many of the “scary” topics that
are skimmed over by most courses and tutorials.
  Part V, “Beyond the Code” (Chapters 18–20), teaches you how to test,
debug, and deploy real-life projects.
   Finally, Chapter 21 provides an overview of the many directions you can
take your Python development journey from here.

What’s NOT in This Book
Since this book is intended for existing programmers, I won’t be rehashing
much general theory. Readers should already know (from a language-
agnostic standpoint) what variables and functions are, what the difference is
between classes and objects, and so forth. At most, I’ll briefly define those
concepts that aren’t quite ubiquitous in the programming world.
   My discussion of topics is far from exhaustive. I’m focusing more on the
why and how, thereby providing a strong foundation. Readers are
encouraged to broaden their understanding through additional, independent
reading, so I’ll leave the comprehensive listing of library functions and the
like to the documentation. Many popular features in the standard library,
such as random numbers and datetime operations, are afforded little more
than incidental explanation when they’re used in an example.
   To control the scope of this book, I also won’t be covering most third-
party tools and libraries. I am frequently asked to discuss popular
alternatives to the default tools in Python, but as these alternatives fall in
and out of favor like the passing of the seasons, I will be sticking largely to
the universal defaults. There are scattered exceptions, but only when a
third-party tool has become practically ubiquitous in the ecosystem,
eclipsing even the standard library.
  In general, when a third-party tool or library seems of particular note, I
will refer the reader to its official documentation or website.

How to Read This Book
Dead Simple Python is intended more as a guided tour than a desk
reference. I recommend starting here, at the beginning, and working your
way through the chapters, in order. Whether you’re new to the language or
have been trying to use it for a while without feeling like you “get it,”
you’ll discover that this approach will fill in many knowledge gaps you
never realized you had.
   However, if you know of a particular topic you need a better
understanding of right now, you can skip directly to the chapter that deals
with it. Most chapters are written to stand alone, but I will always assume
that you have read and understand the material in the preceding chapters.

About the Vocabulary
Nearly any Python book or online article uses vocabulary borrowed from
other languages, such as words like element, body, and variable. While this
is often assumed to be helpful because it relates Python concepts to readers’
existing knowledge, I believe borrowing such vocabulary is ultimately
counterproductive. Attempting to understand Python primarily in terms of
other languages frustrates many attempts to write clear, idiomatic code.
What’s more, if one gets in the habit of using the wrong vocabulary, one
will find the official documentation profoundly difficult to read.
  Therefore, I’ve decided to adhere doggedly to the official vocabulary,
even if a majority of the community considers an approximate synonym
acceptable. This may be one of the few books in print that takes this
position, but I consider it important. To become a native, you must learn to
speak the local dialect!

Theory Recaps
Depending on what languages you already know, there may be some gaps
in your theory repertoire. For example, if you are a Haskell developer, you
may be unfamiliar with object-oriented programming, or if you are a C++
developer, you may be unfamiliar with pure functional programming.
  To bridge these gaps, I provide occasional Theory Recaps, brief
overviews of the essential theory and best practices related to certain
programming paradigms and patterns. That way, if you already know a
particular concept, you can skip over the Theory Recap and get right to the
Python-specific stuff.
Objective or Opinionated?
It’s almost impossible to keep personal opinions out of a technical book,
especially one as focused on idiomatic practice as this one, but I like to
think I’ve done my best to remain objective.
   Dead Simple Python is not my personal take on Python, but rather it is
the distilled collective wisdom of the Python community. I am not the same
developer as when I started writing. My own development practices have
changed drastically as a result of the two years of research,
experimentation, and heated debate that went into this book.
   Even so, it’s impossible to please everybody all the time. At times, I’ve
made particular note in the text about debates that never reached a
satisfactory conclusion. Even matters I consider settled are likely to
provoke strong negative reactions from some Python developers; indeed,
some of them provoked strong reactions in me until I better understood
them.
   I recommend you go into this book with an open mind, even if you
consider yourself reasonably familiar with programming or even with
Python itself. I’ve made an effort to explain the justifications behind all the
recommendations herein, and I would encourage you to expect at least the
same degree of reasoning to accompany any valid recommendation.

The Examples
I’ve carefully constructed the majority of my examples in this book to
demonstrate realistic (if simplified) use cases for whatever topic I’m
discussing. In many situations, I’ll deliberately complicate the example to
highlight issues and surprises that tutorials often gloss over. I’ve made an
effort to point out all the times my examples get a bit convoluted, but you
should know that I may oversimplify or otherwise tiptoe around anything
irrelevant to the immediate topic.
   This approach also often necessitates longer examples than you may be
used to from tutorials, so chapters may appear longer than they effectively
are. Don’t be discouraged by page counts; take it one section at a time.
  All the examples in this book run, or at least fail predictably, except as
otherwise noted. I adhere to Python style conventions throughout. I highly
recommend retyping each example yourself and experimenting with it.
   I’ve made an effort to label the segments of Python code meant to be
saved in files as part of runnable examples. The filename is given, and the
sections are numbered :1, :2, and so on. When a section is revised, I tack a
letter on after the section, so section :2b would revise section :2a; the
revisions themselves are in bold.
  Nearly all the examples in this book can be found on the book’s official
GitHub repository: https://github.com/codemouse92/DeadSimplePython.

What About a Project?
I’ve been asked why I don’t provide a comprehensive project that we can
work through in this book, but the answer is fairly simple: I’m assuming
that you’re probably here because you already have some project you want
to use Python for. Instead of distracting you from that, I’ll focus on
presenting material in a way that you can apply to your work.
   If you don’t have a project in mind, now may be a great time to start one!
Think of a problem you personally wish there were a solution (or a better
solution) for, then build that solution. Pick one small part of the problem
and start there. There’s no magic formula for creating the perfect first
project, other than to make it something you’d personally use. Don’t worry
about making it perfect, or even good, your first time around. There’s a
truism in this industry: “You always throw the first one away.” Don’t be
afraid to build it wrong at first! This book will give you the tools to go back
and make it right.
  Of course, if a project is completely impractical to you, you’ll do just fine
working through this book’s examples.
  In any case, I do strongly recommend creating a personal “firing range”
project, for trying out Python in an environment where breaking things
won’t have significant consequences. I’ll introduce running Python code in
Chapters 2 and 3, and I’ll cover project structure in Chapter 4. I’ll revisit
project structure when I discuss packaging and distribution in Chapter 18.
Prerequisites
   You should already know the essentials of programming in another
   language. This book teaches Python, not programming.
   You should have access to a computer capable of running Python 3.7 or
   later. If you haven’t actually installed Python yet, don’t worry—we’ll be
   doing that in Chapter 2.
   You should know the basics of using the command line on your
   computer, especially relative and absolute paths, and navigating the
   filesystem. If you don’t understand all that, go learn it now. (I’ll wait.)
   You should have an internet connection, even a slow one, for viewing
   the documentation and occasionally downloading packages. However,
   I’ve tried to maximize the number of examples that work without
   internet.

  Now, go get a cup of your favorite beverage and settle in at your
computer with a notebook and pen. Let’s get started!
