                                      1
          THE PYTHON PHILOSOPHY

              I believe the best place to start learning
              Python is not with the language itself,
              but with the guiding philosophy driving
              it. To write good Python code, you must
first understand what Python is. That’s what this
chapter will focus on.

What Is Python, Exactly?
Python is a programming language developed in 1991 by Dutch
programmer Guido van Rossum. The name refers not to the snake often
used as a mascot, but to Monty Python’s Flying Circus (that fact alone
should tell you a lot about the mindset behind the language). What began as
a hobby project over Christmas break turned into one of the most
perennially popular computer languages today.
  From a technical perspective, Python is considered a high-level, general-
purpose language, with full support for the procedural, object-oriented, and
functional programming paradigms, among others.
  Fans of Python are quick to point out its famous readability and
simplicity, which lend to an initial feeling that the language is “magic.” This
has also given rise to a less-than-useful bit of advice for newcomers:
“Python is easy; it’s just pseudocode!”
   That isn’t strictly true. Don’t let the natural readability fool you: Python
is beautifully unique and influenced by many other languages, but it often
bears little resemblance to any of them. To truly master it, one must take it
by itself, not in strong comparison to other languages. That is exactly what
this book will do.
   Most importantly, however, Python is an idea. It’s the collective creation
of a diverse group of nerds, united by nothing more than an audacious
desire to build an awesome programming language. When you truly
understand Python, it alters your entire perspective. You’re a part of
something larger; something that has taken on a life of its own.
  As Guido van Rossum explained in his famous King’s Day speech:
  I believe the most important idea is that Python is developed on the Internet, entirely in the
  open, by a community of volunteers (but not amateurs!) who feel passion and ownership.

Myths: What Python Isn’t
There are a lot of myths about Python, many of which lead to people
shunning the language for certain applications, if not altogether.

Myth #1: Python Is Merely a Scripting Language
I consider “scripting language” to be one of the most insidious terms used
in discussing programming languages. It implies that the language is
somehow unsuited for writing “real” software (see Myth #5).
  Python is turing-complete, which means that you could implement any
programming language in Python and then be able to execute any program
written in that language.
  To put that another way, anything another programming language can do,
Python can do. Whether it’s easy, or even advisable, depends on what
you’re attempting.

Myth #2: Python Is Slow
It’s easy to assume that high-level or interpreted languages like Python are
naturally slower than compiled or low-level languages like C. In truth, it
depends on the implementation of the language and how it’s used. In this
book, we’ll cover several concepts related to improving the performance of
Python code.
   The default implementation of the Python language interpreter, CPython,
is written in C, and it is indeed slower than native machine code. However,
there are various libraries and techniques—as well as other implementations
of the language, including PyPy—which have much better performance
overall (see Chapter 21) and even approach the speed of native machine
code.
   With all that said, you should understand how performance actually
factors into your project. In most situations, Python is plenty fast enough to
be a good choice for application development, data analysis, scientific
computing, game development, web development, and the list goes on. The
performance drawbacks inherent in CPython usually only become
problematic when you are dealing with very specific scenarios demanding
extraordinarily high performance. Even then, there are ways around the
bottlenecks. For the majority of projects, Python’s baseline performance is
more than sufficient.

Myth #3: Python Cannot Be Compiled
Python is an interpreted language, meaning the code is read, interpreted,
and executed at runtime by the language’s interpreter. An end user running
a project written in Python will typically have to have the Python interpreter
installed.
   This contrasts with what I like to call assembled languages, like C, C++,
or FORTRAN. In these languages, the final result of compilation is machine
code, which can be executed directly on any compatible computer without
needing an additional program on that machine (or somehow bundled with
the code).
                                     PEDANTIC NOTE
 There’s a surprising amount of contention about the term compiled language, which is why I
 like to use the terms interpreted and assembled to differentiate. This is a rather deep rabbit hole.

   Many developers take this to mean that Python cannot be compiled
(assembled) to machine code, which seems like the obvious corollary. In
fact, it is possible to compile Python to machine code, although this is
rarely necessary and seldom done.
   If you want to go this route, there are a few options. On UNIX, the built-
in Freeze tool transpiles to C arrays of Python bytecode, and then it
assembles this C code to machine code. This doesn’t result in truly
assembled Python code, however, because the Python interpreter must still
be invoked behind the scenes. Freeze only works on UNIX systems. The
cx_Freeze tool, as well as py2exe on Windows, does much the same thing
as Freeze.
   To truly compile Python to machine code, you must use an intermediary
language. Nuitka can be used to transpile Python code to C and C++, which
can then be assembled to machine code. You can also transpile Python to
Java with VOC. Cython also allows transpiling a specialized form of Python
to C, although it’s primarily geared toward writing Python extensions in C.

Myth #4: Python Gets Compiled Behind the Scenes
The Python interpreter converts code to bytecode, which is then executed.
The interpreter includes a virtual machine, which executes the Python
bytecode similarly to how a CPU executes machine code. Sometimes, the
interpreter will do the conversion to bytecode in advance, for performance
reasons, generating .pyc files containing bytecode. While this is
“compiling” in one sense of the term, there is a key difference between
compiling to bytecode and compiling to machine code: bytecode is still run
through the interpreter, whereas machine code executes directly, without
needing an additional program. (Technically, “compiling” to machine code
is called assembling, although this distinction is often neglected or
overlooked.)
   In practice, the majority of Python projects ship as source code, or at
least Python bytecode, which is run in the Python interpreter installed on
the user’s machine. There are occasions when a standard executable is
preferable, such as for ease of installation on end-user computers or in
closed-source projects. For those situations, tools such as PyInstaller and
cx_Freeze exist. These don’t compile the code, but rather bundle the Python
source code or bytecode with the interpreter so it can be executed by itself
(see Chapter 18).

Myth #5: Python Is Unsuitable for Large Projects
I’ve heard some developers say, “Python is only useful if the whole project
fits in one file.” This adage is partially based on the misconception that
Python projects with multiple files are confusingly structured. This indeed
tends to be the trend, but only because so few developers know how to
correctly structure a Python project.
   In reality, project structure in Python is far simpler than in C++ and Java.
Once the developer understands the concepts of packages, modules, and the
import system (see Chapter 4), working with multiple code files becomes
trivial.
   Another reason for this myth has to do with the fact that Python is
dynamically typed, rather than statically typed like Java or C++, which
some believe makes refactoring harder. This doesn’t have to be the case,
once the developer knows how to work with Python’s type system, instead
of against it (see Chapter 5).

Python 2 vs. Python 3
For many years, there existed two major versions of Python. Starting in
2001, Python 2 was the standard, meaning most books and articles about
Python were written for this version. The last release was Python 2.7.
   The current version is Python 3, known during its development as Python
3000 or Py3k. From its release in 2008 until 2019, we were in a sort of
limbo between the two versions; a lot of existing code and packages were
written in Python 2, while Python 3 was increasingly recommended for new
projects that didn’t require legacy support. Many techniques and tools
existed for writing code that could run in either version, which eased the
transition for many existing projects.
   In more recent years, especially since the release of Python 3.5, we’ve
begun moving away from Python 2 altogether. Most major libraries
officially supported Python 3, and legacy support became less of a priority.
   As of January 1, 2020, Python 2 has been officially retired, and Python 3
is the definitive standard. Since Python 4 is still nothing more than a vague
wisp of a rumor at this point, it’s safe to say that Python 3 will be with us
for years to come.
   Unfortunately, many software development teams have been slow
(sometimes unavoidably) about porting their code bases from Python 2 to
Python 3. This has left a lot of projects in limbo. If you use Python in a
professional capacity, there is a good chance you’ll have to help transition
some code to Python 3. Python’s standard library includes a tool called
2to3, which helps automate this process. Running the code through this tool
is a good first step, but you will still need to manually update the code to
use some of the newer patterns and tools Python 3 has to offer.

Defining “Pythonic” Code
Among Python developers, you’ll hear a lot of talk about Pythonic code and
what it constitutes, precisely. In a general sense, idiomatic code that makes
good use of the language’s features is considered Pythonic.
  Unfortunately, this is very much open to interpretation. As a result, the
topic of best practices in Python is a regular source of heated debate in the
community. Don’t be alarmed by this. By regularly grappling with our own
conventions and standards, we continually improve them and our own
understanding along the way.
  Our tendency to debate best practices in Python is rooted in our
philosophy of There’s Only One Way To Do It (TOOWTDI), a phrase coined
by PythonLabs in 2000 as a tongue-in-cheek response to the Perl
community’s own adage of There’s More Than One Way To Do It
(TMTOWTDI). Despite the historic rivalry between these communities,
these philosophies aren’t strictly opposing.
  Python developers rightly assume there is some single, quantifiably
“best” solution to any specific problem. Our task is to figure out what that
solution is, but we also know we will often fall far short of the goal.
Through continual discussion, debate, and experimentation, we refine our
approaches in pursuit of the theoretical Best Solution.
   In the same way, the Perl community understands that it is often
impossible to definitively arrive at that Best Solution, so they emphasize
experimentation instead of compliance with strict standards, in an effort to
discover better and better solutions.
  In the end, the goal is the same: to ultimately define the best possible
solution to a problem. Only the emphasis differs.
   In this book, I’ll focus a lot on the generally accepted Pythonic ways of
writing code. However, I don’t claim to be the final authority. My
colleagues in the Python community will always have plenty to add to these
discussions. I never fail to learn something new from them!

The Zen of Python
In 1999, a discussion started on the official Python mailing list about the
need to write down some sort of formal guiding principles for the language.
Tim Peters, a prominent member of the community, jokingly laid out a
poetic summary of 19 principles to serve as an outline, leaving the 20th spot
open for Guido van Rossum to complete (which he never did).
  Other community members quickly seized on this summary as a fantastic
overview of Python’s philosophy, ultimately adopting it wholesale as The
Zen of Python. The entire text is published by Python as PEP 20.
  Beautiful is better than ugly.
  Explicit is better than implicit.
  Simple is better than complex.
  Complex is better than complicated.
  Flat is better than nested.
  Sparse is better than dense.
  Readability counts.
  Special cases aren’t special enough to break the rules.
  Although practicality beats purity.
  Errors should never pass silently.
  Unless explicitly silenced.
  In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
  There should be one—and preferably only one—obvious way to do it.
  Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you’re Dutch.
  Now is better than never.
  Although never is often better than *right* now.
  If the implementation is hard to explain, it’s a bad idea.
  If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea.
  Namespaces are one honking great idea—let’s do more of those!

   This, too, is open to interpretation, and some argue that Tim Peters was
kidding when he wrote The Zen of Python. However, if there’s one thing
I’ve learned about Python developers, it’s that the line between “kidding”
and “serious” is fine as spider silk.
   In any case, The Zen of Python is a great place to start when talking
about best practices in Python. Many developers, including myself, often
refer back to it. I’ll refer to it frequently throughout this book.

Documentation, PEPs, and You
Dead Simple Python is intended as a beginning, not an ending, to your
learning journey. Once you are well acquainted with the Python language,
you can turn to the language’s extensive official documentation to learn
more about any particular features or tools. These docs are found online at h
ttps://docs.python.org/.
   Any new feature in Python begins its life as a Python Enhancement
Proposal (PEP). Each is assigned a unique number and published to the
official PEP index at https://python.org/dev/peps/. Once proposed, a PEP
will be considered, discussed, and ultimately accepted or rejected.
   Accepted PEPs are effectively extensions of the documentation, as they
are the most cohesive and authoritative descriptions of the feature(s) they
define. Additionally, there are several Meta-PEPs and Informational PEPs
that provide the backbone for the Python community and language.
   As such, the official documentation and PEP index should be the first
place you go if you have any questions about Python. I’ll refer to these
frequently throughout this book.

Who Calls the Shots?
To understand how and why the language evolves, it is important to know
who’s in charge. When a PEP is proposed, who gets to decide if it’s
accepted or rejected?
   Python is an open source project officially owned by the nonprofit
Python Software Foundation. Unlike many other popular languages, no
formal associations exist between Python and any for-profit organization.
  As an open source project, Python is supported by an active and vibrant
community. At its heart is the core team, the trusted volunteers who
maintain the language and keep the community running smoothly.
   Language creator Guido van Rossum served as the Benevolent Dictator
for Life (BDFL), making the final decisions on all PEPs and overseeing
ongoing development of the language. In 2018, he made the decision to step
down from the role.
   A few months after his resignation, PEP 13 was created to establish a
new system of governance. Now the language is governed by a five-person
steering committee, elected by the core team. Every time a new release of
the language comes out, a new steering committee is elected.
The Python Community
The Python community is a vast and diverse group of individuals from all
over the world, united by their passion for this unique language. Ever since
I stumbled upon the community many years ago as an utter novice, I have
gained immeasurable help, guidance, and inspiration from it and its people.
I’ve been privileged to offer the same to others in return. This book would
not have ever happened without the continual feedback of my Python
friends!
   The Python community is moderated by the core team and governed by
the Python Code of Conduct. In short, it emphasizes open, considerate, and
respectful behavior, summarizing itself as follows:
  Overall, we’re good to each other. We contribute to this community, not because we have to,
  but because we want to. If we remember that, these guidelines will come naturally.

   I strongly encourage any developer who uses Python to plug into this
vibrant community. One of the best ways to participate is through the
Libera.Chat IRC #python chatroom. You can find guides to getting onto IRC
at https://python.org/community/.
   If you have any questions about Python, including while you read
through this book, I recommend asking for help in the IRC channel.
Chances are, you’ll find me and most of my technical editors there.
  In Chapter 21, I’ll discuss the many facets of the Python community.

The Pursuit of the One Obvious Way
The Python mantra “There’s Only One Way to Do It” can be quite
confusing at first. There are many possible ways to solve any one problem.
Are Pythonistas just too enamored with their own ideas?
  Thankfully, no. This mantra means something much more encouraging,
and it’s something every Python developer should understand.
  Some insight comes from The Zen of Python, which includes this rather
cryptic quip:
  There should be one—and preferably only one—obvious way to do it.
  Although that way may not be obvious at first unless you’re Dutch.

  Tim Peters was, of course, referring to language creator Guido van
Rossum, a Dutch national. As the creator of the language, Guido could
usually cut right to the “most obvious way” of solving problems in Python,
especially in the early days of the language.
  This obvious way is Python’s term for “the best solution”—a marriage of
good practice, clean style, and reasonable efficiency, resulting in elegant
code that is comprehensible to even the greenest novice.
  The details of the problem being solved will usually inform this “obvious
way”: one situation may call for a loop, another for recursion, and yet
another for a list comprehension. Contrary to the usual implications of the
word obvious, the solution is often anything but simple to work out. The
best solution is only obvious once you know it; arriving at it is where things
get tricky. Most of us aren’t Guido.
   However, the pursuit of the “one obvious way” is a defining facet of the
Python community, and it has had a profound impact on Dead Simple
Python. A lot of the insights in this book were born out of sometimes
intense debate between myself and my fellow Pythonistas. For this reason, I
hand-selected my panel of technical editors from those colleagues who are
commonly in opposition to me, and often each other, on pedantic technical
points.
   Anything ultimately adopted as the “right way” to solve a problem is
usually accepted as such because of its technical merit, rather than because
of some like-minded bias among Python developers, who are among the
most exacting folks I’ve had the privilege of working with. This approach
to logic overflows into every other conversation we have (which leads to
some rather amazing and enlightening academic debates).
   New situations present themselves regularly. There will never come a
point in any Python developer’s career when coding becomes truly “easy.”
Situations will arise in every project that demand careful consideration, and
often, debate. Developers must attempt to solve problems in the way that
seems most obvious to them, then submit the solution to the critique of
peers.
   The approaches in this book are, in many cases, the most obvious
according to my view. Most have been seconded by my colleagues, yet I
dare not assert that I am altogether “Dutch” in the Python sense. If you find
yourself debating techniques in the Python community, please do not wave
this book in anyone’s face as evidence that your solution is best! Skill in
finding an obvious solution is not something that can be taught; rather it is
only learned through practice.

Wrapping Up
Despite the many myths that have been tossed around over the years,
Python is a versatile and technically sound language, capable of handling
just about any problem you can throw at it. It’s a solid choice, whether you
are writing automation, crunching massive datasets, building native user
applications, implementing machine learning, or crafting web applications
and APIs. Most importantly, Python is backed by a vibrant, diverse, and
helpful community.
   The key to success, then, is writing Python code that makes the most of
the strengths and features of the language. The goal is not simply to write
code that works, but to write code that both looks and behaves elegantly.
The rest of this book will teach you how to do exactly that.
