                                      2
                  YOUR WORKBENCH

              Your development environment is a
              major factor in how productive you’ll
              be in a language. Instead of contenting
              yourself with a bare-bones default shell,
you’ll want to assemble a development environment
worthy of any production-level project.
   A good Python development environment usually consists of the
language interpreter, the pip package manager, a virtual environment, a
Python-oriented code editor, and one or more static analyzers to check your
code for errors and problems. I’ll discuss each of these in this chapter. I’ll
also introduce the style conventions common in Python and round out the
chapter with a guided tour of the most common Python integrated
development environments (IDEs).

Installing Python
Before you can do anything, you have to install Python itself, along with a
couple of essential tools. As you know from Chapter 1, Python is an
interpreted language, so you’ll need to install its interpreter. You must also
install pip, the Python package manager, so you can install additional
Python tools and libraries. The exact steps for setup depend on your
platform, but I will cover the major platforms here.
   In this book, I’m using Python 3.9, the latest version at the time of
writing. If you’re reading this at a later date, just use the latest stable release
of Python 3. All the instructions should work the same. You need only
replace the version number in the obvious ways on any commands run in
the command line.
   This is merely a quick guide to installation. For the complete, official
instructions, which cover many more situations and advanced options, see h
ttps://docs.python.org/using/.

Installing on Windows
On Windows, Python is not generally installed by default, so you’ll need to
download it yourself from https://python.org/downloads/windows/ and run
that installer. On the first screen of the installer, be sure you check the boxes
for Install the launcher for all users and Add Python to PATH.
   Python is also available through the Windows App Store. However, as of
the date of my writing, this particular installation method is still officially
considered unstable. I recommend downloading the official installer
instead.

Installing on macOS
On macOS, you can use either MacPorts or Homebrew to install Python and
pip.
  Use the following commands to install Python and pip with MacPorts,
replacing the 38 with whatever version you want to download (removing the
decimal point):

   sudo port install python38 py38-pip
   sudo port select --set python python38
   sudo port select --set pip py38-pip

   Alternatively, here’s the command to install both Python and pip in one
step with Homebrew:

   brew install python
  Use only one of the two methods described above.

Installing on Linux
If you’re running a Linux operating system, chances are that Python
(python3) is installed by default, although the other tools you need may not
be. (I’ll show you how to install Python anyway, just to be on the safe side.)
  To install Python and pip on Ubuntu, Debian, or related, run this
command:

   sudo apt install python3 python3-pip python3-venv

  On Fedora, RHEL, or CentOS, you can run this:

   sudo dnf install python3 python3-pip

  On Arch Linux, run this:

   sudo pacman -S python python-pip

  For other distributions, you’ll need to search for the Python 3 and pip
packages yourself.

Installing from Source
If you’re running a UNIX-like system, and if your system either has an
outdated version of Python 3 in the system packages or lacks a package
manager altogether, you can build Python from source. This is how I
usually install the latest Python.

Installing Dependencies
On macOS, there are some relatively complex considerations when it comes
to installing Python’s build dependencies. You should consult the
documentation at https://devguide.python.org/setup/#macos-and-os-x.
  On most Linux systems, you will need to make sure you have the
development files for several libraries that Python relies upon. The best way
to install these depends on your system and, more specifically, which
package manager you use.
   If you’re on a Linux distribution that uses the APT package manager—
such as Ubuntu, Pop!_OS, Debian, or Linux Mint—then you should either
check the box to enable Source Code as a source in your Software Sources
or Software & Updates settings or make sure you have it included in your
sources.list file. (The exact method depends on your system, and that topic
is beyond the scope of this book.)
  Then, run the following commands:

   sudo apt-get update
   sudo apt-get build-dep python3.9

   If you get the message Unable to find a source package for python3.9, change
the 9 to a lower (or higher) number until you find one that works. The
dependencies for Python 3 don’t really change much between minor
versions.
  If your Linux distribution uses the DNF package manager, such as if
you’re on modern Fedora, RHEL, or CentOS, run the following commands:

   sudo dnf install dnf-plugins-core
   sudo dnf builddep python3

  If you’re on an older version of Fedora or RHEL that uses the yum
package manager, run the following commands:

   sudo yum install yum-utils
   sudo yum-builddep python3

   If you’re on SUSE Linux, you’ll have to install the dependencies,
including needed libraries, one by one. Table 2-1 lists these dependencies. If
you’re on another UNIX-based system, this list will be helpful, although
you may need to change the package names or build the dependencies from
source.
Table 2-1: Python 3 Build Dependencies According to SUSE Linux

automake       intltool          netcfg
fdupes         libbz2-devel      openssl-devel
gcc            libexpat-devel pkgconfig
gcc-c++        libffi-devel      readline-devel
gcc-fortran    libnsl-devel      sqlite-devel
gdbm-devel lzma-devel            xz
gettext-tools make               zlib-devel
gmp-devel      ncurses-devel

Downloading and Building Python
You can download the Python source as a Gzipped source tarball, which is a
compressed file (.tgz), from https://www.python.org/downloads/source/. I
usually like to move this tarball file into a dedicated directory for Python
source tarballs, especially as I tend to have multiple versions of Python at
any one time. Within that directory, extract (uncompress) this file with tar -
xzvf Python-3.x.x.tgz, substituting the name of the tarball you downloaded.

  Next, from within the extracted directory, run the following, ensuring that
each command succeeds before running the next one:

    ./configure --enable-optimizations
    make
    make altinstall

  This should configure Python for normal use, ensure it won’t encounter
any errors in the current environment, and then install it alongside any
existing Python installations.

                                      GOTCHA ALERT
  You should always run make altinstall if you have any other version of Python already
  installed. Otherwise, the existing installation may be overwritten or hidden, breaking your
  system! If you are absolutely certain this is the first Python installation on the system, only then
  may you run make install instead.

  Once the installation is complete, you can use Python right away.
Meet the Interpreter
Now that you’ve installed that interpreter, you can run Python scripts and
projects.

Interactive Session
The interpreter’s interactive session allows you to enter and run code in real
time and see the outcomes. You can start an interactive session on the
command line with this command:

   python3

                                  GOTCHA ALERT
 You should be in the habit of specifying python2 or python3, instead of using the python
 command, since the latter may refer to the wrong version (which comes preinstalled on many
 systems, even today). You can always check the exact version of Python invoked by any of
 those three commands with the --version flag (for example, python3 --version).

  Although the above should work on Windows, the same as on any other
system, the Python documentation recommends the following alternative on
Windows instead:

   py.exe -3

   Just to keep everything system-agnostic, I’ll use python3 throughout the
rest of this book.
  When you start the interactive session, you should see something that
looks similar to this:

   Python 3.10.2 (default)
   Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
   >

  Enter any Python code you want at the prompt >, and the interpreter will
run it immediately. You can even enter multiline statements, such as
conditional statements, and the interpreter will know more lines are
expected before it runs the code. You’ll see the three-dot (...) prompt when
the interpreter is waiting for more lines. When you’re done, press ENTER
on a blank line, and the interpreter will run the whole block:

   > spam = True
   > if spam:
   ...     print("Spam, spam, spam, spam...")
   ...
   Spam, spam, spam, spam...

  To quit the interactive session, run this command:

   > exit()

  The interactive session is useful for testing things out in Python, but not
much else. You should know of its existence moving forward, but I won’t
use it much in this book. Instead, you should be using a proper code editor.

Running Python Files
You write scripts and programs in a text or code editor. I’ll introduce
several code editors and IDEs at the end of this chapter, but in the
meantime, you can use your favorite text editor for writing your code.
  Python code is written in .py files. To run a Python file (myfile.py, for
example), you’d use this in the command line (not the interpreter):

   python3 myfile.py

Packages and Virtual Environments
A package is a collection of code, which is analogous to a library in most
other programming languages. Python is rather famous for being “batteries
included,” since most things “just work” with a simple import statement. But
if you need to do something beyond the basics, such as creating a snazzy
user interface, you often have to install a package.
    Thankfully, installing most third-party libraries is easy. Library authors
bundle their libraries into packages, which can be installed using the handy
little pip package manager tool that we installed earlier. I’ll cover that tool
later.
   Using multiple third-party packages requires a bit of finesse. Some
packages require other packages to be installed first. Certain packages have
conflicts with other packages. You can also install specific versions of a
package, depending on what exactly you need. Did I mention that some of
the applications and operating system components on your computer rely
on certain Python packages? This is why virtual environments exist.
   A virtual environment is a sandbox where you can install only the Python
packages you need for a particular project, without the risk of those
packages clashing with those for another project (or your system). You
create different little sandboxes for each project and install only the
packages you want in it. Everything stays neatly organized. You never
actually change what Python packages are installed on your system, so you
avoid breaking important things that have nothing to do with your project.
   You may even create virtual environments that have nothing to do with a
particular project. For example, I have a dedicated virtual environment for
running random code files in Python 3.10, with a particular set of tools I use
for finding problems.

Creating a Virtual Environment
Each virtual environment resides in a dedicated directory. Conventionally,
we name this folder env or venv.
   For each project, I typically like to create a dedicated virtual environment
inside the project folder. Python provides a tool called venv for this.
  If you use Git or another version control system (VCS) for tracking
changes to your code, there’s an additional setup step I’ll get to in a
moment.
  To create the virtual environment with the name venv in the current
working directory, run the following command in the command line:

   python3 -m ❶ venv ❷ venv
   The first venv ❶ is a command that creates a virtual environment, and the
second venv ❷ is the desired path to the virtual environment. In this case,
venv is just a relative path, creating a venv/ directory in the current working
directory. However, you could also use an absolute path, and you could call
it whatever you want. For example, you could create a virtual environment
called myvirtualenv in the /opt directory of a UNIX system, like this:

   python3 -m venv /opt/myvirtualenv

  Note, I’m specifying python3 here, although I can run this with whatever
Python version I want to use, such as python3.9 -m venv venv.
  If you use something older than Python 3.3, make sure you install your
system’s virtualenv package and then use this command:

   virtualenv -p python3 venv

   Now if you look at your working directory, you’ll notice that the
directory venv/ has been created.

Activating a Virtual Environment
To use your virtual environment, you need to activate it.
  On UNIX-like systems, run this command:

   $ source venv/bin/activate

  On Windows, run this:

   > venv\Scripts\activate.bat

  Alternatively, if you use PowerShell on Windows, run this:

   > venv\Scripts\activate.ps1

   Some PowerShell users must first run set-executionpolicy RemoteSigned for
virtual environments to work on Windows PowerShell. If you run into
trouble, try this.
   Like magic, you’re now using your virtual environment! You should see
(venv) at the start of your command line prompt (not at the end), to indicate
that you’re using a virtual environment named venv.

                                      GOTCHA ALERT
  If you have multiple shells (usually terminal windows) open, you should be aware that the
  virtual environment is only active for the one shell you explicitly activated it in! On shells that
  support it, look for the (venv) notation to make sure you’re using the virtual environment.

   While inside your virtual environment, you can still access all the same
files on your system that you use outside the virtual environment, but your
environment paths will be overridden by the virtual environment.
Practically speaking, any packages you install in the virtual environment are
only usable there, and from the venv, the system-wide packages cannot be
accessed unless you explicitly specify otherwise.
   If you want the virtual environment to also see the system-wide
packages, you can do so with a special flag, which has to be set when you
first create the virtual environment. You can’t change this after the virtual
environment is created.

    python3 -m venv --system-site-packages venv

Leaving a Virtual Environment
To get out of the virtual environment and back to reality . . . er, ahem, the
system, you need a simple command.
  You ready for this, UNIX users? Just run this:

    $ deactivate

  That really is it. The same works for Windows PowerShell users.
   Things are only slightly more complicated on the Windows command
line:

    > venv\Scripts\deactivate.bat
   Still pretty painless. Remember, like with activation, if you named your
virtual environment something else, you’d have to change the venv in that
line accordingly.

Introducing pip
Most of us have great expectations for Python’s package system. Python’s
package manager is pip, which usually makes package installation trivial,
especially in virtual environments.

System-Wide Packages
Remember, for any Python development work, you should almost always
work in virtual environments. This will ensure that you’re always using the
right packages for your work, without potentially messing up which
packages (and versions thereof) are available to other programs on your
computer. If you absolutely, positively know you want to install packages in
your system-wide Python environment, you may use pip for that as well.
First, make sure you are not working in a virtual environment, and then use
this:

   python3 -m pip command

  Replace the command with your pip commands, which I’ll cover next.

Installing Packages
To install a package, run pip install package. For example, to install PySide6
within an activated virtual environment, you’d use this:

   pip install PySide6

   If you want to install a specific version of something, append two equal
signs (==), followed by the desired version number (no spaces):

   pip install PySide6==6.1.2
   Bonus: you can even use operators like >=, to mean “at least this version
or greater.” These are called requirement specifiers.

   pip install PySide6>=6.1.2

  That line would install the latest version of PySide6 that is at least
version 6.1.2. This is really helpful if you want the most recent version of a
package but also want to ensure you at least install a minimum version of a
package (you might not). If it isn’t possible to install a version of the
package that meets the requirement, pip will display an error message.
   If you’re on a UNIX-like system, you may need to use pip install
"PySide6>=6.1.2" instead, since > has another meaning in the shell.

requirements.txt
You can save even more time for yourself and others by writing a
requirements.txt file for your project. This file lists the packages your
project needs. When creating a virtual environment, you and other users can
install all the required packages with a single command, using this file.
  To create this file, list the name of a pip package, as well as its version (if
required), on each line. For example, one of my projects has a
requirements.txt file like this:

   PySide2>=5.11.1
   appdirs

  Listing 2-1: requirements.txt

  Now anyone can install all those packages in one shot with this
command:

   pip install -r requirements.txt

   I’ll revisit requirements.txt in Chapter 18, when I cover packaging and
distribution.
Upgrading Packages
You can update an already-installed package with pip as well. For example,
to update to the latest version of PySide6, run this:

   pip install --upgrade PySide6

  If you have a requirements.txt file, you can also upgrade all your required
packages at once:

   pip install --upgrade -r requirements.txt

Removing Packages
You can remove packages with this command:

   pip uninstall package

  Replace package with the package name.
  There is one minor wrinkle. Installing one package will also install any
other packages it relies upon, which we call its dependencies. Uninstalling a
package does not remove its dependencies, so you may need to go through
and remove them yourself. This can get tricky, since multiple packages may
share dependencies and you therefore risk breaking a separate package.
   Herein lies one more advantage of virtual environments. Once I’m in that
sort of a pickle, I can delete the virtual environment, create a new one, and
install only those packages I need.

Finding Packages
Great, so now you can install, upgrade, and remove things. But how do you
even know what packages pip has to offer?
  There are two ways to find out. The first is to use pip itself to run a
search. Say you want a package for web scraping. Run this command:

   pip search web scraping
  That will give you a whole ton of results to sift through, but it’s helpful at
those times when you simply forget the name of a package.
   If you want something a lot more browsable and informative, https://pyp
i.org/ is the official Python Package Index.

One Warning About pip . . .
Unless you have expertise in the full technical implications, never use sudo
pip on a UNIX-like system! It can do so many bad things to your system
installation—things that your system package manager cannot correct—that
if you decide to use it, you will regret it for the remainder of your system’s
lifetime.
   Usually, when someone thinks they need to use sudo pip, they should
really use python3 -m pip or pip install --user to install to their local user
directory. Most other problems can be solved with virtual environments.
Unless you’re an expert who fully understands what you’re doing and how
to reverse it, don’t ever use sudo pip!

                                   GOTCHA ALERT
  Seriously. Never use sudo pip.

Virtual Environments and Git
Working with virtual environments and a VCS, like Git, can be tricky.
Within a virtual environment’s directory are the actual packages you
installed with pip. Those would clutter up your VCS repository with big,
unnecessary files, and you can’t necessarily copy a virtual environment
folder from one computer to another and expect it to work anyway.
  Thus, you don’t want to track these files in your VCS. There are two
solutions:

 1. Only create virtual environments outside of your repository.
 2. Untrack the virtual environment directory in the VCS.
   There are arguments in favor of both rules, but which one you should use
really depends on your project, environment, and particular needs.
   If you’re using Git, create or edit a file called .gitignore in the root
directory of your repository. Add this line somewhere in it:

   venv/

  Listing 2-2: .gitignore

   If you used a different name for your virtual environment, change that
line to match. If you’re using a different VCS, like Subversion or Mercurial,
check the documentation to see how to ignore a directory like venv.
   Conventionally, every developer who clones your repository will build
their own virtual environment, probably using that requirements.txt file you
provided.
   Even if you plan to place your virtual environments outside of the
repository, it’s good to use your .gitignore file, just as a little extra
insurance. Best VCS practice is to handpick which files to commit, but
mistakes happen. Since venv is one of the most conventional names for a
virtual environment directory, adding it to the .gitignore at least helps
prevent some accidental commits. If your team has other standard names
for virtual environments, you might consider adding those as well.

The Whole Shebang
Many users and developers who might be running your code will also be
using virtual environments. Yet all of this can come apart at the seams very
easily if the very first line of your Python file is wrong.
   I’m talking about the shebang, a special command at the top of a Python
file, by which you can make that file directly executable:

 ❶ #!/usr/bin/env python3

   print("Hello, world!")

  Listing 2-3: hello_world.py
   The shebang (short for haSH-BANG, or #!) ❶ provides the path to the
Python interpreter. While it’s optional, I strongly recommend including it in
your code, as it means the file can be marked as executable and run directly,
like this:

   ./hello_world.py

   This is helpful, but as I’ve hinted before, one must be careful with
shebangs. A shebang tells the computer where to find the exact Python
interpreter to use, so the wrong shebang can break out of the confines of a
virtual environment or even point to a version of the interpreter that isn’t
installed.
  You may have seen this kind of shebang in the wild:

   #!/usr/bin/python

  Listing 2-4: shebang.py:1a

  That line is terribly wrong, because it forces the computer to use a
particular system-wide copy of Python. Again, that dismisses the entire
purpose of a virtual environment.

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
 You may be wondering how #!/usr/bin/python would even be a valid path on Windows. It
 does function, thanks to some cleverness outlined in PEP 397. (You still should avoid using it.)

  Instead, you should always use this shebang for any Python file that only
runs with Python 3:

   #!/usr/bin/env python3

  Listing 2-5: shebang.py:1b

  If you happen to have a script which runs in both Python 2 and Python 3,
use this shebang instead:
   #!/usr/bin/env python

  Listing 2-6: shebang.py:1c

  The rules about shebangs and how they are handled are officially
outlined in PEP 394 (for UNIX-like systems) and PEP 397 (for Windows
systems). Regardless of which system you develop for, it’s good to
understand the implications of shebangs in both UNIX and Windows.

File Encoding
Since Python 3.1, all Python files have used the UTF-8 encoding, allowing
the interpreter to use all of the characters in Unicode. (Prior to that version,
the default was to use the old ASCII encoding.)
 If you need to use a different encoding system, instead of the default
UTF-8, you need to tell the Python interpreter that outright.
   For example, to use Latin-1 encoding in a Python file, include this line at
the top of your file, right below the shebang. To work, it must be on the first
or second line—that’s where the interpreter looks for this information:

   # -*- coding: latin-1 -*-

   If you want another encoding system, replace latin-1 with whatever you
need. If you specify an encoding that Python doesn’t recognize, it will
throw an error.
   Although the preceding is the conventional way to specify encoding,
there are two other valid ways to write the above comment. You can use this
form, without the hard-to-remember -*-:

   # coding: latin-1

  Or you can use this longer but more English-like form:

   # This Python file uses the following encoding: latin-1
   Whatever you use, it must be exactly as shown above, except for
swapping latin-1 for whatever encoding you want. For this reason, the first
or second forms are preferred.
  To learn more, read PEP 263, which defined this feature.
   Most of the time, you’ll be fine using the default UTF-8 encoding
anyway; if you need something else, now you know how to inform the
interpreter.

A Few Extra Virtual Environment Tricks
As you get used to using virtual environments and pip, you’ll pick up
additional tricks and tools to make the whole process easier. Here are a few
of the more popular ones:

Using a Virtual Environment Without Activating
You can use the binaries that are a part of the virtual environment without
activating it. For example, you can execute venv/bin/python to run the virtual
environment’s own Python instance, or venv/bin/pip to run its instance of pip.
It’ll work the same as if you had activated the virtual environment.
   For example, assuming my virtual environment is venv, I could do this in
the terminal:

   venv/bin/pip install pylint
   venv/bin/python

   > import pylint

   It works! Yet, import pylint still will not work on the system-wide Python
interactive shell (unless, of course, you installed it on the system).

The Alternatives
Throughout this book, I’ll be using pip and venv, as they’re the default tools
for modern Python. However, there are a few other solutions out there
worth looking into.
Pipenv
A number of Python developers swear by Pipenv, which combines both pip
and venv into one cohesive tool, with many additional features.
   Because the workflow is quite different, I won’t cover Pipenv here. If
you’re interested in it, I recommend reading their superb documentation at
https://docs.pipenv.org/. You’ll find comprehensive setup and usage
instructions there, as well as a more detailed explanation of the advantages
Pipenv offers.

pip-tools
A number of tasks in pip can be simplified with pip-tools, including
automatic updating, aids for writing requirements.txt, and more.
  If you use pip-tools, you should only install it within a virtual
environment. It is designed specifically for that use case.
  More information is available at https://pypi.org/project/pip-tools/.

poetry
Some Python developers absolutely hate the entire pip workflow. One such
developer created poetry as an alternative package manager. I don’t use it in
this book, as it behaves very differently, but I’d be remiss not to point it out.
   You can find more information, download directions (the creator does not
recommend using pip to install it), and access documentation on their
website: https://python-poetry.org/.

Introduction to PEP 8
Unlike many languages, where style decisions are left entirely to the
discretion of the community at large, Python does have an official style
guide, which is published as PEP 8. Although the conventions in the guide
are intended primarily for standard library code, many Python developers
choose to stick to them as a rule.
   That doesn’t make them mandatory: if you have an objective reason to
follow a different style convention in your project, that’s fine, although you
should apply that style consistently, as much as is reasonable.
  PEP 8 itself makes this distinction clear, early on:
  A style guide is about consistency. Consistency with this style guide is important. Consistency
  within a project is more important. Consistency within one module or function is the most
  important.
  However, know when to be inconsistent—sometimes, style guide recommendations just aren’t
  applicable. When in doubt, use your best judgment. Look at other examples and decide what
  looks best. And don’t hesitate to ask!

  In practice, you’ll likely find very little reason to deviate from PEP 8.
The style guide is far from all-encompassing. It leaves plenty of breathing
room, while making it clear what constitutes a good or bad coding style.

The Line Limit Debate
PEP 8 recommends a line limit of 79 characters, or an 80-character cutoff,
though there’s a lot of debate on the topic. Some Python developers respect
that rule, while others prefer cutoffs of 100 or 120 characters. What to do?
  The most common argument for longer limits is that modern monitors are
wider and higher resolution. Surely, the 80-character limit is a relic of a
bygone era, right? Definitely not! There are several reasons to stick to a
common line limit. For example:

   Vision-impaired individuals who must work with larger font sizes or
   zoomed-in interfaces
   Viewing differences in a file between commits in a side-by-side diff
   Split-screen editors, displaying multiple files simultaneously
   Vertical monitors
   Side-by-side windows on a laptop monitor, wherein the editor only has
   half its usual space
   Individuals with older monitors, who cannot afford to upgrade to the
   latest 1080p monster
   Viewing code on mobile devices
   Writing coding books for No Starch Press
   In all of these scenarios, the reasoning behind the 80-character limit
becomes apparent: there simply isn’t enough horizontal space for 120
characters or more per line. Soft text wrapping, wherein the remainder of a
cut-off line appears on a separate line (without a line number), does solve
some of these issues. However, it can be difficult to read, as many people
forced to rely on it regularly will attest to.
   This doesn’t mean that you have to follow this 79-character maximum
religiously. There are exceptions. Above all, readability and consistency are
the goals. Many developers embrace the 80/100 rule: an 80-character “soft”
cutoff, you try to respect in most cases; and a 100-character “hard” cutoff,
you reserve for all those cases where the lower limit would negatively
impact readability.

Tabs or Spaces?
Ah yes, the civil war over which many friendships have been strained and
many relationships have abruptly ended (okay, maybe just that one?). Most
programmers have strong feelings on the topic.
   PEP 8 recommends spaces over tabs, but technically, it allows either. The
important thing is to never mix the two. Use either spaces or tabs, and stick
to it throughout your entire project.
   If you do use spaces, then there’s the debate about how many spaces to
use. PEP 8 answers this question, too: four spaces per indentation level.
Any less can negatively impact code readability, especially for people with
visual impairments or some forms of dyslexia.
  By the way, most code editors are able to automatically enter four spaces
when they press TAB, so there’s rarely an excuse to press SPACE
repeatedly.

Quality Control: Static Analyzers
One of the most useful tools in any programmer’s toolkit is a reliable static
analyzer, which reads your source code, looking for potential problems or
deviations from the standards. If you’ve never used one before, now is the
time to change that. One common type of static analyzer, called a linter,
checks your source code for common mistakes, potential errors, and style
inconsistencies. Two of the most popular linters are Pylint and PyFlakes.
   There are many more kinds of static analyzers available for Python,
including static type checkers like Mypy and complexity analyzers like
mccabe.
   I’ll cover how to install all of these below, and I’ll discuss how to use
many of them. I recommend you choose only one of these two linters and
install the rest of the static analyzers.

Pylint
Pylint is perhaps the most versatile static analyzer in Python. It works
decently well by default, and it allows you to customize exactly what you
want it to look for and ignore.
   You can install the Pylint package with pip, which I recommend doing in
a virtual environment. Once installed, you pass Pylint the name of a file you
want analyzed, like this:

   pylint filetocheck.py

   You can also analyze an entire package or module at once. (I’ll define
what modules and packages are in Chapter 4.) For example, if you want
Pylint to analyze a package called myawesomeproject in the current working
directory, you’d run this:

   pylint myawesomeproject

  Pylint will scan the files and display its warnings and recommendations
on the command line. Then, you can edit your file and make the necessary
changes.
  For example, consider the following Python file:

   def cooking():
       ham = True
       print(eggs)
       return order
  Listing 2-7: cooking.py:1a

   I’ll run the linter on that file with the following in the system command
line:

   pylint cooking.py

  Pylint provides the following feedback:

   ************* Module cooking
   cooking.py:1:0: C0111: Missing module docstring (missing-docstring)
   cooking.py:1:0: C0111: Missing function docstring (missing-docstring)
   cooking.py:3:10: E0602: Undefined variable 'eggs' (undefined-variable)
   cooking.py:4:11: E0602: Undefined variable 'order' (undefined-variable)
   cooking.py:2:4: W0612: Unused variable 'ham' (unused-variable)

   -----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Your code has been rated at -22.50/10

   The linter found five errors in my code: both the module and the function
are missing their docstrings (see Chapter 3). I tried to use the variables eggs
and order, neither of which exist. I also assigned a value to the variable ham,
but I never used that value anywhere.
   If Pylint takes umbrage at a particular line of code you feel should be left
as is, you can tell the static analyzer to ignore it and move on. You do this
with a special comment, either inline on the line in question or at the top of
the affected block. For example:

   # pylint: disable=missing-docstring

   def cooking():    # pylint: disable=missing-docstring
       ham = True
       print(eggs)
       return order

  Listing 2-8: cooking.py:1b

  With the first command, I tell Pylint not to alert me about the missing
docstring on the module; that affects the entire block of code. The inline
comment on the next line will suppress the warning about the missing
docstring on the function, and it will only affect that line. If I ran the linter
again, I’d only see the other three linter errors:

   ************* Module cooking
   cooking.py:5:10: E0602: Undefined variable 'eggs' (undefined-variable)
   cooking.py:6:11: E0602: Undefined variable 'order' (undefined-variable)
   cooking.py:4:4: W0612: Unused variable 'ham' (unused-variable)

   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
   Your code has been rated at -17.50/10 (previous run: -22.50/10, +5.00)

  At this point, I’d edit my code and actually fix the rest of those problems.
(Except I won’t, for this example.)
   You can also control Pylint’s project-wide behavior by creating a pylintrc
file in the root directory of your project. To do this, run the following:

   pylint --generate-rcfile > pylintrc

   Find that file; open it; and edit it to turn on and off different warnings,
ignore files, and define other settings. The documentation isn’t fantastic for
this, but you can often work out what different options do from the
comments in that pylintrc file.
   When you run Pylint, it will look for a pylintrc (or .pylintrc) file in the
current working directory. Alternatively, you can specify a different
filename for Pylint to read its settings from, such as myrcfile, by passing the
filename to the --rcfile option when invoking Pylint:

   pylint --rcfile=myrcfile filetocheck.py

   Some regular users of Pylint like to create .pylintrc or .config/pylintrc in
their home directory (UNIX-like systems only). If Pylint cannot find
another configuration file, it will use the one in the home directory.
  Although the Pylint documentation is far from comprehensive, it can still
be useful. You can find it at https://pylint.readthedocs.io/.
Flake8
The Flake8 tool is actually a combination of three static analyzers:

   PyFlakes is a linter, similar in purpose to Pylint. It is designed to work
   faster and to avoid false positives (both being common complaints
   about Pylint). It also ignores style rules, which are handled by the next
   tool.
   pycodestyle is a style checker, to help ensure you write PEP 8-compliant
   code. (This tool used to be called pep8, but it was renamed to avoid
   confusion with the actual style guide.)
   mccabe checks the McCabe (or Cyclomatic) complexity of your code. If
   you don’t know what that is, don’t worry—its purpose is essentially just
   to warn you when your code’s structure is getting too complicated.

   You can install the Flake8 package with pip, which I typically do within a
virtual environment.
  To scan a file, module, or package, pass it to flake8 on the command line.
For example, to scan my earlier cooking.py file (Listing 2-8), I’d use this
command:

   flake8 cooking.py

  That outputs the following:

   cooking.py:2:5: F841 local variable 'ham' is assigned to but never used
   cooking.py:3:11: F821 undefined name 'eggs'
   cooking.py:4:12: F821 undefined name 'order'

   (You’ll notice that Flake8 isn’t complaining about the lack of docstrings;
that’s disabled by default in this linter.)
   By default, only PyFlakes and pycodestyle are run. If you want to
analyze the complexity of your code, you also need to pass the argument --
max-complexity, followed by a number. Anything higher than 10 is considered
too complex, but if you understand McCabe complexity, you can change
this to suit your needs. So, for example, to check the complexity of the
cooking.py file, you’d run this:
   flake8 --max-complexity 10 cooking.py

  However you run Flake8, you’ll get a comprehensive list of all the errors
and warnings in your code.
  If you need to tell Flake8 to ignore something it thinks is a problem, you
use a # noqa comment, followed by the error code to ignore. This comment
should be inline, on the line where the error occurs. If you omit the error
code, then # noqa will cause Flake8 to ignore all errors on that line.
  In my code, if I wanted to ignore both of the errors I received, it might
look like this:

   def cooking():
       ham = True     # noqa F841
       print(eggs)    # noqa F821, F841
       return order   # noqa

  Listing 2-9: cooking.py:1c

   Here, you see three different scenarios. First, I’m ignoring only warning
F841. Second, I’m ignoring two errors (even though one of them isn’t
actually raised; this is just a silly example). Third, I’m ignoring all possible
errors.
   Flake8 also supports configuration files. In the project directory, you can
create a .flake8 file. Start a section in that file with the line [flake8],
followed by all the Flake8 settings you want to define. (See the
documentation.)
   Flake8 will also accept project-wide configuration files called tox.ini or
setup.cfg, so long as they have a [flake8] section within them.
  For example, if you want to automatically run mccabe each time you
invoke Flake8, rather than specify --max-complexity every time, you could
define a .flake8 file that looks like this:

   [flake8]
   max-complexity = 10

  Listing 2-10: .flake8
   Some developers like to define a system-wide configuration file for
Flake8, which you can do (only) on a UNIX-like system. In your home
folder, create the configuration file as either .flake8 or .config/flake8.
  One of the chief advantages of Flake8 over Pylint is the documentation.
Flake8 has a complete list of their warnings, errors, options, and the like.
You can find the documentation at https://flake8.readthedocs.io/.

Mypy
Mypy is an unusual static analyzer because it focuses entirely on type
annotations (see Chapter 6). Because it involves so many concepts I haven’t
covered yet, I won’t go into much depth here.
  Still, now is a good time to get it installed. Like everything else so far,
you can install the mypy package from pip.
 Once installed, Mypy can be used by passing it the file, package, or
module you wish to check:

   mypy filetocheck.py

  Mypy will only attempt to check files that have type annotations, and it
will ignore the rest.

Style Janitors: Autoformatting Tools
Another tool you may find useful is an autoformatter, which can
automatically change your Python code—spacing, indentation, and
preferred equivalent expressions (such as != instead of <>)—to be PEP 8
compliant. Two options are autopep8 and Black.

autopep8
The autopep8 tool leverages pycodestyle (part of Flake8), even using the
same configuration file as that tool to determine what style rules it
ultimately follows or ignores.
  As always, you can install autopep8 with pip.
   By default, autopep8 only fixes whitespace, but if you pass the --
aggressive argument to it, it will make additional changes. In fact, if you pass
that argument twice, it will do even more. The complete list is beyond the
scope of this explanation, so consult the documentation at https://pypi.org/p
roject/autopep8/ to learn more.
  To fix most PEP 8 issues on a Python code file by changing it in place (as
opposed to making a copy, which is the default behavior), run this:

   autopep8 --in-place --aggressive --aggressive filetochange.py

  Changing the file directly may sound a bit risky, but it really isn’t. Style
changes are just that: style. They don’t affect the actual behavior of the
code.

Black
The Black tool is a little more straightforward: it assumes you want to
follow PEP 8 in its entirety, and it doesn’t overwhelm you with many
options as a result.
   Like autopep8, you install black with pip, although it requires Python 3.6
or later. To format a file with it, pass the filename:

   black filetochange.py

  A complete list of Black’s few options can be seen via black --help.

Testing Frameworks
Testing frameworks form an essential part of any good development
workflow, but I won’t go into detail about them in this chapter. Python has
three major options for testing frameworks: Pytest, nose2, and unittest, in
addition to a promising new project called ward. All of these can be
installed with pip.
    More knowledge is essential to cover this topic effectively, so I’ll revisit
it in Chapter 20.
An Exhibition of Code Editors
You have your Python interpreter, your virtual environments, your static
analyzers, and other such tools. Now you are prepared to write code.
  You can write Python in any basic text editor, just as you could with
practically any other programming language. Yet you’ll probably have an
easier time writing production-quality code with a proper code editor.
  Before I end this chapter, I want to take you on a tour of several of the
most popular Python code editors and integrated development environments
(IDEs) available. This is only a sampling, as there are many more options
besides. If you already know what code editor or IDE you want to use,
skip forward to the last section of this chapter.

IDLE
Python has its own IDE, called IDLE, which ships with the standard
distribution of Python. It’s a fairly bare-bones IDE with two components:
an editor and an interface for the interactive shell. You could do worse than
IDLE, so if you aren’t in the mood to install a different editor right now,
start here. However, I recommend exploring your options, as most editors
and IDEs have a host of useful features that IDLE lacks.

Emacs and Vim
The purists and old-school hackers among you will be glad to know that
Emacs and Vim both have excellent Python support. Setting up either is not
for the faint of heart, so I’m not going into any of that here.
  If you’re already a lover of either (or both?) code editors, you can find
excellent tutorials for both at Real Python.
  For Emacs, see https://realpython.com/emacs-the-best-python-editor/.
  For Vim, see https://realpython.com/vim-and-python-a-match-made-in-he
aven/.
PyCharm
According to “The State of Developer Ecosystem 2021” developer survey
by JetBrains, the PyCharm IDE from JetBrains is far and away the most
popular option for Python programming. It comes in two flavors: the free
PyCharm Community Edition and the paid PyCharm Professional Edition.
(Steps were taken by JetBrains to eliminate bias. See the survey here: http
s://www.jetbrains.com/lp/devecosystem-2021/python/.)
   Both versions offer a dedicated Python code editor with autocompletion,
refactoring, debugging, and testing tools. It can manage and use virtual
environments with ease, and it integrates with your version control
software. It even performs static analysis (using its own tool). The
professional edition adds tools for data, scientific development, and web
development.
  If you’re familiar with other JetBrains IDEs, like IntelliJ IDEA or CLion,
PyCharm would be a great Python IDE to start with. It requires more
computer resources than many code editors, but if you have a decently
powerful machine, this won’t be a problem. If you haven’t used JetBrains
IDEs before, try the Community Edition before investing in the paid
version.
  You can find more information and downloads at https://jetbrains.com/py
charm/.

Visual Studio Code
Visual Studio Code has excellent Python support. It’s the second-most
popular Python code editor, according to that 2021 JetBrains survey. It’s
free and open source, and it runs on virtually every platform. Install the
official Python extension from Microsoft, and you’re ready to go!
   Visual Studio Code supports autocompletion, refactoring, debugging, and
virtual environment switching, along with the usual version control
integration. It integrates with Pylint, Flake8, and Mypy, among several
other popular static analyzers. It even works with the most common Python
unit testing tools.
  Download it at https://code.visualstudio.com/.
Sublime Text
Sublime is another popular multilanguage code editor. It is appreciated for
its speed and simplicity, and it is easily customized with extensions and
configuration files. Sublime Text is free to try, but if you find you like it and
wish to continue using it, you need to purchase it.
   The Anaconda plug-in transforms Sublime Text into a Python IDE, with
everything: autocompletion, navigation, static analysis, autoformatting, test
running, and even a documentation browser. It requires a little more hand-
tuned configuration than some of the other options, especially if you want
to use virtual environments. However, if Sublime Text is your jam, it’s
worth it.
  Download Sublime Text at https://sublimetext.com/ and the Anaconda
plug-in at https://damnwidget.github.io/anaconda/. That second link also
provides instructions for installing the plug-in in Sublime Text.

Spyder
If your focus is scientific programming or data analysis, or if you’re a fan of
MATLAB’s interface, you’ll be right at home in Spyder, a free and open
source Python IDE that is also written in Python.
  In addition to the usual features—a dedicated Python code editor, a
debugger, integration with static analyzers, and documentation viewing—
Spyder includes integration with many common Python libraries for data
analysis and scientific computing. It integrates a full code profiler and
variable explorer. Plug-ins exist for supporting unit tests, autoformatting,
and editing Jupyter notebooks, among other features.
  Download Spyder at https://spyder-ide.org/.

Eclipse + PyDev/LiClipse
Eclipse has lost a lot of ground to the newer editors, but it still has a loyal
user base. Although it’s geared toward languages like Java, C++, PHP, and
JavaScript, Eclipse can also become a Python IDE with the PyDev plug-in.
  If you already have installed Eclipse, which is completely free, then you
only need to install the PyDev plug-in from the Eclipse Marketplace.
Download Eclipse at https://eclipse.org/ide/ and look in the marketplace for
the plug-in.
   Alternatively, you can install LiClipse, which bundles Eclipse, PyDev,
and other useful tools. The PyDev developers recommend this approach, as
it directly supports their development work. You can use LiClipse without a
license for 30 days, after which point, you must purchase a license.
Download LiClipse from https://liclipse.com/.
   PyDev offers autocompletion, refactoring, support for type hinting and
static analysis, debugging, unit test integration, and many more features.
You can find more information about PyDev at https://pydev.org/.

The Eric Python IDE
Eric might be the oldest IDE on the list, but it’s still as reliable as ever.
Named after Eric Idle of Monty Python’s Flying Circus, Eric is a free and
open source IDE written in Python.
  It offers everything you could possibly need to write Python:
autocompletion, debugging, refactoring, static analysis, testing integration,
documentation tools, virtual environment management, and the list goes on.
   Find information about Eric and download it at https://eric-ide.python-pr
ojects.org/.

Wrapping Up
Writing code involves so much more than just code. Having set up your
development environment, project, and IDE, you are now prepared to focus
exclusively on making your code the best it can be.
  By this point, you should have assembled a Python development
workbench worthy of any production-level project. At minimum, you
should have installed the Python interpreter, pip, venv, one or more static
analyzers, and a Python code editor.
  Right now, in your code editor or IDE, create a FiringRange project for
experimenting in while working through this book. For the moment, to be
sure everything works, you can make a single Python file in that project
with these contents:

   #!/usr/bin/env python3

   print("Hello, world!")

  Listing 2-11: hello_world.py

  Run that like this:

   python3 hello_world.py

  You should see the following output:

   Hello, world!

  I’ll go into the correct structure for Python projects in Chapter 4, but
writing and running individual Python files in your firing range project
should be sufficient for Chapter 3.
   If you’re new to the IDE you have selected, take a few minutes now to
familiarize yourself with it. You should particularly ensure you know how
to navigate and run code, manage files, work with virtual environments,
access the interactive console, and use the static analyzers.
