                                    8
          ERRORS AND EXCEPTIONS

              In many languages, exceptions are
              regarded as the archnemeses of
              programmers and the hallmarks of some
              degree of failure. Something,
somewhere was used improperly! Python developers,
on the other hand, recognize exceptions as friends
that help write better code.
   Python offers many familiar error-handling tools, but the way we use
them may look different from what you’re used to. These tools can help you
do more than clean up messes. You might even say, error handling in
Python is “exceptional.”
   I’ll start by demonstrating what exceptions look like in Python and how
to read their accompanying messages. I’ll cover catching exceptions,
handling them, and raising them. Then, I’ll show you how to leverage errors
to control the flow of your program. Finally, I’ll give you a tour of the
common exception types.

Exceptions in Python
In case exceptions, which are sometimes called errors in Python, are
unfamiliar to you, here’s the general definition:
  exception: (computing) An interruption in normal processing, typically caused by an error
  condition, that can be handled by another part of the program. (Wiktionary)

  Let’s start with a seemingly innocuous program: a number-guessing
game. I’m only using concepts introduced in previous chapters, so see if
you can spot the bug before I point it out.
  First, I create a function that selects a random number, which the player
will have to try to guess:

   import random

   def generate_puzzle(low=1, high=100):
       print(f"I'm thinking of a number between {low} and {high}...")
       return random.randint(low, high)

  Listing 8-1: number_guess.py:1

  Next, I create a function that gets a guess from the user and outputs
whether the number guessed was too high, too low, or correct:

   def make_guess(target):
       guess = int(input("Guess: "))

       if guess == target:
            return True

       if guess < target:
            print("Too low.")
       elif guess > target:
            print("Too high.")
       return False

  Listing 8-2: number_guess.py:2a

  I return a boolean value to indicate whether the guess is correct or not.
  The following function is responsible for running the game and tracking
how many guesses the player has left:
   def play(tries=8):
       target = generate_puzzle()
       while tries > 0:
          if make_guess(target):
                print("You win!")
                return

          tries -= 1
          print(f"{tries} tries left.")

       print(f"Game over! The answer was {target}.")

  Listing 8-3: number_guess.py:3

   I call the play() function when the module is executed directly, thereby
starting the game:

   if __name__ == '__main__':
       play()

  Listing 8-4: number_guess.py:4

   If I test this game by playing it the normal way, everything seems to work
as expected. Here’s my first playthrough:

   I'm thinking of a number between 1 and 100...
   Guess: 50
   Too low.
   7 tries left.
   Guess: 75
   Too low.
   6 tries left.
   Guess: 90
   Too high.
   5 tries left.
   Guess: 87
   You win!

  Our first instinct as programmers is to test things politely. We have a
subconscious sense about what will cause the code to break, and we
inherently tiptoe around those possible errors. However, if you’ve done any
meaningful testing, you know the value of “doing horrible things to your
code,” as Stack Overflow cofounder Jeff Atwood says.
  Or, as programmer Bill Sempf puts it:
  QA Engineer walks into a bar. Orders a beer. Orders 0 beers. Orders 999999999 beers. Orders
  a lizard. Orders ‒1 beers. Orders a sfdeljknesv.

  So, proper testing of this code involves throwing input to it that it doesn’t
expect or understand, like so:

   I'm thinking of a number between 1 and 100...
   Guess: Fifty
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "./number_guess.py", line 35, in <module>
       play()
     File "./number_guess.py", line 25, in play
       if make_guess(target):
     File "./number_guess.py", line 10, in make_guess
       guess = int(input("Guess: "))
   ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'Fifty'

  Listing 8-5: Traceback from running number_guess.py

  Eww, a bug! My program can’t handle numbers spelled out as words.
Clearly, I need to do something about this.

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
 There’s another half to the above joke: “First real customer walks in and asks where the
 bathroom is. The bar bursts into flames, killing everyone.” In other words, don’t get stuck on
 testing only the obvious functionality.

Reading Tracebacks
That block of output you receive when an error occurs is called the
traceback, and it tells you what went wrong and where. It includes the
details of the error that occurred, the line where it happened, and the entire
call stack—which contains the function calls leading directly from the main
function to the error. The entire call stack will always be displayed; it is up
to you to determine the location of the coding mistake.
   I recommend reading tracebacks from the bottom up. Let’s take apart that
traceback I received in Listing 8-5, piece by piece, starting from the final
line:

   ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: 'Fifty'

  This tells you what went wrong. Specifically, a ValueError was raised
because the value 'Fifty' was passed to the int() function. The with base 10
part has to do with the default value of the base parameter. In other words,
Python can’t convert the string 'Fifty' to an integer using the int() function.
  This last line of the traceback is the single-most important. Always read
and completely understand it before moving forward with fixing the bug!
   The two lines above the error tell you precisely where the error occurred:
in file ./number_guess.py, on line 10, in the make_guess() function:

     File "./number_guess.py", line 10, in make_guess
       guess = int(input("Guess: "))

  Python even gives you the offending line in question, and sure enough,
you can see the int() function wrapped around input().
  Sometimes, you can stop there and go fix the problem. In this case, the
problem is right here. In other situations, the error may occur because of a
mistake in the code further up in the call stack, such as passing bad data to a
parameter. Even though I know that’s not the problem here, I’ll go up
another step:

     File "./number_guess.py", line 25, in play
       if make_guess(target):

   You already know that the error is occurring in the make_guess() function,
and that is being called from within ./number_guess.py, on line 25, in the play()
function. No problem here; the argument target had nothing to do with the
error. Likewise, this part of the code can’t possibly have caused the error:
     File "./number_guess.py", line 35, in <module>
       play()

  Now I’m at the top of the traceback. The play() function is being called
on line 35 of ./number_guess.py, and the call isn’t occurring inside of any
function; rather it’s coming from the module scope, as indicated by <module>.
   That first line is always the same, but it’s a useful reminder if you ever
forget how to read a traceback properly:

   Traceback (most recent call last):

  The most recently executed code is always listed last! Thus, as I’ve said
before, always read tracebacks from the bottom up.

Catching Exceptions: LBYL vs. EAFP
In many languages, the common practice is to test the input before trying to
convert it to an integer. This is known as the Look Before You Leap (LBYL)
philosophy.
  Python has a different approach, officially known as Easier to Ask
Forgiveness than Permission (EAFP). Instead of preventing errors, we
embrace them, using try statements to handle exceptional situations.
  I’ll rewrite my make_guess() function to use error handling:

   def make_guess(target):
       guess = None
       while guess is None:
           try:
                  guess = int(input("Guess: "))
           except ValueError:
                  print("Enter an integer.")

       if guess == target:
           return True

       if guess < target:
           print("Too low.")
       elif guess > target:
           print("Too high.")
       return False

  Listing 8-6: number_guess.py:2b

  I initially set the value of guess to None, so that as long as I don’t have
something usable assigned to guess, I keep prompting the user for input. I
use None instead of 0, since 0 is still technically a valid integer.
   On each iteration of the loop, in the context of try, I attempt to get the
user input and convert it to an int(). If that conversion fails, int() will raise a
ValueError, as you saw earlier.

   If ValueError is raised, it can only mean that the user entered some non-
numeric input, such as 'Fifty' or an empty string. I catch that error and
handle the situation by printing an error message. Because guess is still None,
the entire loop repeats to prompt for input again.
   If int() is successful, no further action is taken in this section of code, and
I move on to the rest of the function. The so-called happy path, the one with
no errors, is efficient.
  To understand why the EAFP approach is the preferred error-handling
philosophy, compare it to the LBYL strategy. Here’s the LBYL approach to
confirming that the string only contains digits:

   def make_guess(target):
       guess = None
       while guess is None:
           guess = input()
           if guess.isdigit():
               guess = int(guess)
           else:
               print("Enter an integer.")
               guess = None

       if guess == target:
           return True

       if guess < target:
           print("Too low.")
       elif guess > target:
           print("Too high.")
       return False

  Listing 8-7: number_guess.py:2c

   While this code is perfectly valid, it’s not very efficient. I run isdigit() on
every single guess, whether it’s erroneous or not, and then I run the int()
conversion if it passes the test. Thus, I process the string in guess twice on
the happy path, and once in the case of an error. Contrast this with the
EAFP strategy with the try statement from earlier, where I only ever process
the string once.
  Some will complain, “Yes, but, error handling is expensive!” True, but
only on the exceptions. A successful try typically has very little overhead in
Python. The extra code for handling special cases is run when an error
occurs. If you’ve designed your code right, the happy path should be far
more common than the exceptional path, such as in the example above.
  The EAFP approach is also easier to think about. Instead of coming up
with tests to anticipate every possible erroneous input—an arduous task in
more complex, real-world scenarios—you only need to anticipate the likely
exceptions, catch them, and handle them accordingly. That said, it can
sometimes take some real effort to figure out what errors to expect. Be
prepared to invest time here, either way.

Multiple Exceptions
The try statement is not limited to a single error type. I can handle multiple
scenarios in one compound statement.
   To demonstrate this, I’ll create a simple, callable AverageCalculator class
that will accept a list of inputs and use them to recalculate a stored running
average:

   class AverageCalculator:

       def __init__(self):
           self.total = 0
           self.count = 0
          def __call__(self, *values):
             if values:
                 for value in values:
                     self.total += float(value)
                     self.count += 1
             return self.total / self.count

  Listing 8-8: average_calculator.py:1

   There are a few possible errors that can occur while using this
AverageCalculator class, but I’d prefer to let the user interface code handle
those, so they can be used for displaying error messages.
  Here’s a basic command line interface for the calculator:

   average = AverageCalculator()
   values = input("Enter scores, separated by spaces:\n    ").split()
   try:
          print(f"Average is {average(*values)}")
   except ❶ ZeroDivisionError:
          print("ERROR: No values provided.")
   except ( ❷ ValueError, ❸ UnicodeError):
          print(f"ERROR: All inputs should be numeric.")

  Listing 8-9: average_calculator.py:2

  There are three errors that can occur when calling average():

    The user might pass no values, meaning total (the divisor of the division
    in __call__()) might be zero and thus raise a ZeroDivisionError ❶.
    One or more of the inputs might not be convertible by float(), thus
    raising a ValueError ❷.
    There might be a problem encoding or decoding Unicode, which will
    raise a UnicodeError ❸. (Actually, that last one is entirely redundant with
    ValueError in this case; I’m only including it to demonstrate the concept.)

   I handle all three exceptional cases by calling average() within the try
clause’s suite and then catching the errors in the except clauses.
  When a ZeroDivisionError is caught ❶, I print that no values were provided
by the user.
  I handle the ValueError ❷ and the (redundant) UnicodeError ❸ in the same
way; either error would occur if the user tried inputting something non-
numeric. By specifying both in a tuple after except, I catch either error and
handle both the same way—in this case, by printing a message that some
inputs weren’t numeric.
   To demonstrate this in a reasonably contained example, I’ve written
slightly convoluted code here. In the real world, I’d place the try statement
within the __call__() method itself. While this example code departs from
idiomatic Python, it demonstrates a more complex try statement, albeit
without any truly useful error-handling behavior (which I’ll get to shortly).

Beware the Diaper Anti-pattern
Sooner or later, every Python developer will discover that a bare except
clause will work:

   try:
          some_scary_function()
   except:
          print("An error occurred. Moving on!")

  Listing 8-10: diaper_antipattern.py

   Here, a bare except allows you to catch all exceptions in one. This is one
of the most insidious anti-patterns in Python. It catches and silences literally
every conceivable exception, whether you expect it to or not.
   The entire point of an exception is to alert you that your program is now
in an exceptional state, meaning it can no longer proceed along the
ordinary, intended happy path without unexpected or even disastrous
results. By silencing every error, you have created a situation where you
have no idea what those exceptional states are or what is causing them.
You’ve thrown away your precious traceback and forced the program to
continue as if nothing had happened.
  In his book How to Make Mistakes in Python, Mike Pirnat calls this the
diaper pattern:
  [A]ll the precious context for the actual error is being trapped in the diaper, never to see the
  light of day or the inside of your issue tracker. When the “blowout” exception occurs later on,
  the stack trace points to the location where the secondary error happened, not to the actual
  failure inside the try block.

   Worse yet, if your program never raises another exception but keeps
attempting to work in its invalid state, weird behavior will often abound.
   Instead, always explicitly catch a particular exception type! Any error
that you cannot foresee is probably related to some bug that needs to be
resolved.
  As usual, The Zen of Python has something to say about this:
  Errors should never pass silently.
  Unless explicitly silenced.

  There’s another diabolical side effect of this anti-pattern, which I can
demonstrate with this simple program for greeting someone by name:

   def greet():
        name = input("What's your name? ")
        print(f"Hello, {name}.")

   while True:
        try:
             greet()
             break
        except:
             print("Error caught")

  Listing 8-11: no_escape.py:1a

   If I were running this program in the Linux terminal and decided I
wanted to quit, I’d press CTRL-C. Look what happens when I do exactly
that:

   What's your name? ^CError caught
   What's your name? ^CError caught
   What's your name? ^CError caught
   What's your name?

  Ack! I’m trapped! The trouble is, the KeyboardInterrupt, which is produced
by pressing CTRL-C on a UNIX terminal, uses the except system. It’s
getting caught, “handled,” and utterly ignored. There’s no escape from this
program, except to kill my terminal altogether and manually kill the Python
process. (Thankfully in this example, you can still quit by typing a name.)
   The KeyboardInterrupt exception does not itself inherit from the Exception
class, like errors do. Thus, some (overly) clever developer might try this:

   def greet():
       name = input("What's your name? ")
       print(f"Hello, {name}.")

   while True:
       try:
           greet()
           break
       except Exception:
           print("Error caught")

  Listing 8-12: no_escape.py:1b

   I’m no longer catching KeyboardInterrupt, which is good, so I can now
escape with CTRL-C. Unfortunately, this is still a form of the diaper anti-
pattern, for the reasons I mentioned earlier: it catches every conceivable
error! The one time this might be acceptable would be in conjunction with
logging, which I’ll address later in this chapter.

Raising Exceptions
You can also raise exceptions to indicate the occurrence of a problem that
your code cannot recover from automatically, such as when someone
calling a function you wrote passes an unusable argument. There are several
dozen common exceptions available for you to raise as needed (see “A
Gallery of Exceptions” near the end of this chapter).
   To demonstrate this, here’s a function that accepts a string containing
numbers (separated by spaces) and calculates the average. Here, I’m
catching the most common error scenario and providing a more useful and
relevant error:

   def average(number_string):
       total = 0
       skip = 0
       values = 0
       for n in number_string.split():
           values += 1
        ❶ try:
               total += float(n)
        ❷ except ValueError:
               skip += 1

  Listing 8-13: average.py:1

   I split the provided string into the individual space-separated parts,
looping through each part. Within a try clause ❶, I attempt to convert each
part to a floating-point number and add it to the total accumulator. If any of
the values cannot be converted to a number, thereby raising a ValueError ❷, I
mark that I’ve skipped an item, and I move on.
  I continue with that function:

     ❸ if skip == values:
           raise ValueError("No valid numbers provided.")
       elif skip:
           print(f"<!> Skipped {skip} invalid values.")

       return total / values

  Listing 8-14: average.py:2

   Once I’ve processed the string, I check whether I’ve skipped all the
values ❸. If I have, I’ll raise another ValueError, passing my error message to
the constructor of the exception. Otherwise, if only some of the values have
been skipped, I’ll print a helpful message and move on.
   Raising an exception breaks out of the function immediately, in the same
manner as a return statement. Thus, I don’t need to worry about the final
return statement being run if I have no values (such as if the user passed in
an empty string).
  The usage of that function is as follows:

   while True:
          line = input("Enter numbers (space delimited):\n   ")
          avg = average(line)
          print(avg)

  Listing 8-15: average.py:3a

  I’ll run that code and try some inputs:

   Enter numbers (space delimited):
          4 5 6 7
   5.5

   The first input works just fine, returning the average of the four numbers
I specified.

   Enter numbers (space delimited):
          four five 6 7
   <!> Skipped 2 invalid values.
   3.25

   The second input works as well, skipping my two invalid values and
returning the average of the other two.

   Enter numbers (space delimited):
          four five six seven
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "./raiseexception.py", line 25, in <module>
          avg = average(line)
     File "./raiseexception.py", line 16, in average
          raise ValueError("No valid numbers provided.")
   ValueError: No valid numbers provided.
  The third input contains no valid numbers, so it crashes the program,
which is exactly what I wanted. Reading the traceback, you can see the
exception I raised earlier and where I raised it from.
   I wouldn’t ship a program like this, so I can, in turn, catch the exception I
raised. I’ll rewrite my infinite loop at the bottom of the program, like so:

   while True:
         try:
            line = input("Enter numbers (space delimited):\n   ")
            avg = average(line)
            print(avg)
         except ValueError:
            print("No valid numbers provided.")

  Listing 8-16: average.py:3b

   I wrap the user input/output logic in a try clause, and then I catch the
ValueError and print a nice message instead. Let’s try out this new version:

   Enter numbers (space delimited):
         four five six
   No valid numbers provided.
   Enter numbers (space delimited):
         4 5 6
   5.0

  Perfect! When the input is bad, the exception I raised inside the average()
function is caught here, and the appropriate message is printed. (I can press
CTRL-C to quit.)

Using Exceptions
Like everything else in Python, exceptions are objects that you can both use
directly and extract information from.
  You can, for example, use exceptions to handle the logic of accessing
values from a dictionary, without knowing in advance whether the key you
specified is valid. (There’s some debate about whether and when to use this
approach, which I’ll revisit in Chapter 9.)
   As an example of using exceptions with dictionaries, here’s a program
that allows a user to look up an email address by a person’s name.
  I start by defining a dictionary containing names and email addresses:

   friend_emails = {
       "Anne": "anne@example.com",
       "Brent": "brent@example.com",
       "Dan": "dan@example.com",
       "David": "david@example.com",
       "Fox": "fox@example.com",
       "Jane": "jane@example.com",
       "Kevin": "kevin@example.com",
       "Robert": "robert@example.com"
   }

  Listing 8-17: address_book.py:1

  Here is my lookup function:

   def lookup_email(name):
       try:
           return friend_emails[name]
       except KeyError ❶ as e:
           print(f"<No entry for friend {e}>")

  Listing 8-18: address_book.py:2

   I start by trying to use the name argument as a key on my dictionary, within
the context of a try clause. If the key is not in the dictionary, a KeyError will
be raised, which I’ll catch. I capture said exception with as e ❶, allowing
me to use the exception object later. In the case of a KeyError, str(e) will
return the value that I just tried to use as a key in the dictionary.
  Finally, here’s the code using that function:

   name = input("Enter name to look up: ")
   email = lookup_email(name)
   print(f"Email: {email}")

  Listing 8-19: address_book.py:3
   If I run this code and pass a name that isn’t in my dictionary, I see the
result of the error handling:

   Enter name to look up: Jason
   <No entry for friend 'Jason'>
   Email: None

Exceptions and Logging
An unusual aspect of KeyError is that its message consists purely of the
erroneous key. Most exceptions contain their complete error message, one
use of which is logging, wherein errors, warnings, and other informational
messages are printed to the terminal or saved to a file for inspection by the
end user, in case of bugs. Users expect programs to behave well and not
crash, but errors aren’t always avoidable. It’s common for software to log
errors to a file or the terminal, to aid in debugging crashes and bugs.
   To demonstrate this, I’ll write a very basic calculator program, which is
intended to demonstrate the concept without getting too deep into the
logging tools and practices themselves. I’ll cover logging more thoroughly
in Chapter 19.

Logging Configuration
My calculator program will need a few imports that may be unfamiliar to
you:

   import logging
   from operator import add, sub, mul, truediv
   import sys

  Listing 8-20: calculator.py:1

   The logging module contains Python’s built-in logging tools, which I’ll
use in a moment. The operator module contains optimized functions for
performing mathematical operations on arbitrary values, which I’ll use in
my calculator function. Third, sys provides tools for interacting with the
interpreter itself; in my case, I’ll use one of its functions later on to tell my
program to exit.
   The logging.basicConfig() function allows me to configure my logging
level, as well as specify things like which file to write the log to:

   logging.basicConfig(filename='log.txt', level=logging.INFO)

  Listing 8-21: calculator.py:2

   There are five increasing severity levels of logging: DEBUG, INFO, WARNING,
ERROR, and CRITICAL. By passing level=logging.INFO, I’m telling the logging
module to log all messages of that level, as well as the three severity levels
above it (WARNING, ERROR, and CRITICAL). That means only log messages marked
as DEBUG are ignored on this setting.
   With the argument filename=log.txt, I also specify that the log should be
written to a file called log.txt. I could also leave this blank if I wanted to
print the log to the console instead.

                                    GOTCHA ALERT
  In practice, logging.basicConfig() should usually only appear in the if __name__ ==
  "__main__": section of your program, as this will change the global behavior of the logging
  module. (See Chapter 19.)

  Here is my actual calculator() function:

   def calculator(a, b, op):
        a = float(a)
        b = float(b)
        if op == '+':
             return ❶ add(a, b)
        elif op == '-':
             return sub(a, b)
        elif op == '*':
             return mul(a, b)
        elif op == '/':
             return truediv(a, b)
        else:
          ❷ raise NotImplementedError(f"No operator {op}")

  Listing 8-22: calculator.py:3
   The math operator functions, such as add() ❶, are coming from the
operator module I imported earlier.

  The calculator() function doesn’t perform error checking by design,
according to the single-responsibility principle from Chapter 7. Code that
uses the calculator() function should provide the right arguments to the
function, anticipate and handle the errors itself, or crash with an explicit
unhandled error (thereby indicating the code is erroneous).
   There is one exception (no pun intended). If the user specifies an operator
in the op parameter that I don’t support in my calculator() function, I raise
NotImplementedError ❷. This exception should be raised anytime functionality
that doesn’t exist is requested.

                                   GOTCHA ALERT
 Don’t confuse NotImplementedError with NotImplemented. Any special (dunder) method that
 is not implemented should return NotImplemented, so code relying on such a special method is
 informed without failing. Any custom method or function (or, in this case, functionality) that
 hasn’t been implemented yet (or never will be) should return NotImplementedError, so any
 attempted usage will fail with an error.

Logging Errors
The following is my usage of the calculator() function, along with all the
error handling and logging code. I’ll break this down into several pieces and
discuss each separately:

   print("""CALCULATOR
   Use postfix notation.
   Ctrl+C or Ctrl+D to quit.
   """)

 ❶ while True:
    ❷ try:
            equation = input(" ").split()
            result = calculator(*equation)
            print(result)

  Listing 8-23: calculator.py:4
   First, I print the program name and some user instructions. Then, in my
program loop ❶, within a try ❷, I attempt to collect the input from the user
and pass it to the calculator() function. If that works, I print the result, and
the loop starts over. However, there are a number of errors that can occur,
and I handle them in my except clauses:

       except NotImplementedError as e:
           print("<!> Invalid operator.")
           logging.info(e)

  Listing 8-24: calculator.py:5

   If I encounter the NotImplementedError, which I capture as a usable object
with as e, it means an invalid operator was specified in the op= argument
passed to calculator(). After printing some information for the user, I log this
(as level INFO) by passing the error, e, to the logging.info() function. That logs
the error message (which you’ll see in a moment), but it throws away the
traceback, which I do not need to show to the program’s user, since the
problem was their input.

       except ValueError as e:
           print("<!> Expected format: <A> <B> <OP>")
           logging.info(e)

  Listing 8-25: calculator.py:6

   The ValueError is raised if float() was not able to convert the arguments a
or b to floating-point numbers. That might mean that the user entered non-
numeric characters for one of the operands, or that the operator was
specified in the wrong order. Remember, I ask the user for postfix notation,
meaning the operator comes after the two operands. In either case, I remind
the user of the format they need to use, and once again, I log the error to
level INFO:

       except TypeError as e:
           print("<!> Wrong number of arguments. Use: <A> <B> <OP>")
           logging.info(e)

  Listing 8-26: calculator.py:7
   The TypeError shows up if the user passes either too many or too few
arguments to the calculator() function. Once again, I log this as level INFO,
print a reminder for the user about the proper format of input, and move on:

          except ZeroDivisionError as e:
             print("<!> Cannot divide by zero.")
             logging.info(e)

  Listing 8-27: calculator.py:8

  If the user tries to divide by zero, it raises the error ZeroDivisionError.
Handling that error is, again, a matter of logging to INFO and notifying the
user:

          except (KeyboardInterrupt, EOFError):
             print("\nGoodbye.")
             sys.exit(0)

  Listing 8-28: calculator.py:9

   Lastly, I use KeyboardInterrupt and EOFError to catch the UNIX terminal
keystrokes CTRL-C (abort) and CTRL-D (end of file), respectively. In
either case, I print a friendly farewell message and then use sys.exit(0) to
properly quit the program. Technically, I could have left both of these
uncaught, but that would have resulted in an ugly error message appearing
upon quitting the program. That might scare some users into thinking
there’s a bug in the program.
  I’ll run this program now and try things out:

   CALCULATOR
   Use postfix notation.
   Ctrl+C or Ctrl+D to quit.

    11 31 +
   42.0
    11 + 31
   <!> Expected format: <A> <B> <OP>
    11 + 31 + 10
   <!> Wrong number of arguments. Use: <A> <B> <OP>
    11 +
   <!> Wrong number of arguments. Use: <A> <B> <OP>
    10 0 /
   <!> Cannot divide by zero.
    10 40 @
   <!> Invalid operator.
    ^C
   Goodbye.

   All in all, this is a clean user experience. All the errors I’ve anticipated
are being caught and handled appropriately, and I can quit nicely.

Reviewing the Logs and Cleaning Up
Take a look at the log.txt file that’s been created:

   INFO:root:could not convert string to float: '+'
   INFO:root:calculator() takes 3 positional arguments but 5 were given
   INFO:root:calculator() missing 1 required positional argument: 'op'
   INFO:root:float division by zero
   INFO:root:No operator @

  Listing 8-29: log.txt

  Here are all five of the error messages that were logged while I used the
program.
   Practically speaking, in production software, I’d never write any of the
expected errors to a file, because it would result in a huge and unwieldy
file! Thus, I might change all my logging commands to logging.debug(), to
log the error messages at the DEBUG level. That way, if I were to need to
peruse the errors during debugging, I’d only need to change my logging
configuration to logging.basicConfig(filename='log.txt', level=logging.DEBUG). I’d
ship with a logging level of INFO, thereby suppressing the DEBUG messages.
That way, the end user wouldn’t see a bloated log.

Bubbling Up
There’s one nonoptimal part of the logging scheme I’ve created: any
unexpected errors won’t get logged. Ideally, any exception I haven’t
anticipated should be logged at level ERROR but still be allowed to crash the
program, so the code doesn’t try to carry on in an unhandled exceptional
state.
   Thankfully, any error you catch can be re-raised, or bubbled up in Python
terminology. Since the error isn’t caught again after being re-raised, the
program will crash.
   I’m leaving the rest of the earlier try statement the same (Listings 8-23
through 8-28), but I’m adding one more except to the end:

       except Exception as e:
           logging.exception(e)
        ❶ raise

  Listing 8-30: calculator.py:10

  The except clauses are evaluated in order, which is why this new clause
has to appear at the end of the current try statement. I don’t want this
“catch-all” to gobble up the exceptions I specifically want to handle
separately.
   This may seem dangerously close to the diaper anti-pattern, except here, I
don’t hide the error, and I’m only catching actual errors—that is, any object
that inherits from Exception. Non-error “exceptions” like StopIteration and
KeyboardInterrupt, which don’t inherit from Exception, won’t get caught by this
except clause.

   I log the error message, along with the traceback, at ERROR level, using the
special method logging.exception(e). When the user sends me the log file with
his bug report, I, the developer, will need this traceback to find and fix the
bug.
   Then, I bubble up the error with a bare raise statement, which raises the
last-caught exception ❶. (I could also have done raise e, but the bare raise
is preferred in this context for brevity in my code and traceback.) It is
absolutely essential that I bubble up the error here, lest this become a case
of the diaper anti-pattern.
Exception Chaining
When you catch one exception and then raise another, you’re at risk of
losing the context of the original error. To avoid this situation, Python offers
exception chaining, whereby you can raise a new exception without
throwing away all the helpful information already provided. This feature
was added in Python 3.0 (via PEP 3134).
  I’ll apply this concept to a program for looking up the city and state of
famous landmarks. I start by defining the dictionaries for the program:

   cities = {
         "SEATTLE": "WASHINGTON, USA",
         "PORTLAND": "OREGON, USA",
         "BOSTON": "MASSACHUSETTS, USA",
   }

   landmarks = {
         "SPACE NEEDLE": "SEATTLE",
         "LIBERTY SHIP MEMORIAL": "PORTLAND",
         "ALAMO": "SAN ANTONIO",
   }

  Listing 8-31: landmarks.py:1

   Here is the function for looking up landmarks and their corresponding
cities in the dictionaries:

   def lookup_landmark(landmark):
         landmark = landmark.upper()
         try:
             city = landmarks[landmark]
             state = cities[city]
       ❶ except KeyError as e:
          ❷ raise KeyError("Landmark not found.") from e
         print(f"{landmark} is in {city}, {state}")

  Listing 8-32: landmarks.py:2

   In this function, I try to find the landmark in the landmarks dictionary. If
it’s not there, a KeyError is raised, which I catch ❶ and then re-raise with
more useful information in the error message ❷. When I raise the new
exception, I use from e to specify that it was caused by the exception (e) I
caught. This ensures that the traceback shows what led to the error: either
the city or the landmark not being found.
  Here’s an example usage of this function:

   lookup_landmark("space needle")
   lookup_landmark("alamo")
   lookup_landmark("golden gate bridge")

  Listing 8-33: landmarks.py:3

   I test the lookup_landmark() function by looking up three landmarks, two of
which ("alamo" and "golden gate bridge") are going to throw an exception, but
for different reasons. In the case of the Alamo, although the landmark is in
the landmarks dictionary, the corresponding city of "SAN ANTONIO" is missing
from the cities dictionary. In the case of the Golden Gate Bridge, the
landmark isn’t even in the landmarks dictionary. (Sorry, San Francisco!)

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
 This implementation is more than a bit silly, but that is a necessary evil for this technical
 example. The better design here would be to split the two dictionary lookups between two try
 statements; the best design would be to use some collection better suited to this situation, since a
 dictionary really isn’t.

   The code as written won’t get to the last line, because the second-to-last
line will throw an exception, as you’ll see in the output:

   SPACE NEEDLE is in SEATTLE, WASHINGTON, USA
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "./chaining.py", line 18, in lookup_landmark
        state = cities[city]
 ❶ KeyError: 'SAN ANTONIO'

 ❷ The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "./chaining.py", line 25, in <module>
       lookup_landmark("alamo")
     File "./chaining.py", line 20, in lookup_landmark
       raise KeyError("Landmark not found.") from e
 ❸ KeyError: 'Landmark not found.'

  The first call to lookup_landmark() works, as you can see from the output.
Remembering that you read traceback from the bottom up, you see that the
second call fails, raising the "Landmark not found" error ❸.
   Above that traceback is a notification that the exception was caused by a
different exception ❷.
  Sure enough, in the traceback above that, you find the problem; Python
couldn’t find the city of "SAN ANTONIO" in the cities dictionary ❶.
   Even if I hadn’t taken the time to add raise KeyError from e earlier, Python
would ordinarily have included the context, although the two tracebacks
would have been separated with a message I consider far more cryptic and
less helpful:

   During handling of the above exception, another exception occurred:

  So, even though you might be able to get away without explicit exception
chaining, it’s just a good habit to take on.
  You can explicitly disable chaining with raise e from None.

Else and Finally
Up to this point, all my error handling examples have relied on try and
except, which leaves the rest of the code to run the same in any case,
whatever happens, unless I call return or take advantage of the breaking
behavior of a raise statement to bail out of a function.
   There are two more optional clauses for try statements: else runs if there
is no exception, and finally runs in any situation, but in a surprising way.
Else: “If All Goes Well”
You would use the else clause for any section of code that should only run if
none of the except clauses caught anything.
   To demonstrate this, I’ll revise my program for finding the average of a
list of numbers. This time, I want it to always output a valid float value. The
average of an empty string should be the constant math.inf (the result of
division by zero), and the presence of any non-numeric values should
produce the constant math.nan.

   import math

   def average_string(number_string):
       try:
           numbers = [float(n) for n in number_string.split()]
       except ValueError:
           total = math.nan
           values = 1

  Listing 8-34: average_string.py:1

   Every time the average_string() function is called, it first tries to create a
list of float values. If any part of the string is non-numeric, a ValueError is
raised. I catch that exception, assign the value math.nan to total, and ensure
there is a 1 in values, which I will use as the divisor in the upcoming
division.
  If no exception was raised by that first try clause, the else clause is run:

       else:
           total = sum(numbers)
           values = len(numbers)

  Listing 8-35: average_string.py:2

   The total and values are calculated based on the now-valid assumption
that numbers is a list of float values. The else clause only runs if the try raises
no exceptions.
   So, why not just return math.nan in the except ValueError clause? That would
certainly be a bit more efficient, but there are two reasons I chose not to do
that:

 1. This approach better accommodates later refactoring; the rest of the
    math is always executed, and it always produces a valid result (except
    for the division-by-zero scenario I handle separately in the next part of
    the code).
 2. If I need to add a finally clause anywhere, the code will still behave as
    expected (see next section).

   Here’s the rest of the program. Notice that I have a separate try statement
to handle attempted division by zero:

         try:
            average = total / values
         except ZeroDivisionError:
            average = math.inf

         return average

   while True:
         number_string = input("Enter space-delimited list of numbers:\n   ")
         print(average_string(number_string))

  Listing 8-36: average_string.py:3

  I’ve handled all of the exceptional paths that could be reasonably
anticipated in the code. Testing this out, everything behaves as expected,
with no unhandled exceptions.

         4 5 6 7
   5.5

   inf
         four five six
   nan
Finally: “After Everything”
The finally clause is always executed, no matter what! There aren’t any
exceptions to this: even raise or return will not prevent the finally clause
from being executed. This is what sets finally apart from plain code after the
try statement.

  Because of this, finally is especially well-suited for any cleanup code you
need to run, no matter what.
  Here’s a function that reads numbers from a file, one number per line,
and finds the average. In this case, I want exceptions to be raised if the file
contains non-numeric data or if the file cannot be found.
   For this example, I’ll use manual opening and closing of a file—although
in production, I’d use a context manager for this instead (see Chapter 11).

   def average_file(path):
       file = open(path, 'r')

       try:
         ❶ numbers = [float(n) for n in file.readlines()]

  Listing 8-37: average_file.py:1

   When the average_file() function is called, it attempts to open the file
indicated by the argument path. If this file doesn’t exist, file.open() will raise
a FileNotFoundError exception, which I’m allowing as is, in this case.
   Once the file is opened, I try to iterate over it, converting it into a list of
numbers ❶. (You’re welcome to take this particular line of code for granted
for now. See Chapters 10 and 11.)

       except ValueError as e:
           raise ValueError("File contains non-numeric values.") from e

  Listing 8-38: average_file.py:2

   If any of the values are non-numeric, I catch the ValueError. In this clause,
I raise a chained exception with more specific information describing what
was wrong with the file.
  Otherwise, if no errors were raised by the try clause, the else clause runs:

       else:
           try:
                  return sum(numbers) / len(numbers)
           except ZeroDivisionError as e:
                  raise ValueError("Empty file.") from e

  Listing 8-39: average_file.py:3

  This clause’s suite attempts to calculate and return the average, but it also
contains a nested try statement to handle an empty file.
  After either the except or the else clause has run, the finally clause is
always executed, even after a raise or return! This is important, because no
matter the outcome, the file needs to be closed:

       finally:
           print("Closing file.")
           file.close()

  Listing 8-40: average_file.py:4

   I’ll test the program with four files, three of which I’ve created: a file
containing integers called numbers_good.txt, a file containing words called
numbers_bad.txt, an empty file called numbers_empty.txt, and a nonexistent
file called nonexistent.txt.
   Let’s examine the output of these four scenarios one by one. These have
to be run separately, because the program execution ceases when an
exception is raised:

   print(average_file('numbers_good.txt'))

  Listing 8-41: average_file.py:5a

  The file numbers_good.txt contains 12 integers, each on a separate line.
Running that scenario, I get the following output:
   Closing file.
   42.0

   The function works correctly; it opens the file and calculates the average
of the values. Notice when the finally clause runs, as evidenced by the
printed message "Closing file." Although it is running after the return
statement in the average_file() function from earlier, it appears before the
function returns. This is a good thing, because the finally clause in this
function is responsible for closing the file, which absolutely must happen.
  Now for the second scenario:

   print(average_file('numbers_bad.txt'))

  Listing 8-42: average_file_usage.py:5b

   The numbers_bad.txt file contains words, not numbers. This output is a
lot longer because of the exception:

 ❶ Closing file.
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "tryfinally.py", line 5, in average_file
          numbers = [float(n) for n in file.readlines()]
     File "tryfinally.py", line 5, in <listcomp>
          numbers = [float(n) for n in file.readlines()]
   ValueError: could not convert string to float: 'thirty-three\n'

   The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "tryfinally.py", line 20, in <module>
          print(average_file('numbers_bad.txt'))   # ValueError
     File "tryfinally.py", line 7, in average_file
          raise ValueError("File contains non-numeric values.") from e
   ValueError: File contains non-numeric values.

  In this case, a ValueError is raised. Yet, once again, the finally clause is run
❶ before the exception is raised, even though the raise statement seems to
come first in the function’s source code.
  Here’s the third scenario:
   print(average_file('numbers_empty.txt'))

  Listing 8-43: average_file_usage.py:5c

  The file numbers_empty.txt is, as its name suggests, an empty file. The
output is as follows:

 ❶ Closing file.
   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "tryfinally.py", line 10, in average_file
       return sum(numbers) / len(numbers)
   ZeroDivisionError: division by zero

   The above exception was the direct cause of the following exception:

   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "tryfinally.py", line 21, in <module>
       print(average_file('numbers_empty.txt'))     # ValueError
     File "tryfinally.py", line 12, in average_file
       raise ValueError("Empty file.") from e
 ❷ ValueError: Empty file.

   You can see that the error message about the empty file is working as
well ❷. Also, as before, it is evident the finally clause is running ❶ before
the exception is raised.
  Now for the last scenario:

   print(average_file('nonexistent.txt'))

  Listing 8-44: average_file_usage.py:5d

   This is attempting to read from a file that doesn’t exist. Here’s the output
of that scenario:

   Traceback (most recent call last):
     File "tryfinally.py", line 22, in <module>
       print(average_file('nonexistent.txt'))     # FileNotFoundError
     File "tryfinally.py", line 2, in average_file
       file = open(path, 'r')
   FileNotFoundError: [Errno 2] No such file or directory: 'nonexistent.txt'
   This exception comes from the file.open() call, which, if you refer back to
the source code for average_file(), you’ll notice occurs before the try
statement. The finally clause only runs if its connected try clause is
executed; since control flow never reached the try, the finally never gets
called. Just as well, since there’s no point in trying to close a file that was
never opened.

Creating Exceptions
Python has quite the menagerie of exceptions, and their uses are very well
documented. Sometimes, however, you need something a bit more
customized.
   All error-type exception classes inherit from the Exception class, which in
turn inherits from the BaseException class. This dual hierarchy exists to let you
catch all error exceptions, as I did earlier, without also reacting to the
special, non-error exceptions like KeyboardInterrupt, which inherit from
BaseException and not Exception.

   When making a custom exception class, you can inherit from any
exception class you like. However, avoid inheriting from BaseException, as
that class is not designed to be directly inherited from by custom classes.
Sometimes, it’s best to inherit from the exception class that is closest in
purpose to the one you’re making (see the next section). However, if you’re
at a loss, you can inherit from Exception.
   Before going through all the effort to write a custom exception, consider
why you want to. My recommendation is to ensure your use case fits at
least two of these three criteria:

 1. No existing exception effectively describes the error, even if you
    provide a custom message.
 2. You will raise or catch the exception more than once.
 3. You need to be able to catch this specific exception, without catching
    any of the similar built-in exceptions.

  If your use case cannot satisfy at least two of these criteria, you probably
don’t need a custom exception and can instead use one of the existing
exceptions.
   Most of the time, the need for custom exceptions arises in more
complicated projects, so it’s very difficult to create a practical example for
this. For demonstration purposes, here’s the code for a uselessly simple and
rather silly custom exception and its usage:

   class ❶ SillyWalkException( ❷ RuntimeError):
          def __init__(self, ❸ message="Someone walked silly."):
             super().__init__(message)

   def walking():
     ❹ raise SillyWalkException("My walk has gotten rather silly.")

   try:
          walking()
 ❺ except SillyWalkException as e:
          print(e)

  Listing 8-45: silly_walk_exception.py

   I define a new class with the name of the exception ❶, and I inherit from
the most specific exception class that makes sense ❷. In this case, I’m
inheriting from RuntimeError because my exception doesn’t fit into the
description of any of the other built-in exceptions.
   There’s some debate about whether it’s necessary to write an initializer
for custom exceptions. I prefer to, because it provides an opportunity to
specify a default error message ❸. Writing your own initializer also allows
you to accept and store multiple parameters for various bits of information,
not just the message attribute that all Exception classes must have (although I
don’t do that here).
  If you accept a string for a message and don’t want to provide a default,
you can get away with this version to define the custom exception class
with nothing more than a header and a docstring:

   class SillyWalkException(RuntimeError):
          """Exception for walking silly."""
  Either way, the custom exception can be raised ❹ and caught ❺ in the
same way as any other exception.

A Gallery of Exceptions
The Python documentation provides an exhaustive list of all the built-in
exceptions and their uses. You can find this list at https://docs.python.org/li
brary/exceptions.html.
   However, since that documentation can feel like an information dump,
I’ll briefly cover the most common exception classes. There are four base
classes from which all the other exceptions are inherited; when you need to
catch an entire category of exceptions, you can often use these:

    BaseExceptionis the base class for all exceptions. Remember not to inherit
    directly from this; it’s not designed to be used as such.
    Exception   is the base class for all error-type exceptions.
    ArithmeticError   is the base class for arithmetic-related errors.
    LookupErroris the base class for any error related to finding values in
    collections.

                                   PEDANTIC NOTE
  There’s also BufferError, which relates to memory errors behind the Python language. No
  other exceptions inherit from this one, and you shouldn’t either.

   Next, after the base exception classes, come the concrete exceptions, each
of which describes a particular type of error. As of this writing, there are 35
concrete exceptions in the Python language, although I’m only covering
some of the most common of these (see the documentation for the rest). A
few others will be introduced in later chapters. All of these inherit directly
from Exception, except as noted:

    AttributeErroris raised when accessing or assigning to a class attribute
    that doesn’t exist.
          is raised when an import statement isn’t able to find a package,
ImportError
module, or a name within the module. You may also encounter the
subclass exception ModuleNotFoundError.
IndexError is raised when an index (subscript) is out of range for a
sequential collection, such as a list or tuple. This inherits from
LookupError.

KeyErroris raised when a key is not found in a dictionary. This inherits
from LookupError.
               is raised when the user presses a KEY-KEY
KeyboardInterrupt
combination to interrupt the running program, such as with CTRL-C on
UNIX-like systems. This inherits from BaseException, not Exception.
MemoryError  is raised when Python runs out of memory. However, there
are still steps you can take to (probably) fix the problem, usually by
deleting stuff.
NameErroris raised when a name is not found in the local or global scope.
This isn’t used in relation to class attributes (see AttributeError) or
imports (see ImportError).
OSErroris both a concrete error and a base class for many exceptions
relating to the operating system, including FileNotFoundError (which is
raised when a file cannot be opened). I’ll explore some of these in later
chapters.
OverflowError is raised when an arithmetic operation would produce a
result that is too large to be represented or stored. This mainly occurs
with floating-point numbers. Integers never raise OverflowError, because
they have no official size limits in Python; they will raise a BufferError if
a similar situation occurs. This inherits from ArithmeticError.
             is raised when a function calls itself too many times (see
RecursionError
Chapter 6), whether directly or indirectly. This inherits from RuntimeError.
           is a sort of catch-all for any error that doesn’t fit into the
RuntimeError
other categories.
          is raised if there are any syntax errors in the Python code.
SyntaxError
These often come up when you run your program, but you may
encounter them at any point during runtime when using arbitrary
   execution (see Chapter 15). This also includes the subclasses
   IndentationError and TabError.

   SystemErroris raised when the interpreter has an internal error. There’s
   not much you can do about these errors; report them to the developers
   of the Python implementation you use.
   SystemExit is raised when sys.exit() is called. Be careful about catching
   this, as you can prevent your program from quitting normally! This
   inherits from BaseException.
   TypeErroris raised when an operation or function tries to act on an object
   of the wrong type. This is the best exception to raise if your function is
   not intended to work on a particular value type received as an argument.
                  , a subclass of NameError, is raised when you try to access
   UnboundLocalError
   a local name that has no value yet assigned to it. This inherits from
   NameError.

           is raised when an operation or function tries to act on an
   ValueError
   argument that is the right type, but the wrong value.
   ZeroDivisionErroris raised when trying to divide by zero, whether through
   the true division (/), floor division (//), modulo (%), or divmod() operators.
   This inherits from ArithmeticError.

Wrapping Up
I’ve spent a lot of time discussing how and when to use exceptions and
error handling. This is a vast topic, yet the syntax itself boils down to the
structure of try, except, else, finally, and the raise keyword.
