                                   16
 ASYNCHRONY AND CONCURRENCY

              You know the situation: you have to
              finish that TPS report for your boss, fix
              a bug that shipped to production, and
              figure out which of your co-workers
borrowed your stapler (it’s Jeff again, isn’t it?), all
before day’s end. How will you get it all done? You
can’t make copies of yourself—and even if you
could, the line for the copier is out the door—so you
tackle these tasks with concurrency.
   It’s the same in Python. If your program needs to wait on user input, send
data over a network, and crunch numbers, all while still updating the user
interface, you can handle these tasks concurrently, thus improving your
program’s responsiveness.
   There are two options for achieving concurrency in Python: either
threading (see Chapter 17), wherein the operating system manages the
multitasking, or asynchrony, where Python handles it. This chapter focuses
on the latter.
                    THEORY RECAP: CONCURRENCY

Concurrency is the programming equivalent of multitasking: rapidly dividing a
program’s singular attention between multiple tasks. It is not the same as parallelism,
wherein multiple tasks occur simultaneously (see Chapter 17). A program that uses
concurrency is limited to one system process, and that process can only do one thing
at a time in most implementations of Python.
   Revisiting the busy-workday example, you can write the TPS report and shake down
Jeff for your stapler, but not at the same time. Even if you called Jeff into your cubicle to
talk to him while you filled out the TPS report, you would be dividing your attention
between the two tasks, however short the periods of focus might be. While a casual
observer might conclude you are doing two things at the same time, you are really just
oscillating between the different tasks.
   This has an important implication: concurrency does not actually speed up execution
time. All told, you still need to spend 10 minutes filling out the TPS report and another
five interrogating Jeff. The two tasks together will take 15 minutes, whether you finish
your report before talking to Jeff or divide your attention between the two. In fact,
because of the additional effort it takes to switch between tasks, it may take longer
when employing concurrency. The same is true in programming. These tasks are
effectively CPU-bound, because their speed is limited by your brain’s abilities, which
are analogous to the speed of the CPU. Concurrency is not helpful with CPU-bound
tasks.
   Concurrency is chiefly useful when dealing with IO-bound tasks, such as receiving a
file over a network or waiting for a user to click a button. For example, imagine you
have to laminate several copies of the meeting agenda for reasons known only to
management. Each lamination job takes a couple of minutes, during which time, you’re
sitting and listening to the whine of the laminator. Your effort and attention are not
required. Not a very good use of time, is it? This is an IO-bound task because your
speed is limited primarily by waiting for the finished laminated page (the output). Now
say you employ concurrency by starting a page in the laminator and then walking away
and turning the office upside-down for your stapler. Every couple of minutes, you check
the laminator, perhaps feed another page through, and then resume your search. By
the time you’ve found your beloved stapler in Martha’s desk drawer (sorry, Jeff!), you
have also finished laminating the agendas for the meeting.
  Concurrency is also useful for improving the perceived responsiveness of your
program: even while the program performs a particularly long or heavy task, such as a
complicated data analysis, it can respond to user input or update a progress bar. In
reality, no single task is happening faster than before, but the program doesn’t hang.
   Lastly, concurrency is useful for performing a task at regular intervals, such as saving
a temporary file every five minutes, regardless of what the rest of the program is doing.
Asynchrony in Python
As mentioned, there are two ways to achieve concurrency in Python.
Threading, also known as pre-emptive multitasking, involves letting the
operating system manage the multitasking by running each task in a single
flow of execution called a thread. These multiple threads still share the
same system process, which is an instance of a running computer program.
If you open the system monitor on your computer, you can see a list of
running processes on your machine. Any one of those processes can have
multiple threads.
   Traditional threading has a number of pitfalls, which is why I’ll come
back to it in Chapter 17. The alternative is asynchrony, also known as
cooperative multitasking. It is the easiest way to achieve concurrency in
Python—but that doesn’t make it easy! The operating system only sees your
code as running in a single process, with a single thread; it is Python itself
that manages the multitasking, with some help from you, thereby
sidestepping some of the issues that crop up with threading. Still, writing
good asynchronous code in Python requires some forethought and planning.
   It’s important to keep in mind that asynchrony is not parallelism. In
Python, a mechanism called the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) ensures that
any single Python process is constrained to a single CPU core, regardless of
how many cores are available to the system. For this reason, parallelism
cannot be achieved with either asynchrony or threading. This may sound
like a design flaw, but efforts to eliminate the GIL from CPython have
proven more technically challenging than imagined, and the results have
had poorer performance thus far. As of this writing, progress has all but
stalled on the most prominent of these efforts, Larry Hastings’s Gilectomy.
The GIL makes things run smoother in Python.

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
 There are a few other ways around the GIL, such as Python extensions, because they are written
 in C and executed in compiled machine code. Anytime your logic leaves the Python interpreter,
 it also goes beyond the jurisdiction of the GIL and becomes capable of running in parallel. I
 won’t go into this further in this book, save mentioning a few extensions that do this in Chapter
 21.
   Asynchrony was originally possible in Python through third-party
libraries, like Twisted. Later, Python 3.5 added syntax and functionality for
natively achieving asynchrony. These features did not become stable until
Python 3.7; as a result, many articles and online discussions about
asynchrony are profoundly out-of-date. Your best source of information is
always the official documentation. I’ve done my best to be up-to-date with
Python 3.10.
   Python makes asynchrony possible with two keywords borrowed from
the C# language: async and await, as well as a special type of coroutine.
(Many other languages implement similar syntax; these include JavaScript,
Dart, and Scala.) Asynchronous execution is managed and run by an event
loop, which is responsible for the multitasking. Python provides the asyncio
module in the standard library for this purpose, and we’ll use it in this
chapter’s examples.
   It’s worth noting that at the time of this writing, asyncio is dauntingly
complicated beyond basic usage, even to some Python experts. For that
reason, I’ll stick to the essential concepts universal to asynchrony and avoid
explaining or using asyncio any more than is absolutely unavoidable. Most of
what you’ll see are just plain asynchrony techniques; I’ll call out the
exceptions.
   When you’re ready to go further into this topic of asynchrony, pick up
either the Trio or Curio library. Both are written to be user-friendly. They’re
well documented, with the beginner in mind, and they regularly provide
design cues to asyncio’s developers. Armed with the knowledge from this
chapter, you should be able to learn either of those libraries from their
documentation.
   Curio was developed by David Beazley, an expert in Python and
concurrency, with the goal of making asynchrony in Python more
approachable. The official documentation can be found at https://curio.read
thedocs.io/. That main page also has links to a number of excellent talks on
Python asynchronous programming, including several talks that guide you
through writing your own asynchrony module (although you likely won’t
ever need to do this).
  Trio is based on Curio, and it furthers the library’s goals of simplicity and
usability. As of this writing, it’s considered somewhat experimental, but it is
still stable enough to use in production. Python developers most often
recommend using Trio. Find the official documentation at https://trio.readth
edocs.io/en/stable/.
   Earlier in this section, I mentioned the Twisted library, which added
asynchronous behavior to Python some 20 years before asynchrony was
added to the core language. It uses a number of dated patterns, rather than
the modern asynchronous workflow model, but it’s still an active and viable
library with many use cases. A number of popular libraries use it under the
hood. Learn more at https://twistedmatrix.com/.
  The asyncio official documentation can be found at https://docs.python.or
g/3/library/asyncio.html. I recommend digging into asyncio in more detail
only once you’re comfortable with asynchronous programming via either
Trio or Curio, as well as with the analogous concepts of threading (Chapter
17). Your grasp of the concepts and patterns of asynchrony and concurrency
will help you make sense of the asyncio documentation.
   In the midst of all this, remember that asynchrony is still in its relative
infancy, both in Python and in the field of computer science as a whole. The
asynchronous workflow model first appeared in the F# language in 2007,
based on concepts introduced in Haskell around 1999 and several papers
from the early 1990s. By contrast, the related concept of threading dates to
the late 1960s. Many problems in asynchrony still don’t have clear or
established solutions. Who knows—you might be the first to solve one of
them!

The Example Scenario: Collatz Game,
Synchronous Version
To properly demonstrate how these concepts work, I’ll create a small
program that would benefit from concurrency. Because of the complexity of
the issues at hand, I’ll focus entirely on this one example for this chapter
and the next, so you can get used to the working details.
   I’ll start with a synchronous working version, so you’ll have a solid idea
of what I’m doing. The complexity of this example will demonstrate some
of the common issues involved in concurrency. Simplicity is the enemy of
effectiveness for examples with these concepts.
   For the example, I’ll play with a strange phenomenon in math known as
the Collatz conjecture, which works like this:

 1. Start with any positive integer n.
 2. If n is even, the next term in the sequence should be n / 2.
 3. If n is odd, the next term in the sequence should be 3 * n + 1.
 4. If n is 1, stop.

   Even if you start with a fantastically large number, you’ll always wind up
at 1 after relatively few steps. Starting with 942,488,749,153,153, for example,
the Collatz sequence arrives at 1 in only 1,863 steps.
   There are all sorts of things you can do with the Collatz conjecture. For
this example, I’ll create a simple game that challenges the user to guess
how many Collatz sequences have a particular length. I’ll restrict the range
of starting numbers to integers between 2 and 100,000 (which I can also
represent as 10**5).
   For example, exactly 782 starting numbers will yield Collatz sequences
with a length of exactly 42 values. To play the game in the example, the
user would enter 42 (the target length) and then guess how many starting
numbers would produce Collatz sequences of the target length. If the user
guessed 782, they’d win. (Okay, yes, it’s a lousy game premise, but it works
for demonstrating concurrency.)
   At the top of my module, I’ll define a constant, BOUND, for the maximum
starting number. Counting zeros in constants is an invitation to error, so I’ll
define 100,000 as a power of 10 instead:

   BOUND = 10**5

  Listing 16-1: collatz_sync.py:1

  Next is the function for finding the number of steps in a single Collatz
sequence:
   def collatz(n):
       steps = 0
       while n > 1:
           if n % 2:
                  n = n * 3 + 1
           else:
                  n = n / 2
           steps += 1
       return steps

  Listing 16-2: collatz_sync.py:2

   Nothing should surprise you here. This function follows the rules for
calculating a Collatz sequence and returns the number of steps it took to
reach 1.
   I need another function for tracking how many times a target sequence
length is met:

   def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       for i in range(2, BOUND):
           if collatz(i) == target:
                  count += 1
       return count

  Listing 16-3: collatz_sync.py:3

   This function runs collatz() on every possible starting integer from 2 to
BOUND and counts how many times a Collatz sequence had exactly target
steps. It returns this count at the end.
  Next, I create a function for getting a positive integer from the user,
which I’ll need to do a couple of times in the program run, first to get the
desired Collatz target length, and second to get the user’s guess of how
many starting values produce Collatz sequences of the target length:

   def get_input(prompt):
       while True:
           n = input(prompt)
           try:
                 n = int(n)
           except ValueError:
                 print("Value must be an integer.")
                 continue
           if n <= 0:
                 print("Value must be positive.")
           else:
                 return n

  Listing 16-4: collatz_sync.py:4

   This function should also look pretty familiar by now. I get a string from
the user with input(), attempt to convert it to an integer, and ensure that
integer is not negative. If anything goes wrong, I display a message for the
user and let them try again.
  Tying it all together is the main function:

   def main():
       print("Collatz Sequence Counter")

       target = get_input("Collatz sequence length to search for: ")
       print(f"Searching in range 1-{BOUND}...")

       count = length_counter(target)
       guess = get_input("How many times do you think it will appear? ")

       if guess == count:
           print("Exactly right! I'm amazed.")
       elif abs(guess - count) < 100:
           print(f"You're close! It was {count}.")
       else:
           print(f"Nope. It was {count}.")

  Listing 16-5: collatz_sync.py:5

  I display the name of the program and ask the user to enter a target
sequence length to search for. I perform the search for the sequence length
with length_counter() and bind the result to count. Next, I get the user’s guess,
which I bind to guess, and compare it to count, giving the user some feedback
on how close their guess was.
  Lastly, I need to execute the main function:

   if __name__ == "__main__":
       main()

  Listing 16-6: collatz_sync.py:6

  All in all, I’ve stuck with syntax and patterns you should be familiar with
by now. But running this module shows why the program could do with
some concurrency:

   Collatz Sequence Counter
   Collatz sequence length to search for: 42
   Searching in range 1-100000...

  At this point, the program hangs for several seconds, before continuing:

   How many times do you think it will appear? 456
   Nope. It was 782.

   It works, but it doesn’t feel particularly responsive. What’s more, if I
were to increase the value of BOUND by even one exponential value, to 10**6,
the delay would increase dramatically; on my system, it went from 7 to 63
seconds!
  Thankfully, there are a number of ways I could make this program feel
more responsive. Over the next two chapters, I’ll point these out to you and
implement the changes.

Asynchrony
Let’s see how asynchrony can help my Collatz program. First, notice that
the several-second delay on running length_counter() is CPU-bound, as it
relates to how long it takes the CPU to perform the math. That delay will
remain until I apply parallelism in the next chapter.
  But there’s another source of delay in this program: the user. The
program has to wait for an indefinite period of time until the user enters a
valid number. This part of the program is IO-bound, because it is limited by
the response time of something external, such as user input, a network
response, or another program, rather than the working speed of the CPU.
   I can improve the program’s perceived responsiveness, how fast it seems
to the user, by running the math concurrently with waiting for the user’s
guess. The calculations themselves won’t actually happen any faster, but my
users probably won’t realize that: they’ll be focusing on entering a guess
while Python is running that heavy-duty math.
   I’ll use the built-in asyncio module to work with asynchrony in Python, so
I import it at the start of my program:

   import asyncio

   BOUND = 10**5

  Listing 16-7: collatz_async.py:1a

  As in Listing 16-1, I’m defining my BOUND constant here. Now I can begin
rewriting my code to be asynchronous.

Native Coroutines
In Chapter 10, I introduced simple coroutines, which are based on
generators. Simple coroutines run until they hit a yield statement and then
wait for data to be sent to the coroutine object with the send() method.
   I’ll make my game’s code asynchronous by turning some of my
program’s functions into native coroutines. Also called coroutine functions,
native coroutines build on the idea of simple coroutines: instead of waiting
for data to be sent, they can be paused and resumed at specific places to
achieve multitasking. In the rest of this chapter, I use the terms coroutine
function and native coroutine somewhat interchangeably. Be advised that
when most Python developers refer to coroutines, they almost always mean
native coroutines, although it never hurts to clarify.
   You declare a native coroutine by placing the async keyword in front of
the definition, like this:

   async def some_function():
        # ...

   However, don’t get the idea that to implement asynchrony, you only need
to put the async keyword in front of all your function definitions. This is only
the first of many steps toward making the code asynchronous.
   When called, a coroutine function returns a native coroutine object,
which is a special kind of object called an awaitable. These are callables
that can pause and resume mid-execution. Awaitables must be called using
the await keyword, which acts much like yield from. Here, I use the await
keyword to call the awaitable coroutine function some_function():

   await some_function()

  There’s another catch: the await keyword can only be used within an
awaitable. When a native coroutine reaches an await, it pauses execution
until the called awaitable is finished.

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
  Although you won’t see it in these examples, you can pass a native coroutine to a function to be
  called later, perhaps after some other task has been completed. When used this way, the native
  coroutine being passed is called a callback.

  A function should only be turned into a coroutine function when it calls
another awaitable, performs an IO-bound task, or is specifically intended to
run concurrently with another awaitable. In the Collatz game, I’ll need to
make some decisions about which functions to turn into coroutine functions
and which to leave as ordinary functions.
  To begin with, consider the synchronous collatz() function:

   def collatz(start):
        steps = 0
        n = start
        while n > 1:
             if n % 2:
                  n = n * 3 + 1
           else:
               n = n / 2
           steps += 1
       return steps

  Listing 16-8: collatz_async.py:2

   This function will always return almost instantly, so it neither needs to
call an awaitable nor run concurrently with another awaitable. It can remain
as a normal function.
   Meanwhile, length_counter() is labor intensive and CPU-bound. I want it to
run concurrently with the code that waits for the user to input a guess, so
it’s a good candidate for a coroutine function. I’ll rewrite the synchronous
version from Listing 16-3:

   async def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       for i in range(2, BOUND):
           if collatz(i) == target:
               count += 1
           await asyncio.sleep(0)
       return count

  Listing 16-9: collatz_async.py:3

   I turn this function into a coroutine function with async and use await
asyncio.sleep(0) to tell Python where the coroutine function can pause and let
something else work. If I don’t await something in the coroutine function, it
will never be paused, which would defeat the purpose of making it a
coroutine function in the first place. (Trio, Curio, and asyncio all offer a
sleep() awaitable.)

  I also want to turn the IO-bound get_input() function into a coroutine
function, as the very nature of waiting for user input involves the ability to
pause and resume. This first version of the coroutine function doesn’t yet
await anything else; I’ll revisit that in a bit.

   async def get_input(prompt):
       while True:
           n = input(prompt)
           try:
                  n = int(n)
           except ValueError:
                  print("Value must be an integer.")
                  continue
           if n <= 0:
                  print("Value must be positive.")
           else:
                  return n

  Listing 16-10: collatz_async.py:4a

   There’s one critical limitation to await: it can only be called from within
an awaitable, such as a coroutine function. I want to call get_input() from
main(), so main() must also be a coroutine function, as you’ll see in Listing 16
-11.
  Behind the scenes, native coroutines are still used in a strikingly similar
manner to simple coroutines. Because length_counter() is a coroutine
function, I can force it to be executed manually (and synchronously) the
same as I would a simple coroutine. This is just a side example that runs the
coroutine function synchronously:

   f = length_counter(100)
   while True:
       try:
           f.send(None)
       except StopIteration as e:
           print(e)    # prints '255'
           break

  I wouldn’t ever use this approach in production, as coroutine functions
need to be run in a special way to be useful.

Tasks
Now that get_input() and length_counter() are coroutine functions, I must call
them using the await keyword. There are two different ways to invoke them,
depending on how I want them to be run: by directly awaiting them or by
scheduling them as tasks, which are special objects that run coroutine
functions without blocking.
   Both approaches require turning the Collatz example’s main() function
into a coroutine function, so I’ll begin by doing that:

   async def main():
       print("Collatz Sequence Counter")

       target = await get_input("Collatz sequence length to search for: ")
       print(f"Searching in range 1-{BOUND}")

       length_counter_task = asyncio.create_task(length_counter(target))
       guess_task = asyncio.create_task(
           get_input("How many times do you think it will appear? ")
       )

       count = await length_counter_task
       guess = await guess_task

       if guess == count:
           print("Exactly right! I'm amazed.")
       elif abs(guess-count) < 100:
           print(f"You're close! It was {count}.")
       else:
           print(f"Nope. It was {count}.")

  Listing 16-11: collatz_async.py:5a

   Deciding how to call each awaitable requires some thought. First, before
I can do anything else, I need to know what Collatz sequence length the
user wants to search for. I call the get_input() coroutine function with the
await keyword. Calling the coroutine function like this will block the
program while literally awaiting the user input. This blocking is acceptable
here, since we can’t do any math calculations (or, really, anything else)
without that initial user input.
   Once I have the input, I can start the calculation in length_counter(), which
I want to run concurrently with getting the user guess via another call to
get_input(). To do this, I schedule the native coroutines as tasks. Always
schedule a Task object rather than instantiating it directly. Here, I use
asyncio.create_task() to schedule a task.

  The two native coroutines are now scheduled to run as soon as there’s an
opening, that is, as soon as main() is awaiting something. I relinquish the
main() coroutine function’s control of execution by calling await on one of
my tasks—at the moment, it doesn’t matter which—thereby allowing
another task to have a turn. Because both tasks are already scheduled,
they’ll take turns until length_counter_task returns the value returned by the
length_counter() coroutine function. Then the program waits on the other task,
guess_task, until it, too, returns a value. Depending on how quickly the user
entered input, guess_task may have been waiting to return a value even while
length_counter_task was still running.

   The Trio and Curio libraries have tasks, just like asyncio does, although
they’re created a little differently. Consult the documentation for those
libraries to learn more.

The Event Loop
At this point, it may seem like I’ve coded myself into a corner: coroutine
functions and other awaitables must be called with await, but only coroutine
functions can contain the await keyword. How can I start this program?
   The event loop is the heart of asynchrony. It manages the multitasking
between awaitables and provides the means of calling the first awaitable in
the stack. Every asynchrony module provides an event loop mechanism.
You can even write your own if you’re feeling brave. In this example, I’ll
employ the default event loop provided by asyncio, like this:

   if __name__ == "__main__":
         loop = ❶ asyncio.get_event_loop()
     ❷ loop.run_until_complete(main())

  Listing 16-12: collatz_async.py:6a

   I acquire an event loop ❶ and bind it to the name loop. An event loop
object has a number of methods for controlling execution; in this case, I use
loop.run_until_complete() to schedule and run the main() coroutine function ❷.

  Since this is the most common way to start an event loop, it’s not
surprising that asyncio provides a shorter equivalent way to use the default
event loop:
    if __name__ == "__main__":
        asyncio.run(main())

  Listing 16-13: collatz_async.py:6b

  I can now run my module, and it works.

                                     GOTCHA ALERT
  According to asyncio maintainer Andrew Svetlov, the development team is in the process of
  improving on asyncio’s flawed design, including how event loops are used. If you’re reading
  this book in the future, perhaps using Python 3.12 or later, there’s a very good chance the above
  example code here is no longer the recommended approach. See the documentation!

   Alternative asynchrony modules offer some important additional
mechanisms for handling multiple tasks: Curio has TaskGroup, while Trio has
(and requires use of) Nursery. See the documentation for those libraries to
learn more. The asyncio module has no analogous structures yet, and
implementing them is decidedly non-trivial.
   If you run this code, you’ll notice a remaining problem: collatz_async.py
still hangs in the same place it did before! That’s not very practical.

Making It (Actually) Asynchronous
The code isn’t yet behaving concurrently because of this line from
get_input() in Listing 16-10, which I warned you about earlier:

             n = input(prompt)

  No matter how I write the rest of the program, input() is an IO-bound
blocking function, so it will hog the process until the user inputs something,
such as their guess. It doesn’t know how to take turns.
   To get user input asynchronously, I must use a coroutine function
equivalent to input(). There’s nothing of the sort in the standard library, but
the third-party library aioconsole provides an asynchronous equivalent for
input(), among a few other functions. I’ll need to install this package to my
virtual environment.
                                      GOTCHA ALERT
  Getting input from the stdin stream asynchronously is a harder problem than it appears, and it
  hasn’t yet been fully solved. Creating a unified-streams API is extraordinary difficult! If you’re
  using a different asynchronous programming library, like Trio or Curio, you’re in for quite a
  challenge. This is the only reason I’m using asyncio for the example: aioconsole provides a
  limited but effective workaround for the problem, but it’s only compatible with asyncio.

  Once it’s installed, I import the ainput coroutine function I need:

    import asyncio
    from aioconsole import ainput

    BOUND = 10**5

  Listing 16-14: collatz_async.py:1b

   The ainput coroutine function works exactly like the built-in function
input(), except that it’s an awaitable, so it will periodically relinquish control
of the process, allowing other awaitables to run.
   Conventionally, asynchronous equivalents to standard library functions
and modules are prepended with an a (for async). This is helpful to know
because there’s not much in the way of documentation for aioconsole, as of
this writing. With any library of this sort, assume this naming convention
and identical usage to the standard library equivalent, unless otherwise
informed by documentation.
  I adjust my get_input() coroutine function to use ainput:

    async def get_input(prompt):
        while True:
             n = await ainput(prompt)
             try:
                    n = int(n)
             except ValueError:
                    print("Value must be an integer.")
                    continue
             if n <= 0:
                    print("Value must be positive.")
           else:
               return n

  Listing 16-15: collatz_async.py:4b

   Now, if I run the module, it works asynchronously. If I take more than a
couple of seconds to input a valid guess, the results are printed immediately
after I press ENTER. In contrast, if I input a valid guess immediately, the
delay from the CPU-bound task can still be observed. As mentioned before,
concurrency only improves the perceived responsiveness of the program,
not the execution speed.

Scheduling and Asynchronous Execution
Flow
When you’re used to the execution flow of ordinary synchronous code,
asynchrony can take more than a little bit of getting used to. To help
reinforce the principles I’ve introduced, I’ll break down the call stack of the
complete collatz_async.py file.
  At the outset of execution, I start the event loop:

   asyncio.run(main())

   This schedules the main() coroutine function as a task, which I’ll refer to
as main throughout this section. Because it’s the only task scheduled, the
event loop runs it immediately.
  Next, the code needs some user input before it can logically do anything,
so I await the return value of the coroutine function get_input():

       target = await get_input("Collatz sequence length to search for: ")

  The await statement causes the main task to relinquish control to the event
loop so something else can run. The coroutine function get_input() is
scheduled as an event in the background, it runs, and the value is returned
and assigned to target. With that fulfilled, the main task proceeds.
  Next, I schedule the get_input() coroutine function as a task to get the
user’s guess:

       guess_task = asyncio.create_task(
           get_input("How many times do you think it will appear? ")
       )

   The task bound to guess_task is scheduled, but it does not immediately
start. The main task still has control, and it hasn’t relinquished it yet.
  I also schedule the length_counter() coroutine function in the same manner:

       length_counter_task = asyncio.create_task(length_counter(target))

  Now, length_counter_task is scheduled to run at some point in the future.
  Next, this line is executed in the main task:

       count = await length_counter_task

  This code causes main to relinquish control to the event loop, in that it
pauses and waits for length_counter_task to have a value for return. The event
loop now has control.
  The next scheduled task in the queue is guess_task, so that’s started next.
The get_input() coroutine function runs up to the following line:

           n = await ainput(prompt)

   Now, get_input() is waiting on another awaitable, ainput(), which is
scheduled. Control is handed back to the event loop, which runs the next
scheduled task, length_counter_task. The length_counter() coroutine function is
started, and it runs up to its await command before returning control to the
event loop.
   Perhaps the user hasn’t yet input anything—only a few milliseconds have
passed, after all—so the event loop checks in with main and guess_task, which
are both still waiting. The event loop again checks length_counter_task, which
does some more work before pausing again. Then, the event loop checks
back with ainput to see if the user has entered anything yet.
  Execution continues in this manner until something finishes.
   Bear in mind that await isn’t a magical keyword that itself returns control
to the event loop. Rather, some non-trivial logic under the hood determines
which task is run next, but I won’t go into that here, in the interests of time
and sanity.
   Once the length_counter_task has completed and is ready to return a value,
the await in main is fulfilled, and that returned value is assigned to count. The
next line in the main() coroutine function is run:

   guess = await guess_task

   For the purposes of this example, suppose the guess_task isn’t done yet.
The main task must wait some more, so it hands control back to the event
loop, which now checks in on guess_task—still waiting—before checking on
ainput. Notice it doesn’t need to check on length_counter_task anymore, as that
task is completed.
   Once the user enters something, ainput has a value to return. The event
loop checks in with the still-waiting main task and then allows guess_task to
store the returned value from its await in n and continue its execution. There
are no more await statements in the get_input() coroutine function, so aside
from the event loop looking in on the napping main task, guess_task is able to
return a value. With its await fulfilled and no other tasks in the queue, main is
given priority again, and it finishes up.
   There’s an important rule here: the order in which concurrent tasks
complete is never guaranteed! As you’ll see in the next chapter, this can
lead to some interesting problems.

Simplifying the Code
I can use the asyncio.gather() coroutine function instead of the prior method
to run two tasks concurrently. This won’t change the functionality of the
program at all from what I’m already doing, but it will make the code
cleaner:

   async def main():
       print("Collatz Sequence Counter")
       target = await get_input("Collatz sequence length to search for: ")
       print(f"Searching in range 1-{BOUND}")

       (guess, count) = await asyncio.gather(
           get_input("How many times do you think it will appear? "),
           length_counter(target)
       )

       if guess == count:
           print("Exactly right! I'm amazed.")
       elif abs(guess-count) < 100:
           print(f"You're close! It was {count}.")
       else:
           print(f"Nope. It was {count}.")

  Listing 16-16: collatz_async.py:5b

   I pass the awaitables I want to run to asyncio.gather() in the order I want
their values returned. While asyncio.gather() will create and schedule tasks
for all native coroutines passed to it, remember not to depend on the order
in which tasks will be started and run. The return values from the native
coroutines are packed into a list, which is then returned from
asyncio.gather(). In this case, I unpack the two values from the list into guess
and count. The outcome is the same as that of Listing 16-11.

Asynchronous Iteration
Iterators work with asynchrony much the same as functions do: only
iterators marked as async support the pause-and-resume behavior. By
default, looping on an iterator is blocking, unless there’s an explicit await
somewhere in the suite. This particular feature of asynchrony has evolved
quite a lot in the last several versions of Python and has only achieved some
modicum of API stability in 3.7, so older code you may find will likely use
outdated techniques.
   To demonstrate this behavior, I’ll rework my Collatz example to use an
asynchronously iterable class, instead of a coroutine function. Understand
that this technique is overpowered for this use case. In production code, I’d
have stuck with the simpler native coroutine and saved the asynchronous
iterator class for more complex logic.
   All the new concepts below are part of the core Python language and not
from asyncio. I start simply enough by creating a Collatz class, setting the
bound and starting values as before:

   import asyncio
   from aioconsole import ainput

   BOUND = 10**5

   class Collatz:

       def __init__(self):
           self.start = 2

  Listing 16-17: collatz_aiter.py:1

   Next, I’ll write a new coroutine function that will contain all the logic for
counting the steps in a single Collatz sequence. This really isn’t much of a
coroutine function, as it lacks a yield, but this approach will be convenient
for the example:

       async def count_steps(self, start_value):
           steps = 0
           n = start_value
           while n > 1:
               if n % 2:
                    n = n * 3 + 1
               else:
                    n = n // 2
               steps += 1
           return steps

  Listing 16-18: collatz_aiter.py:2

  For an object to be an ordinary, synchronous iterator, it needs to
implement the special methods __iter__() and __next__(). Similarly, to be an
asynchronous iterator, it must implement the special methods __aiter__()
and __anext__(). You can define an asynchronous iterable in the same
manner, by implementing __aiter__().
  Here, I define the two special methods necessary to make Collatz an
asynchronous iterator:

       def __aiter__(self):
           return self

       async def __anext__(self):
           steps = await self.count_steps(self.start)
           self.start += 1
           if self.start == BOUND:
               raise StopAsyncIteration
           return steps

  Listing 16-19: collatz_aiter.py:3

  The __aiter__() method must return an asynchronous iterator object,
which is just self in this case. You will notice that this method is not made
awaitable with async. It must be directly callable.
   The __anext__() special method has a couple of differences from __next__().
First and most importantly, it is marked async, making it awaitable.
Otherwise, iterating over the iterator object would be blocking. Second,
when there are no more values to iterate over, I raise StopAsyncIteration,
instead of StopIteration, as with ordinary iterators.
   In my __anext__() coroutine function, I also chose to include an await
statement, which allows the coroutine function to pause if necessary and
hand control back to the event loop. (Here, I really only do this to
demonstrate that it’s possible, especially since asynchronous iterators are
particularly useful when a single iterative step is time consuming. However,
since the execution time of the coroutine function is so brief in this
example, I could have omitted it, as the mere usage of the asynchronous
iterator involves an await under the hood.)
  In my length_counter() coroutine function, I must use an async for to iterate
over the asynchronous iterator:
   async def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       async for steps in ❶ Collatz():
          if steps == target:
                 count += 1
       return count

  Listing 16-20: collatz_aiter.py:4

  The async for compound statement is specifically for iterating over an
asynchronous iterator, which in this case is a Collatz instance ❶.
  If you want to understand what’s happening under the hood here, take a
look at the equivalent logic for the async for loop in the context of this
function:

   async def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       iter = Collatz().__aiter__()
       running = True
       while running:
          try:
                 steps = await iter.__anext__()
          except StopAsyncIteration:
                 running = False
          else:
                 if steps == target:
                    count += 1
       return count

   Notice the use of the await keyword when calling __anext__() on the
iterator. An async for loop will hand control back to the event loop on each
iteration, but if a single iteration were to take a long time, I’d need the
additional await statements in the __anext__() coroutine function to keep it
from blocking.
  As for the rest of this version of my code, I’m reusing Listings 16-16 and
16-13. The output and behavior are the same as before.
  As I mentioned, asynchronous iterators are definitely overpowered for
my Collatz example. Most of the time, asynchronous iterators are only
useful if iteration is either IO-blocking or computationally heavy enough to
justify some sort of progress indicator, or perhaps for concurrency with
another IO-blocking task.

Asynchronous Context Managers
Context managers must also be written in a specific way to have them work
with asynchrony. An asynchronous context manager has the special
coroutine functions __aenter__() and __aexit__(), instead of the usual
__enter__() and __exit__() special methods. Typically, you’d only write an
asynchronous context manager if you needed to await something in
__aenter__() or __aexit__(), such as a network connection.

  An asynchronous context manager is used with async with, instead of with,
but using it is otherwise the same as working with a regular context
manager.

Asynchronous Generators
You can also create asynchronous generators, which are identical in all
manners to ordinary generators (discussed in Chapter 10), except for being
compatible with asynchrony. They were introduced in Python 3.6 via PEP
525.
   You define an asynchronous generator with async def but use yield
statements as with regular generators. As these generators are
asynchronous, you can use await, async for, and async with in their suites as
needed. When the asynchronous generator is called as normal (without
await), it produces an asynchronous generator iterator, which can be used
just as you would an asynchronous iterator.

Other Asynchrony Concepts
There are quite a number of other tools in your asynchrony toolkit: locks,
pools, events, futures, and the like. Most of these concepts are borrowed
from the older and considerably better-documented technique of threading,
which I’ll cover in Chapter 17. The main reason I’ve skipped over these
concepts in this chapter is that the exact usage of each one varies between
asynchrony modules. If you’ve done any amount of work in concurrency
before, you’ve also noticed that I skipped some important problems,
including race conditions and deadlocks. I’ll introduce these issues in the
next chapter as well.
   One other advanced concept relating to asynchrony that you should be
aware of is context variables, or contextvars. These allow you to store
different values in variables depending on a context, meaning two different
tasks can work with the same apparent variables but in fact retrieve entirely
distinct values. If you want to learn more about context variables, see the
official documentation at https://docs.python.org/3/library/contextvars.html.
(The analogous threading concept is thread-local storage, which I won’t
cover in this book.)
   Anyone considering a dive into asynchrony should push onward into the
next chapter, as the same problems experienced in threading and traditional
concurrency can creep into asynchronous programming. The exact solutions
vary from one asynchrony library to the next and may even require a bit of
trailblazing. If you want to excel at asynchrony, become comfortable with
threading, even if you never plan on using threads in production.

Wrapping Up
The distinction between concurrency and asynchrony can be bewildering at
first, so here’s a quick recap. Concurrency improves your program’s
perceived responsiveness by allowing the code to do something else while
waiting on an IO-bound process. It does not make your code faster, and it
thus isn’t useful for CPU-bound processes where the delays come from the
code itself. Asynchrony is a relatively new way of achieving concurrency
entirely within the code, without needing to resort to the more complex
techniques.
   In Python, asynchronous programming is achieved with the async/await
model, which introduces two keywords. Roughly, async means, “This
structure can be used asynchronously,” and await means, “I’m waiting for a
value, so you can do something else now, if you like.” The await keyword
can only be used inside of a native coroutine (also known as a coroutine
function), which is a function declared with async def.
  Asynchronous programming primarily consists of writing native
coroutines and either awaiting them with await or scheduling them as tasks.
The order in which current tasks will complete is never guaranteed.
   Ultimately, asynchrony relies on an event loop to manage the execution
of native coroutines and concurrent tasks. The Python standard library
includes asyncio for this purpose, although this module is sometimes
considered quite complex and obtuse. There are some much more intuitive
alternatives, especially Trio. Alternatively, you could write your own
custom event loop that’s fit to your particular purpose, if you’re feeling
brave.
