                                    17
     THREADING AND PARALLELISM

             Before the advent of asynchrony in
             Python, you had two options to improve
             the responsiveness of your program:
             threading and multiprocessing.
Although the two concepts are often seen as related,
and even interchangeable in some languages, they
couldn’t be more different in Python.
   Threading is a means of achieving concurrency, which is useful in
working around IO-blocking tasks, wherein the code is limited by the speed
of something external, like user input, the network, or another program. It is
not useful by itself for working around CPU-blocking tasks, wherein the
magnitude of processing is the cause of code slowdowns.
   Parallelism is a technique used to deal with CPU-blocking tasks, by
running different tasks at the same time on separate CPU cores.
Multiprocessing is the way we accomplish parallelism in Python. It was
introduced to the language in Python 2.6.
   Concurrency and parallelism are often essential when programming user
interfaces, scheduling events, working with networks, and performing
labor-intensive tasks in code.
   Unsurprisingly, there is a lot to threading and multiprocessing, far
beyond the conceivable scope of this book. This chapter will anchor you in
the core concepts of concurrency and parallelism in Python. From there,
you can consult the official documentation: https://docs.python.org/3/librar
y/concurrency.html. I’ll assume you have already read Chapter 16, as I’ll be
reworking the Collatz example I introduced throughout that chapter.

Threading
A single sequence of instructions in a program is called a thread of
execution, which is usually just referred to as a thread. Any Python program
not written with concurrency or multiprocessing is contained within a single
thread. Multithreading, typically just called threading, achieves
concurrency by running multiple threads simultaneously in the same
process, which is an instance of a running computer program.
   In Python, only one thread can run at a time within a single process, so
multiple threads have to take turns. Threading is also known as preemptive
multitasking, because the operating system is preempting, or seizing control
from, one running thread to give another thread a turn. This contrasts with
asynchrony, also known as cooperative multitasking, wherein a particular
task voluntarily gives up control.
   While threading is mediated by the operating system, your code is
responsible for starting the threads and managing the data they share. This
is not a simple task, and a large portion of this chapter will focus on the
difficulties of sharing data between threads.

Concurrency vs. Parallelism
Although they are often confused, concurrency and parallelism are not the
same thing! According to Go co-creator Rob Pike, concurrency is the
composition of multiple tasks, while parallelism involves running multiple
tasks at the same time. Parallelism can be brought in as part of a concurrent
solution, but you should first understand the concurrent design of your code
before you invite multiprocessing to the party. (I highly recommend
watching Pike’s talk “Concurrency is not Parallelism” from the Heroku
Waza conference: https://blog.golang.org/waza-talk/.)
   In many programming languages, threading also achieves parallelism as
a side effect of the language and system architecture. This is part of the
reason why many confuse concurrency with parallelism. However, Python’s
Global Interpreter Lock prevents this implicit parallelism, since any Python
process is constrained to run on a single CPU core.

Basic Threading
In Python, the threading, concurrent.futures, and queue modules provide all the
classes, functions, and tools you’ll need to work with threading. I’ll use all
three in this chapter.

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
  The threading module actually uses the _thread module, which provides the low-level
  primitives for threading. While you should nearly always stick with the threading and
  concurrent.futures modules, which are easier to use by far, _thread may be of use to you if
  you’re doing something particularly advanced. See its documentation at https://docs.python.org/
  3/library/_thread.html.

  To use threading effectively, first identify the IO-bound tasks in your
code and isolate each such task behind a single function call. This design
will make it easier to thread individual tasks later.
   In the case of my Collatz example from Chapter 16, the function
get_input() is IO-bound, since it waits on input from the user. The rest of the
code is not IO-bound, so it can run synchronously. I want to run get_input()
on a separate thread, so it can run concurrently with the rest of the program.
   If you’re coding along with me, open a fresh copy of collatz_sync.py
(Listings 16-1 through 16-6) in your code editor. In Listing 17-1, I have the
original synchronous version of the collatz() and length_counter() methods. I
import the threading module at the top, as I’ll be using functions from that
module throughout this version of my program:

   import threading

   BOUND = 10**5

   def collatz(n):
        steps = 0
       while n > 1:
          if n % 2:
                  n = n * 3 + 1
          else:
                  n = n // 2
          steps += 1
       return steps

   def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       for i in range(2, BOUND):
          if collatz(i) == target:
                  count += 1
       return count

  Listing 17-1: collatz_threaded.py:1

   I need to iron out one little wrinkle in my prior design as I introduce
threading: a function being run in a separate thread cannot return a value to
the caller, but all my original functions return values. I therefore need a
different solution for passing those values around.
   The naive solution would be to create some sort of central location where
the threaded function can store its data, and the most quick-and-dirty way to
accomplish this is with a global name:

   guess = None

   def get_input(prompt):
       global guess
       while True:
          n = input(prompt)
          try:
                  n = int(n)
          except ValueError:
                  print("Value must be an integer.")
                  continue
          if n <= 0:
                  print("Value must be positive.")
          else:
                 guess = n
                 return n

  Listing 17-2: collatz_threaded.py:2a

   The get_input() function stores its return value in the new global name
guess and then returns directly anyway.

   Okay, yes, that design is repulsively non-Pythonic for this use case, and
I’ll build a cleaner solution a bit later, but it’ll do for the moment. However,
this version is analogous to a real-world pattern that can be Pythonic: you
may need to allow threads to store data in a central, shared location, such as
a database.
   Now for the interesting part. I need to thread the function call—namely,
get_input()—that I want to execute concurrently:

   def main():
       print("Collatz Sequence Counter")

       target = get_input("Collatz sequence length to search for: ")
       print(f"Searching in range 1-{BOUND}...")

       t_guess = threading.Thread(
           target=get_input,
           args=("How many times do you think it will appear? ",)
       )
       t_guess.start()

       count = length_counter(target)

       t_guess.join()

       if guess == count:
           print("Exactly right! I'm amazed.")
       elif abs(guess - count) < 100:
           print(f"You're close! It was {count}.")
       else:
           print(f"Nope. It was {count}.")

   if __name__ == "__main__":
       main()
  Listing 17-3: collatz_threaded.py:3a

  The program can’t do anything until it gets the target value from the user,
so I call get_input() the ordinary (synchronous) way the first time.
   I want the second call to get_input(), wherein the user enters their guess,
to run concurrently with the CPU-intensive Collatz calcuations. To run this
concurrently, I create a thread with threading.Thread(). I pass the function to
run in the thread to the target= keyword argument of Thread(). Any arguments
that must be passed to the function being threaded have to be passed as a
tuple to args=. (Note the trailing comma in the code above!) When the thread
starts, it will call get_input() and pass it the arguments specified in args=. In
this case, I am threading the call to get_input() and passing the input prompt
message as a string.
  I bind the thread object I created to t_guess and then start it in the
background with t_guess.start(), so my code can continue as normal without
waiting for the get_input() function to return.
   Now I can start the CPU-intensive step of calling length_counter()
synchronously. While I could thread this, too, there’s no point, as my
program can’t really do anything else until length_counter() returns a value.
Threads are quite a bit more expensive than asynchronous tasks, in terms of
performance overhead for creating them. Therefore, you should only create
threads when they provide a direct benefit to your program’s performance
or perceived responsiveness.
   Once length_counter() has finished, the program really can’t do anything
more until the thread for get_input() is done working and has stored its return
value in guess. I join the thread with t_guess.join(), meaning the code will
wait for the thread to finish its work before continuing. If the thread is
already done, the call to t_guess.join() it will immediately return.
   From there, the program carries on as normal. If you run this complete
program, you’ll find it has the same behavior as the asynchronous version
in Chapter 16: the calculations happen while the program waits on the user
to input their guess.
Timeouts
Notice that the program hangs while waiting for a thread to finish up. For Li
sting 17-3, this is perfectly safe, as any delay in this scenario would come
from the user being slow about entering a value. However, you would be
justified in being a bit wary of this indefinite suspension. If your thread is
IO-bound from using a network connection or another system process, an
unexpected error might cause the thread to never return! Your program
would hang indefinitely, without an explanation or error message, until the
operating system reports to your bewildered user, The program has stopped
responding.

   To help mitigate this issue, you can introduce a timeout. This specifies
the maximum time until the program gives up waiting on a thread to join,
after which, it carries on with or without it.
  To demonstrate this, I’ll annoy my Collatz game user by making the
program a bit impatient. (Yes, this is an absolutely terrible game design
choice, but it’s better than dragging you through a fresh example, right?)

   def main():
       # --snip--

       t_guess = threading.Thread(
           target=get_input,
           args=("How many times do you think it will appear? ",),
           daemon=True
       )
       t_guess.start()

       count = length_counter(target)

       t_guess.join(timeout=1.5)
       if t_guess.is_alive():
           print("\nYou took too long to respond!")
           return

       # --snip--

   if __name__ == "__main__":
       main()
  Listing 17-4: collatz_threaded.py:3b

   I pass the timeout=1.5 keyword argument to join() to specify that, once the
join() statement is reached, the program should only wait for one and a half
seconds before continuing, regardless of whether the thread has finished. In
effect, this means the user only has one and a half seconds to enter their
answer.
   Bear in mind, if the join() times out, it doesn’t actually affect the thread at
all. It’s still running in the background. The main program just doesn’t wait
around for it anymore.
   To determine whether a timeout has occurred, I check whether the thread
is still alive. If it is, I complain to the user and quit the program.

Daemonic Threads
Another consideration is that exiting the main thread will not terminate the
other threads. In Listing 17-4, if I timed out waiting for the t_guess thread,
even when I reached the return statement, ending the main flow of
execution, that t_guess thread would keep running in the background
indefinitely. That’s a problem, especially as the user would expect the
program to have quit in its entirety.
  Even so, Python deliberately supplies no obvious way of killing a thread,
because doing so can result in some horrible effects, including utterly
mangling your program state. However, without a way to abort the thread, it
would hang forever after the complaint, and entering data would then do
nothing. Once again, if the hanging thread were due to something like a
network error, then either your program would go unresponsive, or the
waiting thread would keep running in the background long after the main
program was closed.
   To mitigate this here, I make my thread daemonic, meaning I tie its
lifespan to the lifespan of the process (the main program). When the main
thread ends, all the associated daemonic threads are killed as well.
  I define a thread as daemonic when I create it, by specifying the keyword
argument daemon=True, as I did in Listing 17-4. Now, when I exit the main
program, the thread is aborted too.
                                     GOTCHA ALERT
  You have to be extremely careful about daemonic threads! Because they abort abruptly when
  your program does, they don’t finish their work or clean up after themselves. This can leave
  files and database connections open, changes partially written, and all manner of nasty things.
  Only make a thread daemonic if you are absolutely certain it’s safe to suddenly abort it anytime.

Futures and Executors
That quick-and-dirty global-name technique for passing things around is
less than ideal for this example, largely because global names are too easily
shadowed or improperly mutated. On the other hand, I don’t want to
introduce side effects into my get_input() function by passing some mutable
collection to store the data in instead. I need a more resilient way to return a
value from the thread.
   This is possible, thanks to futures, which are sometimes known as
promises or delays in other languages. A future is an object that will contain
a value at some point in the future but can be passed around like a normal
object, even before it contains that value.
   Carrying on with our current example, I import the concurrent.futures
module that provides futures. Futures also provide a way to create threads
directly, so I no longer need the threading module.

    import concurrent.futures

    BOUND = 10**5

    def collatz(n):
        # --snip--

  Listing 17-5: collatz_threaded.py:1b

   In this version, I won’t be needing the global name guess for storing the
return value from get_input(), so I’ll just remove the two lines that use it:

    def get_input(prompt):
        while True:
           n = input(prompt)
           try:
                  n = int(n)
           except ValueError:
                  print("Value must be an integer.")
                  continue
           if n <= 0:
                  print("Value must be positive.")
           else:
                  return n

  Listing 17-6: collatz_threaded.py:2b

   The function now looks like the synchronous version, although it will
still work with threading via futures.
   In my main method, I start the thread with a ThreadPoolExecutor object. This
is a type of executor—an object that creates and manages threads:

   def main():
       print("Collatz Sequence Counter")

       # --snip--

       executor = concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor()
       future_guess = executor.submit(
           get_input,
           "How many times do you think it will appear? "
       )

       count = length_counter(target)
       guess = future_guess.result()
       executor.shutdown()

       # --snip--

   if __name__ == "__main__":
       main()

  Listing 17-7: collatz_threaded.py:3c
   I create a new ThreadPoolExecutor and bind it to the name executor. This
name is conventional for thread pools and other executors. Then, I create a
new thread in that pool with executor.submit(), passing the function to be
threaded, as well as all its arguments. Unlike when I’m instantiating from a
threading.Thread object, I do not need to wrap the arguments in a tuple.

   The call to executor.submit() returns a future, which I bind to the name
future_guess. The future object will eventually contain the value returned by
get_input(), but at the moment, it’s nothing more than a promise.

   From here, I continue as normal, running those heavy calculations via
length_counter().

   Once that’s done, I get the final value of the future with
future_guess.result(). Like when joining a thread, this will hang until the
thread returns a value.
   After all the threads managed by the executor are done, I need to tell the
executor to clean up after itself, which I accomplish with executor.shutdown().
This is safe to call, even before the threads are finished, as it will shut down
the executor once all threads are finished. Once you’ve called shutdown() on
an executor, attempting to start new threads with it will raise a RuntimeError.
  A with statement can automatically shut down an executor in the same
way it can automatically close files. This is useful, in case you forget to shut
down your executor.

   def main():
       print("Collatz Sequence Counter")

       # --snip--

       with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor() as executor:
           future_guess = executor.submit(
                 get_input,
                 "How many times do you think it will appear? "
           )

           count = length_counter(target)

       guess = future_guess.result()

       # --snip--
   if __name__ == "__main__":
       main()

  Listing 17-8: collatz_threaded.py:3d

   The call to executor.shutdown() occurs automatically at the end of the with
statement. Any statements that should run concurrently with the thread(s)
must be in the suite of the with, as it won’t be possible for main control flow
to leave the with statement until all the threads are finished.
   In this case, I chose to retrieve the result of the future after the thread
pool has been shut down, outside of the with statement. This order isn’t
strictly necessary, but it doesn’t hurt, since the thread pool’s preceding
shutdown also implies the thread is done, so there will be no waiting to
retrieve from the future.

Timeouts with Futures
The result() method on a future accepts a timeout= keyword argument, just as
join() does on a Thread object. Unlike with Thread objects, you can determine
if a timeout has occurred by catching the concurrent.futures.TimeoutError
exception. However, this isn’t as simple as it seems. While you can time out
on waiting, there remains the problem of stopping the hanging thread.
  Here’s an example, although you probably shouldn’t run this, as it will
hang forever:

       count = length_counter(target)
       try:
           guess = future_guess.result(timeout=1.5)
       except concurrent.futures.TimeoutError:
           print("\nYou took too long to respond!")
         ❶ executor.shutdown(wait=False, cancel_futures=True)
           return   # hangs forever!
       else:
           executor.shutdown()

  The trouble is, executors do not properly support daemonic threads and
do not support them at all as of Python 3.9. Executors also do not offer any
mechanism for canceling a thread that is already running. In handling the
           above, I cancel any threads that haven’t started yet ❶, but once
TimeoutError
a thread has been started by an executor, it cannot be stopped externally
without some horrible and inexcusable hackery.
   If a thread started by an executor might need to abort under some
circumstances, you would need to plan ahead and write custom code for the
thread to handle its own timeout internally. This is easier said than done,
and in the case of get_input(), it is non-trivial and even approaches
impossible. To create a timeout for user input, I have to stick with the
thread-based technique.
                   THEORY RECAP: THREAD SAFETY

According to developer Eiríkr Åsheim, “Some people, when confronted with a problem,
think, ‘I know, I’ll use multithreading.’ Nothhw tpe yawrve o oblems [sic].”
   The joke here is that, in threading, you can never predict what order the threads will
finish in. You have to be prepared for this. When your code is guaranteed to work
correctly with threading, it is said to be thread safe. Thread-safe code is straightforward
enough to write in a small, well-contained example like Collatz, but larger systems
often contain some sneaky thread safety issues that are an utter nightmare to debug.
  Asynchrony, which I introduced back in Chapter 16, is less prone to the issues I’ll
describe in this section, but it is not immune! Whether you’re working with async/await,
threads, or multiprocessing, be mindful of the issues that can arise with concurrency.
  As you’ve seen so far, threads need to pass return values and other data between
one another during execution. There are really only three ways to reliably move data
around between threads: shared state, futures, or passing messages.
   Passing messages is considered the safest technique of the three, but it requires
careful planning and may involve some significant overhead. Futures, which I used
earlier, are another reliable option in specific situations. There are some pitfalls with
futures that I’ll come back to.
  Shared state, of which the global name in Listing 17-2 is an example, is the easiest-
looking technique, and it has plenty of use cases. Shared state may consist of global
names, mutable values, databases, streams, and files. Although it looks easy to
implement, shared state is the most treacherous of the three options, because it is
prone to race conditions. Race conditions can be particularly difficult to understand if
you’re new to threading, so here’s a fairly robust real-world example.
   Consider a shared data source in an office, such as a whiteboard list of supplies
needed. Anyone can add new items to the list. To save the secretary time, the office
has a tradition: if someone is going out for lunch, they can also pick up some of the
items on the way back, using their company credit card. In an effort to ensure that
items are not forgotten, there’s one rule: you can’t erase something from the board until
you return with that item.
   Jess is heading out for lunch at her favorite sushi place, which is right next to the
office supply store, so she makes a note to herself to buy the five boxes of paperclips
Peter needs for his quarterly report. A few minutes later, Vaidehi leaves to get a
sandwich and decides to get something while she’s out: the five boxes of paperclips.
Meanwhile, Ben does the same thing while checking out the new food truck, and so
does Lisa as she heads out for a coffee break. When everyone comes back from lunch,
a confused Peter is greeted with 20 boxes of paperclips on his desk!
  The problem is that Jess, Vaidehi, Ben, and Lisa were all operating concurrently
(actually, in parallel), and because of the delay between reading and updating the data
on the whiteboard, none of them could have known that someone else was getting the
paperclips. What’s worse, without a fair bit of detective work, it’ll be hard to know why
Peter is now making a kilometer-long paperclip chain and pondering how to better
manage that pesky whiteboard.
   Race conditions can crop up when you least expect them. In the analogy, the
 confusion arose because there were two indivisible steps that needed to take place in
 sequence: reading the board and updating the board.
    There are two different locking strategies the team can employ to prevent a race
 condition. The first is coarse-grained locking: when Jess decides to get something, she
 writes her name along the side of the board, thereby acquiring a lock on the board. As
 long as her name is there, she is the only person who can edit the whiteboard, with no
 exceptions! Jess “owns” the whiteboard for the moment. When she returns from lunch,
 perhaps with a bottle of correction fluid that Jacob requested, she erases her name
 from the whiteboard, releasing it for anyone else to lock.
   Coarse-grained locking often negatively impacts performance. Nobody else could get
 any of the items on the whiteboard during their lunch.
    The alternative strategy is fine-grained locking: Jess writes her initials next to the
 “correction fluid” item on the whiteboard, meaning that particular item is locked. More
 items can still be added to the whiteboard, and other items can be claimed and locked,
 but only Jess can purchase the correction fluid or update that item. When she returns
 to the office, she erases the item and must also release the lock by erasing her name
 from the board.
   Closely related to the topic of thread safety is reentrancy. A reentrant function can be
 paused mid-execution while being called again concurrently, without any odd effects.
 This can be violated if a function depends on a shared resource remaining unmodified
 for the entire operation.

Race Conditions
Race conditions are particularly hard to detect because a single line of code
may hide many steps. For example, consider something as seemingly
innocuous as incrementing an integer bound to a global name:

   count = 0

   def increment():
       global count
       count += 1

  Listing 17-9: increment.py:1a

   The augmented addition operator += is not atomic, meaning it consists of
multiple instructions under the hood. You can see this by disassembling the
increment() function with the dis module:
   import dis

   count = 0

   def increment():
         global count
         count += 1

   dis.dis(increment)

  Listing 17-10: increment.py:1b

  Running Listing 17-10 produces the following output:

     7            0 LOAD_GLOBAL                0 (count)
                      2 LOAD_CONST             1 (1)
                      4 INPLACE_ADD
                      6 STORE_GLOBAL           0 (count)
                      8 LOAD_CONST             0 (None)
                  10 RETURN_VALUE

   The 7 in the leftmost column tells us that the bytecode here corresponds
to the line 7 in the Python code, which is count += 1. All of these Python
bytecode instructions, except the last two, take place on that one line of
code! The value of count is read, the value 1 is added, and then the new value
is stored. These three steps (across five instructions) must take place in
uninterrupted succession. But consider what would happen if two threads
both called increment() at the same time, as illustrated in Table 17-1.
Table 17-1: Model of Race Condition with Two Threads

  Thread A count (global) Thread B
0 ← Read      0                (Waiting)
1 Increment 0                  (Waiting)
1 (Waiting)   0                Read →      0

1 Write →     1                (Waiting)   0

  (Done)      1                Increment 1
              1                ← Write     1

              1                (Done)
  Although two separate threads are supposed to increment the global count
value, Thread B has read the value 0 from the global count before Thread A
has a chance to write its updated value.
   The worst thing about a race condition is that there is no such thing as a
RaceConditionError exception that can be raised. There’s no error message and
no linter error. Nothing is going to tell you that a race condition is
happening—you can only determine it with some in-depth detective work.
Since there’s no way to predict when threads will pause and resume, a race
condition can hide in plain sight for ages until the perfect conditions arise
for it to manifest. This accounts for a terrifying number of “can’t
reproduce” bug reports.

A Race Condition Example
To demonstrate thread safety techniques, I’m going to rather uselessly
thread the Collatz calculations. As mentioned before, concurrency will
actually slow down CPU-bound tasks further. However, the threading
pattern I’m about to apply would be useful if the functions involved had
only been IO-bound. I’ll also use this scenario to demonstrate multiple
concurrency techniques, although some of them are ill-suited to the
situation. Roll with it.
   To reliably demonstrate a race condition, I will need to create a class to
serve as a counter. I’ll use this counter, instead of a normal integer, for
storing global shared state between different threads working on the Collatz
calculation. Again, this would be nonsense in real life, but it ensures I can
reliably reproduce a race condition for demonstration purposes:

   import concurrent.futures
   import functools
   import time

   BOUND = 10**5

   class Counter:
       count = 0

       @classmethod
       def increment(cls):
           new = cls.count + 1
        ❶ time.sleep(0.1)      # forces the problem
           cls.count = new

       @classmethod
       def get(cls):
           return cls.count

       @classmethod
       def reset(cls):
           cls.count = 0

  Listing 17-11: collatz_pool.py:1a

   The likelihood of a race condition increases the more time there is
between sequential steps in a process, like between reading and updating
data. By slipping that time.sleep() call into the increment() class method ❶, I
increase the time between calculating and storing the new count, and I thus
practically guarantee the race condition will manifest.
   Now, I’ll thread my collatz() function for this example and have it accept
a target number as an argument. Every time the Collatz sequence generated
by the function has the target number of values, I increment the Counter
instead of returning a value:

   def collatz(target, n):
       steps = 0
       while n > 1:
           if n % 2:
               n = n * 3 + 1
           else:
               n = n // 2
           steps += 1

       if steps == target:
           Counter.increment()

  Listing 17-12: collatz_pool.py:2a

   The situation is now prime for a race condition. Now, I only need to
dispatch multiple threads—and my problem is aliiiiive! (Cue thunder and
evil laughter.)
   In the next section, I’ll make some adjustments to the code, merely to
create the race condition I’m trying to demonstrate. Understand that the
problem isn’t the threading technique itself. The code in the next section is
valid. It’s the code in Listings 17-11 and 17-12 that contains the real
problem, and I’ll come back around to fixing it in a little while.

Creating Multiple Threads with ThreadPoolExecutor
To demonstrate the race condition, I will first do away with the for loop in
my original length_counter() method and replace it with a ThreadPoolExecutor.
This will allow me to dispatch a new thread for each individual Collatz
sequence calculation:

   def length_counter(target):
     ❶ Counter.reset()
       with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor( ❷ max_workers=5) as executor:
           func = ❸ functools.partial(collatz, target)
         ❹ executor.map(func, range(2, BOUND))
       return Counter.get()

  Listing 17-13: collatz_pool.py:3a

   I start by resetting the Counter to 0 ❶. I define a ThreadPoolExecutor in a with
statement, and I specify that it may run a maximum of five threads (also
known as workers) at once ❷.
   For this arbitrary example, I pulled this maximum of five workers out of
thin air. The maximum number of workers you permit can have a
significant impact on your program’s performance: too few workers won’t
improve responsiveness enough, but too many can bloat overhead. When
using threading, it’s worth doing a bit of trial and error to find the sweet
spot!
   I need to pass two arguments to the function collatz(): the target number
of steps (target) and the sequence’s starting value (n). The target value never
changes, but each value for n comes from an iterable, range(2, BOUND).
   The executor.map() method can dispatch multiple threads iteratively.
However, this method is only able to pass a single value, provided by an
iterable, to the given function. Since I’m trying to dispatch my collatz()
function, which accepts two arguments, I need another way to handle the
first argument. To accomplish this, I generate a callable object with
functools.partial(), with the target argument effectively passed in advance ❸.
I bind this callable object to func.
   The executor.map() method uses the range() iterable to provide the values
for the remaining collatz() argument via func ❹. Each resulting function call
will take place in a separate worker thread. The rest of this program is the
same as in Listings 17-6 and 17-8.
  If you run this code as is, you’ll see that nasty race condition at work:

   Collatz Sequence Counter
   Collatz sequence length to search for: 123
   Searching in range 1-100000...
   How many times do you think it will appear? 210
   Nope. It was 43.

   My guess of 210 should be exactly right, but the race condition interfered
so badly that the calculated result was wildly inaccurate. If you run this on
your computer or update the time.sleep() duration, you might get a
completely different number, maybe even coincidentally the right number at
times. That unpredictability is why race conditions are so hard to debug.
  Now that I’ve finished creating the problem, I can begin to fix it.

Locks
A lock can prevent race conditions by ensuring that only one thread can
access a shared resource or perform an operation at a time. Any thread that
wants to access a resource has to lock it first. If the resource already has a
lock on it, the thread must wait until that lock is released.
   I can resolve the race condition in the Collatz example by adding a lock
to Counter.increment():
   import concurrent.futures
   import threading
   import functools
   import time

   BOUND = 10**5

   class Counter:
       count = 0
       _lock = ❶ threading.Lock()

       @classmethod
       def increment(cls):
        ❷ cls._lock.acquire()
           new = cls.count + 1
           time.sleep(0.1)
           cls.count = new
        ❸ cls._lock.release()

       # --snip--

  Listing 17-14: collatz_pool.py:1b

   I create a new Lock object, which in this case, I bind to a class attribute,
_lock ❶. Every time Counter.increment() is called, the thread will try to acquire

(take ownership of) the lock with the lock’s acquire() method ❷. If another
thread has ownership of the lock, any other call to acquire() will hang until
that owning thread releases the lock. Once a thread acquires the lock, it can
continue as before.
   A thread must also release the lock, via the lock’s release() method, as
soon as possible after finishing work with the protected resource, so other
threads can continue ❸. Every lock that is acquired must be released.
  Because of this requirement, locks are also context managers. Instead of
manually calling acquire() and release() on my Lock, I can handle both
implicitly via a with, like this:

       # --snip--

       @classmethod
       def increment(cls):
           with cls._lock:
                new = cls.count + 1
                time.sleep(0.1)
                cls.count = new

       # --snip--

  Listing 17-15: collatz_pool.py:1c

  The with statement will acquire and release the lock automatically.
   There’s nothing inherently magical about a Lock; it’s merely a glorified
boolean value. Any thread can acquire an unowned Lock, and any thread can
release a Lock, regardless of owner. You must ensure any code that would be
prone to a race condition is hemmed in by the lock acquisition and release.
Nothing prevents you from breaking the rules, but debugging such
violations can be fraught with danger, or at least considerable annoyance.

Deadlock, Livelock, and Starvation
A deadlock situation occurs when the combined current status of your locks
causes all your threads to wait, with no way forward. You can visualize a
deadlock as two cars moving toward each other and blocking each other
from crossing a one-lane bridge.
   The similar livelock situation occurs when threads keep infinitely
repeating the same interactions, instead of merely waiting, which also
results in no real progress. Have you ever had a conversation with a
significant other to the effect of “Where do you want to eat?” “I don’t care,
where do you want to eat?” If so, you have experienced a real-world
example of livelock. Both threads perform work involved in waiting for or
deferring to one another, but neither thread gets anywhere.
  Deadlocks and livelocks will usually cause your program to go
unresponsive, often without any messages or errors to suggest why.
Whenever you’re using locks, you must be extraordinarily careful to foresee
and prevent deadlock and livelock scenarios.
   To prevent deadlock and livelock, one must be mindful of potential
circular wait conditions, in which two or more threads are all mutually
waiting on one another to release resources. Because these are hard to
depict believably in a code example, I’ll illustrate a common circular wait
condition in Figure 17-1.

Figure 17-1: Deadlock between two processes

  Threads A and B both require access to shared Resources X and Y at the
same time. Thread A acquires a lock on Resource X, while Thread B
concurrently acquires a lock on Resource Y. Now, Thread A is waiting on
Lock B, and Thread B is waiting on Lock A. They’re deadlocked.
   The right way to resolve a deadlock or livelock will always depend on
your particular situation, but you have a couple of tools at your disposal.
First, you can specify a timeout= on the lock’s acquire() method; if the call
times out, it will return False. In the situation in Figure 17-1, if either thread
encountered such a timeout, it could then release any locks it held, thereby
allowing the other thread to proceed.
  Second, any thread can release a lock, so you can forcibly break the
deadlock if necessary. If Thread A recognizes a deadlock, it could release
Thread B’s lock on Resource Y and proceed anyway, thereby breaking the
deadlock. The difficulty with this method is that you risk breaking a lock
even if you’re not in deadlock, which creates a race condition.
   Locks are not the only culprits in a deadlock or livelock scenario.
Starvation occurs when a thread is stuck waiting for a future or to join a
thread, especially to acquire some data or resource it needs, but that thread
or future never returns for some reason. This can even occur if two or more
futures or threads wind up waiting for one another to complete.
   A thread can even deadlock itself! If a single thread tries to acquire a Lock
twice in a row without releasing it first, then it is stuck waiting for itself to
release the lock it’s waiting on! If there’s any risk of this situation arising,
you can use threading.RLock, instead of a threading.Lock. With an RLock, a single
thread can acquire the same lock multiple times without deadlocking, and
only the thread that acquired the lock may release it. While you still must
release as many times as you acquire, a thread cannot directly deadlock
itself with an RLock.
   There is one catch: because an RLock may only be released by the owning
thread, it’s much harder to break a multithread deadlock with an RLock than
with an ordinary Lock.

Passing Messages with Queue
You can sidestep the risk of race conditions and deadlocks by passing
messages, at the cost of a bit more memory overhead. This is safer than
using futures or a shared data source. Anytime futures don’t work for your
situation, your default strategy for exchanging and collating data with
multiple threads should be to have those threads pass messages.
   You would typically pass messages between threads with a queue. One or
more threads can push data to the queue, and one or more other threads can
pull data from the queue. This is analogous to a waiter passing written
orders to a kitchen in a restaurant. Neither the sender nor the receiver needs
to wait on the other, unless the message queue is full or empty.
   Python’s standard library includes the queue module, which provides
collections that already implement thread safety and proper locking, thus
negating the risk of deadlocks. Alternatively, you can use collections.deque in
the same way for passing messages, because that collection has atomic
operations like append() and popleft(), which make locking unnecessary.

                                     PEDANTIC NOTE
  Technically, a queue would still require a shared object, but it’s considered different from other
  shared objects. The queue is a pipeline for passing pieces of data in one direction, as opposed to
  an object where all the threads update the same shared canonical data.
   I’ll update my collatz_pool.py example to pass results from worker
threads back to the main thread via a queue, rather than using a shared
object.

   import concurrent.futures
   import functools
   import queue

   BOUND = 10**5

  Listing 17-16: collatz_pool.py:1d

  I import the queue module and remove that pesky Counter.
  Next, I’ll adjust my collatz() function to push the results onto the queue:

   def collatz(results, n):
       steps = 0
       while n > 1:
           if n % 2:
                  n = n * 3 + 1
           else:
                  n = n // 2
           steps += 1
       results.put(steps)

  Listing 17-17: collatz_pool.py:2b

   I accept a queue.Queue object on the results parameter, and I add an item to
that collection via results.put().
   My design decisions here are deliberate. Data should only flow in one
direction via the queue, either input to the worker threads or output from the
worker threads. Most design patterns involving queues react to the queue
being empty, non-empty, or full, rather than to the contents of the data. If
you try to create a queue for moving multiple types of data, it’s all too easy
to create a starvation or infinite loop situation.
  In this case, the worker threads running collatz() will push their output
data to the queue, and length_counter() will pull that data in from the queue. If
I had needed two-way communication, I would have implemented a second
queue to handle data flow in the other direction.
   Each worker thread running collatz() must also have a dedicated queue
for storing results, lest concurrent calls mix up their results. To do this, I
pass the queue as an argument, instead of binding it to a global name.
Although this technically violates the “no side effects” principle, it’s
acceptable because the queue is intended purely as a data transfer medium.
  Here’s my updated length_counter() method, using the queue:

   def length_counter(target):
       results = queue.Queue()
       with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=5) as executor:
           func = functools.partial(collatz, ❶ results)
           executor.map(func, range(2, BOUND))
       results = list(results.queue)
       return results.count(target)

  Listing 17-18: collatz_pool.py:3b

  I create the queue object and pass it to each of the workers ❶ in the same
way I passed target in Listing 17-13. The workers will append the length of
each generated Collatz sequence to the queue. Once they’re all done, I
convert the results queue to a list and return the number of times the target
appears in that queue.

Futures with Multiple Workers
As I mentioned before, you can also solve deadlocks with futures. In fact,
that’s the best option for avoiding a deadlock in this multithreaded Collatz
example. Futures have little risk of deadlocking, as long as you avoid
having multiple threads waiting on futures from one another.
  I’m revising my deadlock example further, to implement futures. I only
need to import the concurrent.futures module to use this technique:

   import concurrent.futures
   BOUND = 10**5

  Listing 17-19: collatz_pool.py:1e

  I can also restore my collatz() method to its original form, where I am
only returning a single value:

   def collatz(n):
       steps = 0
       while n > 1:
          if n % 2:
               n = n * 3 + 1
          else:
               n = n // 2
          steps += 1
       return steps

  Listing 17-20: collatz_pool.py:2c

  The executor.map() method returns an iterable of futures, which I can use to
collect the return values from the worker threads:

   def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       with concurrent.futures.ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=5) as executor:
          for result in executor.map(collatz, range(2, BOUND)):
               if result == target:
                     count += 1
       return count

  Listing 17-21: collatz_pool.py:3c

   I iterate over each of the values returned by executor.map() and count how
many of those values match the target. The executor.map() method is
essentially a threaded drop-in replacement for the built-in map() function;
while the input processing order is not guaranteed, the output order is. With
most other techniques, you cannot rely on the order in which values are
returned.
  This is the cleanest approach of all, with minimal overhead.
                      THEORY RECAP: PARALLELISM

 Parallelism is true multitasking, wherein multiple tasks are performed at the same time.
 It’s heavily leveraged in the field of high-performance computing (HPC), where
 extraordinarily processing-intensive tasks are broken down so that they may be
 completed in a reasonable span of time. In parallelism, when the primary process is
 busy, the task is moved to a separate process running on a separate CPU core, leaving
 the primary process and CPU core free to do other work. This only works when there
 are multiple CPU cores, as any one CPU core can only work on one task at a time.
    To use an analogy borrowed from real life, say you need to make a dozen copies of a
 memo for distribution around the office. The copy machine (analogous to the CPU) is
 slow, so the line of employees (processes) waiting to use it is very long. You have other
 things to do, so you ask your co-worker Sangarshanan to handle it for you, since he’s
 got some free time. The task (making copies) is moved to a separate process
 (Sangarshanan), leaving the primary process (you) free to do other work. When he’s
 done with the copies, he leaves them in your cubicle for you to pick up at your leisure.
   Parallelism is useful with a CPU-bound task, because it’s primarily limited by how
 quickly the CPU can work. Just as the employees in line in the analogy are limited by
 the speed of the copy machine, CPU-bound tasks are limited by the speed of the CPU.
   One important limitation of parallelism is that processes should not share resources!
 While there are techniques that allow you to bypass this limitation, they’re fraught with
 peril. Instead, each resource is only accessed and used by one process at a time, and
 processes pass messages back and forth to communicate in their own timing. This
 way, it will not matter in what order the processes run or which ones are running
 concurrently, as both of those things are unpredictable in parallelism anyway.
    Parallelism is a fairly involved technique, with a lot of hidden pitfalls that can be
 difficult to debug. As a result, it should be reserved for projects that have enough
 significant CPU-bound tasks to justify the added complexity. If it’s a matter of
 preventing the user interface from freezing, concurrency (likely via asynchrony) is the
 better option.

Achieving Parallelism with Multiprocessing
Since Python 2.6, parallelism is possible via multiprocessing, wherein
parallel tasks are handled by entirely separate system processes, each with
its own dedicated instance of the Python interpreter. Multiprocessing
bypasses the limitations imposed by Python’s Global Interpreter Lock
(GIL), since each process has its own Python interpreter, and thus its own
GIL. This allows a single Python program to employ parallelism. A
computer can run these multiple processes simultaneously by distributing
them among different CPU cores, to be worked on at the same time. How
processes are divided up among cores is the prerogative of the operating
system.
   Remember that multiprocessing has performance costs of its own, so
merely adding it to your code will not automatically make everything faster.
Improving performance requires dedicated thought and work. As with
threading and asynchrony, you must carefully consider your code’s design
when implementing multiprocessing. You’ll see these principles in action
shortly.
   Multiprocessing in Python follows a very similar structure to threading.
Process objects are used exactly like Thread objects. The multiprocessing module
also provides classes like Queue and Event, which are analogous to their
threading-based cousins but specifically designed for multiprocessing. The
concurrent.futures module provides ProcessPoolExecutor, which looks and acts
much the same as ThreadPoolExecutor and makes it possible to use futures.

                                    GOTCHA ALERT
  Multiprocessing seldom works in the interactive interpreter, because __main__ must be
  importable by subprocesses. You will need to run the code from a module or package instead.

Pickling Data
Some Python developers recoil at the thought of using multiprocessing for one
reason: it uses pickle behind the scenes. If you recall from Chapter 12, pickle
is extraordinarily slow and insecure as a data serialization format, so much
so that Pythonistas avoid it like the plague, with good reason.
   Even so, pickle does work reasonably well in the context of
multiprocessing. First, we don’t need to worry about pickle being insecure,
because it is being used to transfer data directly between active processes
started and managed by your code, so that data is considered trusted.
Second, many of pickle’s performance issues are offset by the tangible
performance gains afforded by parallelism and the fact that the serialized
data is never being written to a file, which is itself a CPU-intensive task.
  Moreover, because pickle is used in multiprocessing, it is still actively
maintained and improved; Python 3.8 saw the implementation of pickle
protocol 5. You typically don’t need to worry about pickle when using
multiprocessing; it’s merely an implementation detail most of the time.
  It is important to remember that data must be picklable, meaning it can
be serialized by the pickle protocol, for it to be passed between processes.
According to the documentation, you can pickle the following data types:

    None

    True   and False
    Integers
    Floating-point numbers
    Complex numbers
    Strings
    Bytes-like objects
    Tuples, lists, sets, and dictionaries only containing picklable objects
    Functions (but not lambdas) at global scope
    Classes at global scope, with additional requirements

   For a class to be picklable, all of its instance attributes must be picklable
and stored in the instance __dict__ attribute. When a class is pickled,
methods and class attributes are omitted, along with anything else in the
class __dict__ attribute. Alternatively, if a class uses slots or otherwise cannot
fulfill this criteria, you can make it picklable by implementing the special
instance method __getstate__(), which should return a picklable object.
Typically, this would be a dictionary of picklable attributes. If the method
returns False, it signals the class as unpicklable.
   You can also implement the special instance method __setstate__(state),
which accepts an unpickled object, which you would unpack into the
instance attributes as appropriate. This is a more time-consuming approach,
but it’s a good way around the restrictions. If you don’t define this method,
one will be created automatically that accepts a dictionary and assigns it
directly to the instance’s __dict__ attribute.
   If you’re going to work a lot with picklable data, especially in the context
of multithreading, it may be helpful to see the official documentation for the
pickle module: https://docs.python.org/3/library/pickle.html.

Speed Considerations and ProcessPoolExecutor
Multiprocessing gets around the GIL, allowing the code to use multiple
processes, so you might assume it will speed up that CPU-bound activity of
calculating the Collatz sequences. Let’s test out that idea.
  Continuing from the previous example, I can make use of
multiprocessing by swapping my ThreadPoolExecutor to a ProcessPoolExecutor. I
can reuse Listings 17-19 and 17-20 (not shown below) and modify Listing 1
7-21 to look like this:

   def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       with concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor() as executor:
           for result in executor.map(collatz, range(2, BOUND)):
               if result == target:
                   count += 1
       return count

  Listing 17-22: collatz_multi.py:3a

  All I needed to do was to replace ThreadPoolExecutor with ProcessPoolExecutor.
Here, I didn’t specify max_workers on the ProcessPoolExecutor, so it defaults to
one worker per processor core on the machine. I happen to be on an 8-core
machine, so when I run this code on my machine, the ProcessPoolExecutor will
default to a max_workers value of 8. Your machine may be different.
   I’m still using Listings 17-6 and 17-8 for the rest of the program, which
threads the IO-bound task of getting user input. There’s no sense in using
multiprocessing to handle an IO-bound task.
  If I run this program, however, it is actually the slowest version yet! My
computer has an Intel i7 8-core processor, but it took a whopping 21
seconds to get the results. The version with the ThreadPoolExecutor and futures
(Listing 17-18) took 8 seconds, and the version that didn’t thread the
calculations at all (Listing 17-1) took less than 3 seconds.
  Rest assured, the code is indeed creating multiple subprocesses—
separate processes linked to the main process—and bypassing the GIL. The
problem is, subprocesses themselves are extremely expensive to create and
manage! The overhead of multiprocessing is outweighing any performance
gains I might have.
   Alternatively, I could drop the threading on the IO-bound task and
instead move the CPU-bound task out to a single subprocess. However, that
results in roughly the same performance as seen with threading alone,
negating the point of multiprocessing here.
   One cannot simply throw parallelism at a problem and expect the code to
run faster. Effective multiprocessing requires planning. In order to take
proper advantage of multiprocessing, I need to give each subprocess a
reasonable amount of work to do. As you’ve seen, if I create too many
subprocesses, the overhead of the multiprocessing nullifies any
performance gains. If I create too few, there will be little to no difference
from running it on a single subprocess.
   I don’t want to create a new subprocess for each call to collatz(), as I did
before—a hundred thousand subprocesses is a huge strain on the system
resources! Instead, I’ll divide those among four separate subprocesses, each
of which performs a quarter of the work. I can do this by chunking: defining
how much of the work is given to a single subprocess:

   def length_counter(target):
       count = 0
       with concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor() as executor:
          for result in executor.map(
               collatz,
               range(2, BOUND),
               chunksize=BOUND//4
          ):
               if result == target:
                   count += 1
       return count

  Listing 17-23: collatz_multi.py:3b

  Within the executor.map() method, I use the keyword argument chunksize to
specify that roughly one-quarter of the values being passed should go to
each subprocess.
   When I run the code, I find this version to be the fastest yet! With a BOUND
= 10**5, it completes almost instantaneously. If I increase BOUND to 10**6, this
version takes 5 seconds, versus 16 seconds for the final version of
collatz_threaded.py. I can play with the chunking to find the ideal value,
which is indeed 4; any higher value in this scenario won’t make the program
run faster than 5 seconds, and a value smaller than 4 is slower.
  By carefully applying parallelism, I can bypass the GIL and speed up
CPU-bound tasks.

The Producer/Consumer Problem
In parallelism and concurrency, one often classifies threads or processes as
either producers, which provide data, or consumers, which intake that data
and process it. It’s possible for a thread or process to be both a producer and
a consumer. The producer/consumer problem is a common situation in
which one or more producers provide data, which is then processed by one
or more consumers. The producers and consumers are working
independently of one another, at potentially different speeds. The producer
might produce values faster than the consumers can process them, or the
consumers might process the data faster than it is produced. The challenge
is preventing the queue of data being processed from getting too full, lest
the consumers wait forever because they don’t know whether the producer
is slow or finished.
   I’ll model the producer/consumer problem with the Collatz example,
merely so I don’t need to build up a brand-new example. I’ll have one
producer provide the starting values of the Collatz sequences, and I’ll have
four consumers working in parallel to generate the sequences from those
starting values and to determine how many have the target number of steps.
(In practice, this pattern is overkill for something as simple as the Collatz
example.)
  At first blush, this program seems like it should be easy to write: create a
queue, fill it with the starting values, and then start four subprocesses on the
executor to take values out of that queue. In practice, there are a few
problems that need to be solved.
   First, I cannot wait until the producer has produced all the values before
processing. If I tried to pack all the values into the queue at once, I’d have a
whopping 3.8 MiB if I set my BOUND to 10**7; real-world examples of the
producer-consumer problem can involve gigabytes or terabytes of data.
Instead, the producer should provide more values only when there’s space
in the queue for them.
   Second, the consumers need to know the difference between the queue
being empty because the values are exhausted and the queue being empty
because the producer is working on adding more. If something goes wrong
to prevent values being added—or, conversely, if something prevents the
consumers from processing values—then the code should be able to handle
that error gracefully, rather than waiting forever for something to happen.
Similarly, when the program is ready to end, each thread or subprocess
should clean up after itself—closing files and streams, for example—rather
than aborting abruptly.
  Third, and perhaps hardest to implement, producers and consumers must
be reentrant. In other words, if a consumer is paused mid-execution and
another consumer is started before the first is resumed, the two consumers
should not interfere with one another. Otherwise, they may be in danger of
deadlocking (or livelocking) in subtle and unexpected ways.

Importing the Modules
I’m going to need quite a few modules to accomplish this program:

   import concurrent.futures
   import multiprocessing
   import queue
   import itertools
   import signal
   import time

   BOUND = 10**5

  Listing 17-24: collatz_producer_consumer.py:1

   As before, the concurrent.futures module allows me to work with both
threads and processes. The multiprocessing module provides the parallelism-
specific versions of concurrency classes, including multiprocessing.Queue and
multiprocessing.Event. The queue module provides the exceptions related to
Queue. I’ll also need repeat from itertools when dispatching consumers in my
particular use case.
   The signal module, which may be new to you, allows me to
asynchronously monitor for and respond to process control signals coming
from the operating system. This is important to ensuring that all my
subprocesses shut down cleanly. I’ll come back to this in a moment.

Monitoring the Queue
I need two shared objects from the multiprocessing module for the
producer/consumer model to work. The Queue stores the data being passed
from producer to consumer, and Event signals when no more data will be
added to the Queue by the producer.

   in_queue = multiprocessing.Queue(100)
   exit_event = multiprocessing.Event()

  Listing 17-25: collatz_producer_consumer.py:2

   I’m using global names for these two objects because, unlike with
threads, you cannot pass shared objects via arguments when dispatching
subprocesses.
   The producer subprocess will fill the queue with starting values, and the
consumer subprocesses will read from it. The multiprocessing.Queue class has
atomic put() and get() methods, like queue.Queue, so it isn’t prone to race
conditions. I pass the argument 100 to the Queue initializer here, which sets
the queue to hold a maximum of 100 items. The maximum is somewhat
arbitrary; you should experiment for your use cases.
  The exit_event object is an event, a special flag that processes can monitor
and react to. In this case, the event signals either that the producer will be
adding no more values to the queue, or that the program itself has been
aborted. The threading module provides an analogous Event object for
concurrency.
  You’ll see both of these at work shortly.
Subprocess Cleanup
It is each subprocess’s duty to clean up after itself and shut down properly.
When the producer is finished producing data, the consumers need to
process the remaining data in the queue and then clean themselves up.
Similarly, if the main program is aborted, the subprocesses must all be
informed so they can shut themselves down.
  To handle both of these situations, I’ll write my consumer and producer
functions to monitor and respond to exit_event.

   def exit_handler(signum, frame):
     ❶ exit_event.set()

   signal.signal(❷ signal.SIGINT, exit_handler)
   signal.signal(❸ signal.SIGTERM, exit_handler)

  Listing 17-26: collatz_producer_consumer.py:3

   I define an event handler function, exit_handler(), which is designed to
respond to operating system events. The event handler function must accept
two arguments: the signal number that corresponds to a particular system
event and the current stack frame, which is roughly the current location and
scope in the code. Both values will be provided automatically, so there’s no
need to worry about figuring out what they should be.
  The exit_handler() function will set exit_event ❶. Later, I’ll write my
processes to clean up and shut down in response to exit_event.
   I attach the handler to the two signals I want to monitor: signal.SIGTERM
occurs when the main process terminates ❷, and signal.SIGINT occurs when it
is interrupted, such as with CTRL-C on POSIX systems ❸.

Consumers
Here’s my usual collatz() function, as well as my consumer function:

   def collatz(n):
       steps = 0
       while n > 1:
           if n % 2:
               n = n * 3 + 1
           else:
               n = n // 2
           steps += 1
       return steps

   def collatz_consumer(target):
       count = 0
       while True:
           if not in_queue.empty():
               try:
                     n = in_queue.get( ❶ timeout=1)
               except queue.Empty:
                     return count

               if collatz(n) == target:
                     count += 1

           if exit_event.is_set():
               return count

  Listing 17-27: collatz_producer_consumer.py:4

  The collatz_consumer() function accepts one argument: the target it is
looking for. It loops infinitely, until explicitly exited with a return statement.
   On each iteration, the consumer function checks whether the shared
queue, in_queue, has anything in it. If it does, the function attempts to get the
next item from the queue with in_queue.get(), which waits until there’s an
item in the queue. I provide a timeout of one second ❶, which is important to
prevent deadlocks and to give the subprocess an opportunity to check and
respond to events. One second is more than ample time for my producer
process to put a new item into the queue. If in_queue.get() times out, the
exception queue.Empty is raised, and I exit the subprocess immediately.
   If the consumer is able to get a value from the queue, it runs the value
through collatz(), checks the returned value against target, and updates count
accordingly.
  Finally, I check if exit_event is set; if it is, I return count, ending the
subprocess cleanly.

Checking for an Empty Queue
If you look at the documentation for multiprocessing.Queue.empty() (queue.empty()
in Listing 17-27) and similar methods, there’s a rather ominous statement:
  Because of multithreading/multiprocessing semantics, this is not reliable.

   This does not mean you cannot use the empty() method. The
“unreliability” has to do with the dynamics I’ve already described at work
in concurrency. By the time the subprocess determines that the queue is
empty via the empty() method, it might not be empty anymore, since the
producer is operating in parallel. This is okay, however. There’s no harm in
another iteration passing if the timing is off.
   This dynamic really only becomes treacherous if you rely on empty() to
ensure you can put() a new item in the queue. The queue might be filled up
before the subprocess even reaches put(), even if it’s the next statement. The
same is true of checking full() before calling get(). That’s why I invert the
logic and check that the queue is not empty, while still wrapping the get()
statement in a try clause.

Producers
Enough about the consumer. It’s time to put some values in that queue with
the producer. The producer function for the Collatz example pushes values
to the queue when there’s an empty spot to do so:

   def range_producer():
        for n in range(2, BOUND):
         ❶ if exit_event.is_set():
                   return
            try:
              ❷ in_queue.put(n, timeout=1)
            except queue.Full:
              ❸ exit_event.set()
                   return

        while True:
           time.sleep(0.05)
           if in_queue.empty():
               exit_event.set()
               return

  Listing 17-28: collatz_producer_consumer.py:5

  In addition to pushing values to the queue when it isn’t full, the producer
function always checks if exit_event is set, so it can exit cleanly as soon as
possible ❶.
   I next try to put a value on the queue with put() ❷. In this particular
example, if the operation takes more than a second, I want it to time out and
thus indicate that the consumers have deadlocked or crashed in some way.
If there’s a timeout, the queue.Full exception is raised, and I set the exit_event
❸ and end the subprocess. Bear in mind, each situation will have its own
ideal timeouts, which you’ll have to figure out for yourself. It’s better to
have too long a timeout, rather than one that’s too short.
   If the loop reaches its end without a timeout, I don’t want to set the
exit_event right away, as that might cause the consumers to quit too early and
not process some waiting items. Instead, I loop infinitely, checking whether
the queue is empty. I can rely on the empty() method here to inform me when
the consumers are finished processing the data, since this is the only
producer adding values to the queue. On each iteration here, I also sleep for
a few milliseconds, so the producer doesn’t chew through processing power
while it waits. Once the queue is empty, I set the exit_event. Then I exit the
function, ending the subprocess.

Starting the Processes
Now that I have written my producers and consumers, it’s time to dispatch
them. I’ll run the producer and all four consumers as subprocesses, which I
start with a ProcessPoolExecutor:

   def length_counter(target):
       with concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor() as executor:
           executor.submit( ❶ range_producer)
           results = ❷ executor.map(
               collatz_consumer,
               ❸ itertools.repeat(target, 4)
           )

       return ❹ sum(results)

  Listing 17-29: collatz_producer_consumer.py:6

   I submit my producer function from Listing 17-28, range_producer(), to a
single subprocess ❶.
   I use executor.map() as a convenient way to dispatch multiple consumer
subprocesses ❷, but I don’t need to iteratively provide any data, which is
the usual purpose of map(). Since that function requires an iterable as its
second argument, I use itertools.repeat() to create an iterator providing
exactly four copies of the value target ❸. The values in this iterable will be
mapped to four separate subprocesses.
   Finally, I collect and sum all the counts returned by the finished
consumer subprocesses via results ❹. Because this statement is outside of
the with statement’s suite, it will only run once the producer subprocess and
all four consumer subprocesses have exited.
  I’ve designed my code architecture to work with a single producer. If I
wanted more than one producer subprocess, I would need to refactor the
code.
  As before, I’m using Listings 17-6 and 17-8 for the rest of the program,
which will still be threaded.

Performance Results
Running the code in Listing 17-29 is a bit slower than running the version
in Listing 17-23—five seconds on my machine for a BOUND of 10**5, versus
the nearly instant return of the previous version—but you can see that it
works as expected:

   Collatz Sequence Counter
   Collatz sequence length to search for: 128
   Searching in range 1-100000...
   How many times do you think it will appear? 608
   Exactly right! I'm amazed.
   I chose 128 as my test target, as that’s the length of the Collatz sequence
starting with the value 10**5, which was the last value provided. This
allowed me to confirm that the consumer subprocesses didn’t exit before
the queue was empty. There are 608 Collatz sequences that are 128 steps
long, and that is what is reported after a few seconds.
   Be aware that the design of this particular code isn’t necessarily going to
work for your producer/consumer scenario. You will need to carefully
consider how messages and data are passed, how events are set and
checked, and how subprocesses (or threads, for that matter) clean up after
themselves. I highly recommend reading “Things I Wish They Told Me
About Multiprocessing in Python” by Pamela McA’Nulty: https://www.clou
dcity.io/blog/2019/02/27/things-i-wish-they-told-me-about-multiprocessing-
in-python/.

Logging with Multiprocessing
There’s one piece of multiprocessing that I’ve chosen to skip over.
Normally, when working with multiple processes, you’d use a logging
system that includes timestamps and unique identifiers for processes. This
is extraordinarily helpful in debugging parallelized code, especially as most
other debugging tools will not work across processes. Logging will allow
you to see the status of different processes at any given moment in time, so
you can tell which ones are working, which are waiting, and which have
crashed. I’ll cover logging in general in Chapter 19, and you can fit it to
your purposes.

Wrapping Up
There are many helpful tools for threading and multiprocessing that I
simply didn’t have the opportunity to cover here. Now that you have a grasp
of the fundamentals of concurrency and parallelism in Python, I highly
recommend skimming through the official documentation for the modules
I’ve been using, as well as two I’ve skipped:
concurrent.futures

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/concurrent.futures.html

queue

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/queue.html

multiprocessing

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html

sched

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/sched.html

subprocess

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/subprocess.html

_thread

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/_thread.html

threading

  https://docs.python.org/3/library/threading.html

  Remember also that asynchrony libraries have analogous structures and
patterns for nearly everything in threading, including locks, events, pools,
and futures. Most of the time, if you can thread it, you can write it
asynchronously.
   In summary, there are three primary ways to multitask in Python:
asynchrony (Chapter 16), threading, and multiprocessing. Asynchrony and
threading are both for working with IO-bound tasks, while multiprocessing
is for speeding up CPU-bound tasks.
   Even so, remember that concurrency and parallelism are not magic
bullets! They can improve your program’s responsiveness and, at least in
the case of multiprocessing, speed up execution times, but always at the
cost of added complexity and the risk of some pretty snarly bugs. They
demand careful planning and code architecture, and it’s easy to get their
usage wrong. I spent considerable time writing, testing, debugging, and
fighting with the Collatz examples until I got them right—more so than
with any other examples in this book! Even now, you may discover flaws in
the design that I overlooked.
   Concurrency and parallelism are essential when programming user
interfaces, scheduling events, and performing labor-intensive tasks in code.
Even so, there’s often nothing wrong with old-fashioned synchronous code.
If you don’t need the extra power, then avoid the extra complexity.
   For further understanding, you may want to look up other concurrency
and parallelism patterns, such as the subprocess module, job queues like
celery, and even external operating system utilities like xargs -P and systemd.
There is far more to this than can fit into one chapter. Always carefully
research the options for your particular situation.
