                                    18
     PACKAGING AND DISTRIBUTION

              The best code in the world amounts to
              little if you never ship it. Once your
              project is functional, you should work
              out how you’ll package and distribute
it, before continuing development. The trouble is,
packaging in Python sometimes feels like beating
yourself with a wet trout.
   Often, the difficulty doesn’t come from packaging your own code—that’s
usually easy enough—but rather from handling your code’s dependencies,
especially its non-Python dependencies. Distribution can be a snarly issue
for even experienced programmers, due in part to the diverse scenarios in
which Python is used. Still, if you understand how things are supposed to
work, you’ll have a good foundation for pushing past the frustration and
shipping working code.
   In this chapter, I’ll break down the essentials of packaging and
distributing a Python project, first via the Python Package Index, and then
as an installable binary. To do this, I’ll walk you through packaging an
actual application I wrote: Timecard. This project is well-suited as an
example, because it has both Python and system dependencies, plus a few
non-code resources, all of which need to be accounted for, somehow. The
repository for this project is available on GitHub: https://github.com/codem
ouse92/timecard/. I’ve set up the packaging_example branch to contain only the
project itself and none of the packaging files, so you can practice.
   This chapter functions as an introduction to the packaging process in
general, regardless of the tool you plan to use. However, to avoid getting
lost in the weeds explaining the myriad packaging tools out there, I’ll
package Timecard using the popular setuptools package, from which we get
the majority of modern packaging patterns.
   Along the way, I’ll touch on many other common tools, including a few
popular third-party alternatives, but I won’t go into detail on most of them.
In case you want to learn more about these tools, I will link to their official
documentation for your reference. Also, if you want to go deeper into
packaging in general, one of the best resources is the community-
maintained Python Packaging User Guide at https://packaging.python.org/,
which covers a number of more advanced topics, such as packaging a
CPython binary extension.
   To make this whole idea of packaging feel less threatening to you, I’d
also like to mention that the mascot of Python packaging is a happy, purple
platypus: an odd little creature that seems to be made up of many disparate
parts, is cute and generally friendly, and can lay eggs. (That last part is a
pun you’ll likely understand by the time this chapter is over.) If you’re
feeling intimidated by packaging right now, go to https://monotreme.club/
and revel in the cuteness that is the Python Packaging mascot. They have
stickers.

Planning Your Packaging
Before you begin packaging, you need a solid idea of what you’re trying to
accomplish, why, and how. Unfortunately, very few developers recognize
this necessity and instead plunge headlong into writing their packaging
scripts, with no real direction. These ad hoc packaging schemes can suffer
from brittleness, unnecessary complexity, a lack of portability between
systems, and poor or missing dependency installation.

The Dangers of Cargo Cult Programming
In an attempt to encourage the use of good packaging tools and practices,
many well-meaning people will provide templates for the files setup.py,
setup.cfg, or others used in packaging, with advice to copy and modify the
templates. This practice, known as cargo cult programming, is widely
employed in Python packaging, to the detriment of both project and
ecosystem. Because configuration files are copied blind, errors, hacks, and
anti-patterns propagate like plague-carrying rabbits.
   A bug in packaging won’t always manifest with a failed installation or a
helpful error message. For example, a mistake in packaging a library may
instead manifest when that library is used as a dependency. Distribution is
especially pesky in this regard, as many related bugs are platform specific.
Sometimes, you’ll be able to install the package, but the program will fail in
surprising ways! Issue trackers are rife with these sorts of tickets, many of
which are unhelpfully closed with “Cannot reproduce,” perhaps because the
bug only occurs on that one version of Linux with a particular version of
that one system library.
  All that is to say, do not give in to the temptation of cargo cult
programming! While it is reasonable to start from a proven template, aim to
understand every single line of code therein. Read through the
documentation. Be certain you haven’t omitted a needed parameter the
template may have overlooked, used some deprecated option, or even
swapped the proper sequence of lines. (Yes, that last one is a thing.)
   Thankfully, the Python Packaging Authority (PyPA) working group has
done a lot to move the community away from this. The PyPA is a quasi-
official group made up of Python community members who want to make
Python packaging a better experience, and membership is open to anyone
who maintains a project. They have extensively explained the whys and
wherefores of each piece of their packaging templates and the Python
Packaging User Guide they maintain.

A Note on Packaging Opinions
As you’re about to discover, there are a plethora of ways to package and
distribute Python projects. I’ll focus primarily on the techniques advised by
the PyPA, but there are plenty of alternatives.
   Whatever packaging techniques you ultimately use, they must produce a
reasonably portable, stable, “just works” package. Your end user should be
able to run a predictable set of steps on any supported system and succeed
at running your code. While it isn’t uncommon for there to be variations in
installation instructions from one platform to the next, you want to
minimize the number of steps that your end user needs to follow. The more
steps, the more chances for errors! Keep things simple and try to respect the
recommended packaging and distribution practices for each platform. If
your end users consistently report problems or confusion when installing
your project, fix the packaging.

Determining Your Packaging Goals
Ultimately, the goal of any packaging tool is to create a single artifact,
usually a file, that can be installed on an end user’s environment, be it a
personal computer, a server, a virtual machine, or another piece of
hardware. There are a number of ways to package a project in Python for
distribution. Selecting the right way all comes down to what your project is
and who is going to be using it.
   At the PyBay2017 conference, Mahmoud Hashemi presented a talk
entitled “The Packaging Gradient” (https://youtu.be/iLVNWfPWAC8), in
which he brought a lot of clarity to the Python packaging ecosystem. (I
definitely recommend watching it.) In that talk, he introduced the concept
of the packaging gradient, which visualizes the options for Python
packaging and distribution like the layers of an onion.

Option 1: Python Modules
On the innermost layer of the packaging gradient is the Python module,
which can be distributed by itself. If your entire project consists of a single
Python module, such as some utility script, you may be able to simply
distribute that. However, as you’ve probably noticed by now, this isn’t
practical whenever there is more than one module involved in the project.
   Unfortunately, many Python developers chicken out at this point, zip up
their whole project in a compressed file (perhaps with a README file),
and leave the hapless end user to figure out how to run the package on their
particular system. Don’t do this to your users. It’s not a great experience.
Option 2: Python Distribution Packages
So far in your Python journey, you’ve installed plenty of packages with pip.
These are all provided by the Python Package Index (PyPI), an online
repository of Python packages. Each package in PyPI is in one or both of
two formats: source distribution and built distribution.
   The source distribution, or sdist, contains one or more Python packages
bundled into a compressed archive, such as a .tar.gz file. This is fine as long
as your project’s code is solely in Python and only depends on Python
packages. This is the second layer in the packaging gradient.
   The third layer in the packaging gradient is the built distribution, or bdist,
which contains precompiled Python bytecode, as well as binary files needed
for the package to run. A built distribution is faster to install than a source
distribution, and it can contain non-Python components.
   A built distribution is packaged as a wheel, a standardized format defined
in PEP 427. The name wheel refers to a wheel of cheese, which is a
reference to the “cheese shop,” the original code name for what is now
PyPI. Prior to the 2012 adoption of the wheel standard, Python unofficially
used another format called eggs, which had a number of technical
limitations that wheel overcame.
   The source distribution, and by extension, the associated built
distribution, is known as a distribution package once it has been bundled
together and versioned.
   PyPI can distribute both wheels and sdists, so it’s trivial (and thus
recommended) to upload both. If you have to choose, favor sdists. If you
were to upload only a platform wheel—a wheel built for a specific system
—and omitted the sdist, users on other systems would not be able to install
your package. Only publishing wheels also leaves out users in situations
where auditing the source code is mandatory, such as in some corporations.
Still, wheels are faster to install than sdists. Whenever you can, upload both.

Option 3: Application Distribution
There’s just one problem so far: PyPI is intended for distributing to
developers, not to end users. While it is possible to distribute an application
on PyPI, it’s not well-suited for deploying to end users or production
environments; pip is too brittle to be that reliable!
   This chapter’s example project, Timecard, is certainly a good example of
this. While providing a Python distribution package for my application
doesn’t hurt, many end users will be at a loss if I just tell them to install
from pip. I will need an additional layer in my packaging later.
   Determining the right distribution method for your application depends
largely on your project dependencies, your target environments, and the
needs of your end users. Later in this chapter, I’ll cover several good
options for distributing an application.

Project Structure: src or src-less
Before you start the process of packaging, you must decide whether to use a
src/ directory. Up to this point, all my examples in this book have used so-
called src-less (“source-less”) project structures, where the main project
package sits directly in the repository. I chose this technique in prior
chapters because of the ease of running the package via python3 -m
packagenamehere, without the need for installation.

An alternative project structure involves placing all your project modules
and scripts in a dedicated src/ directory. Python developer Ionel Cristian
Mărieș, one of the leading advocates of this approach, details several
advantages of using a src/ directory, which I can summarize:

   It simplifies maintenance of your packaging scripts.
   It keeps your packaging scripts and your project source code clearly
   separated.
   It prevents several common packaging mistakes.
   It prevents you from making assumptions about the current working
   directory.
   To test or run your package, you are forced to install your package,
   usually in a virtual environment.
   That last item may seem like a peculiar benefit. Avoiding that situation is
exactly why I didn’t introduce this technique back in Chapter 2, since it
would have been impossible to properly introduce setup.cfg and setup.py
then.
   In production-grade development, however, forcing yourself to install the
package is highly beneficial. It immediately exposes flaws in packaging,
assumptions about current working directories, and a number of related
problems and anti-patterns. I didn’t actually learn about this until
researching this book, and I deeply wish I’d discovered it sooner, as it
would have saved me many woes.
  Another benefit of that approach is that it keeps you from putting off
questions of packaging until the last step in a project. I can say from
personal experience that there is little more frustrating than building an
entire project, only to discover you cannot package anywhere but on your
own machine! Figure out packaging as early in the development process as
you can.
   For the rest of this book, and in the Timecard project in particular, I’ll use
the src/ directory approach. Even if you don’t use a dedicated src/ directory,
you should install your package in a virtual environment when you want to
test it. By the end of the next section, you’ll have done exactly that.

Packaging a Distribution Package with
setuptools
There are a lot of interesting packaging tools out there for Python, each
with its own vocal proponents, so it can be easy to get overwhelmed. When
in doubt, I recommend starting with setuptools, the de facto standard tool
for Python packaging. Even if you decide to use another packaging tool
later, many concepts from setuptools are borrowed by most of the other
packaging tools.
   The setuptools library is a fork of a Python standard library package
called distutils. In its heyday, distutils was the official standard packaging
tool (ergo, its inclusion), but as of Python 3.10, it is now deprecated in favor
of setuptools.
   To package Timecard as a distribution package, I will use the setuptools
and wheel modules, the latter of which is not installed by default. It’s good to
ensure both are up-to-date in your environment, along with pip. You can do
this with the following terminal command, inside your virtual environment:

   pip install --upgrade pip setuptools wheel

   Remember to run that inside of the virtual environment you’re using,
either by activating the virtual environment first or by directly invoking its
captive pip binary (such as venv/bin/pip).

Project Files and Structure
Here’s a quick overview of the files I’ll create for this project:

   README.md is a Markdown file with project information.
   LICENSE contains the project license.
   pyproject.toml specifies the build backend and lists build requirements
   for the package.
   setup.cfg contains distribution package metadata, options, and
   dependencies.
   setup.py used to contain packaging instructions and dependencies; now
   it just ties things together in the source distribution package.
   MANIFEST.in lists all the non-code files that should be included in the
   distribution package.
   requirements.txt lists dependencies (which are used differently from
   setup.cfg; it’s often useful to have both).

  I’ll cover each of these files in the sections to come.
   The recommendations contained herein are based partly on the latest
version of PyPA’s sample project, which you can see at https://github.com/p
ypa/sampleproject/. The rest of the information comes from the PyCon
2021 talk “Packaging Python in 2021” by Jeremiah Paige. Bernát Gábor, a
member of PyPA, generously reviewed this chapter to make sure it was up-
to-date.
Where Metadata Belongs
These days, the Python packaging ecosystem is evolving quickly, and
standards are stuck in an odd limbo between yesterday, today, and
tomorrow.
  Historically, all the metadata for your project—its title, description, and
so forth—belonged in a file called setup.py. This file also contained other
build instructions, such as dependencies to install. Even today, most Python
projects still use this convention.
   The current convention is to move all of this data into a file called
setup.cfg, which is easier to maintain by merit of being declarative,
meaning it focuses on data rather than implementation. This technique is the
one I’m using herein. The setup.py file still has an occasional role to play,
but it’s mostly relegated to legacy builds.
  In the near future, some packaging data, especially the metadata, will be
moved to a third file: pyproject.toml. This will allow for a clear separation
between the project metadata and options used by all packaging tools on the
one hand, and the setuptools-specific configuration in setup.cfg on the other
hand. As of the date of this writing, this new convention isn’t yet
implemented by some Python packaging tools, but it is expected to be very
soon. In the meantime, pyproject.toml still plays the invaluable role of
specifying what packaging tools are used.

The README.md and LICENSE Files
Every good project should have a README file, which describes the
project, its authors, and its basic usage. Nowadays, these are typically
written as Markdown files (.md), which are rendered with nice formatting
by most version control platforms, such as GitHub, GitLab, Bitbucket, and
Phorge.
   It is a significant packaging mistake to skimp on your README! I like
to put a bit of thought and time into mine, and I include (at minimum) the
following:

   A project description, written to “sell” users on the project
   A list of authors and contributors
    Basic installation instructions
    Basic usage instructions, such as how to start the program
    The technology stack I used
    How to contribute code or report an issue

   In addition, whether your code is open source or not, you should include
a LICENSE file. In the case of free and open source software, this file
should contain the complete text of the license. If you need help selecting
an open source license for your project, check out https://choosealicense.co
m/ and https://tldrlegal.com/. Otherwise, include the copyright information.
   If you prefer, you can also include the .txt file extension (LICENSE.txt)
or use Markdown (LICENSE.md).
  On occasion, I may also include such files as BUILDING.md or
INSTALL.md, to describe building (for development) or installing the
project. Whether you use these is up to you.

The setup.cfg File
When creating a distribution package ultimately intended for production,
one of the first files to create is setup.cfg, which is placed in the root of the
repository. The setup.cfg file contains all the project metadata,
dependencies, and options for setuptools, and it may be used by other
packaging tools as well.
  It may be tempting to grab a minimalist setup.cfg template, but I, like
Mahmoud Hashemi, recommend you do not wait until the last phase of your
project to start on packaging. Using a src/ directory forces you to think
about packaging early. This is one of those lessons I wish I’d learned years
ago.
   As soon as you start work on a project, create your setup.cfg file. I’ll
break down the one for Timecard in this section. This is the most important
file in your packaging scripts, so I’ll be spending a lot of time on this one
file.
  If you want to know about this file format, see the official documentation
here: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/userguide/declarative_confi
g.html.

Project Metadata
In writing the setup.cfg file for Timecard, I’ll start with the basic metadata.
The setup.cfg file is divided into sections, indicating the tool or set of
options the parameters to follow belong to. Each section is marked out with
the section name in square brackets. For example, all the metadata belongs
under the [metadata] section:

   [metadata]
   name = timecard-app

  Listing 18-1: setup.cfg:1

   All the data in a setup.cfg file is in key-value pairs. The first key here is
called name, and I pass the string value timecard-app. Notice that I didn’t need
to use quotes around the string value. (The documentation outlines the
different types setup.cfg understands and what types it expects for each
key.)
   Although my program is called Timecard, I gave the distribution package
the name “Timecard-App,” to avoid confusion with the unrelated
“Timecard” library published on PyPI. This is the name that will be used in
the pip install command. PyPI further restricts this name: it must contain
only ASCII letters and numbers, although you may include periods,
underscores, and hyphens in the name, as long as they’re not at the start or
end.
  The version must be a string following the format outlined in PEP 440, as
demonstrated here:

   version = 2.1.0

  Listing 18-2: setup.cfg:2

   In short, it must be made up of two or three integers, separated by dots:
either in the format major.minor ('3.0') or major.minor.micro ('3.2.4'). I strongly
recommend employing semantic versioning. In this case, the version of
Timecard is major version 2, minor version 0, and micro (or “patch”)
version 5.
  If you need to indicate something more in the version, such as a release
candidate, beta version, postrelease, or development version, this is
permitted using a suffix. For example, '3.1rc2' would mean “3.1, release
candidate 2.” See PEP 440 for more details on this convention.
   Tools like setuptools-scm can handle version numbers for you, which can
be helpful if you need to update them often: https://pypi.org/project/setupto
ols-scm/. I’ll stick to the manual method for this book, however.
  The description is a one-line description of the package, which I enter here
explicitly:

   description = Track time beautifully.
   long_description = file: README.md
   long_description_content_type = text/markdown; charset=UTF-8

  Listing 18-3: setup.cfg:3

   The long_description is a large multiline description, which I am deriving
directly from the contents of the README.md file. The file: prefix
indicates I’m reading from the file that follows. That file must exist in the
same directory as setup.cfg, as paths are not supported here.
   Since my README is a Markdown file, I also need to indicate that it
needs to be processed as Markdown text with UTF-8 encoding, via the
long_description_content_type keyword argument. If the README were
instead written in reStructuredText (another markup language), I’d indicate
that with the argument 'text/x-rst'. Otherwise, if this keyword argument is
omitted, it defaults to 'text/plain'. If you view my project on PyPI (https://p
ypi.org/project/Timecard-App/), you’ll see that the README.md is used as
the body of the page.
   I also include the license information. There are three ways to do that:
explicitly via a string value on the license key, via a single file with
license_file, or via multiple files with license_files. Since I only have one
license for the whole project, and that is in a LICENSE file, I’ll use the
second option:
   license_file = LICENSE

  Listing 18-4: setup.cfg:4

  Next, I’ll include more information about the project authorship:

   author = Jason C. McDonald
   author_email = codemouse92@outlook.com
   url = https://github.com/codemouse92/timecard
   project_urls =
       Bug Reports = https://github.com/codemouse92/timecard/issues
       Funding = https://github.com/sponsors/CodeMouse92
       Source = https://github.com/codemouse92/timecard

  Listing 18-5: setup.cfg:5

   I indicate the author (myself) and the contact email for the author,
author_email. In the case of this project, I’m also the project maintainer. If
someone else were responsible for the packaging, their information would
be included with the maintainer and maintainer_email keyword arguments.
   I also include the url for more information about the project. Optionally,
you can include any other links by passing a dictionary to the project_urls
argument. The keys are all strings with the link names, as they will be
displayed on the PyPI project page. The values are the actual URLs as
strings.
  To make finding my distribution package in PyPI easier, I include a
space-delimited list of keywords:

   keywords = time tracking office clock tool utility

  Listing 18-6: setup.cfg:6

   If you find yourself translating a setup.py file to a setup.cfg, be aware that
setup.py uses a comma-separated list instead. Be sure to revise it when
moving it to setup.cfg.
Classifiers
PyPI makes use of classifiers, standardized strings that facilitate organizing
and searching for packages on the index. The complete list of classifiers can
be found at https://pypi.org/classifiers/.
  I include the relevant classifiers for Timecard in my setup.cfg, like this:

   classifiers =
       Development Status :: 5 - Production/Stable
       Environment :: X11 Applications :: Qt
       Natural Language :: English
       Operating System :: OS Independent
       Intended Audience :: End Users/Desktop
       Topic :: Office/Business
       License :: OSI Approved :: BSD License
       Programming Language :: Python
       Programming Language :: Python :: 3
       Programming Language :: Python :: 3.6
       Programming Language :: Python :: 3.7
       Programming Language :: Python :: 3.8
       Programming Language :: Python :: 3 :: Only
       Programming Language :: Python :: Implementation :: CPython

  Listing 18-7: setup.cfg:7

   I’ve included all of the relevant classifiers for my project above as a list
of strings. Your project’s classifier list will likely be different. Browse the
complete classifier list from PyPI and find the ones relevant to your project.
A good rule of thumb is to pick at least one for each of the categories—the
part of each classifier before the first double colon—in the list above. (If
this task feels overwhelming, you can skip this part until you’re ready to
distribute.)

Including Packages
Now I need to specify what files belong in my package. This is where the
src/ directory approach I used in structuring my repository really comes in
handy. In a new section marked as [options], I include the following keys
and values:
   [options]

   package_dir =
       = src
   packages = ❶ find:

  Listing 18-8: setup.cfg:8a

  The package_dir key informs setuptools where to find all my packages. It
accepts a dict, which in setup.cfg is denoted as an indented, comma-
separated list of key-value pairs.
   Because I’m using the src/ directory approach, I only need to tell
setuptools that all packages, denoted by the empty string as the key, are in
the directory src. This is recursive, so any nested packages will also be
found.
   This key does not actually tell setuptools what packages it will find. For
that part, I need the packages key. Instead of manually listing all my
packages, I can tell setuptools to use its special find_packages() function by
passing the value find: ❶ (note the trailing colon!). This technique is
especially helpful when your project consists of multiple top-level
packages.
   The find: function can find all the packages in a given directory, but it has
to know where to look first. I provide that information in a separate section:

   [options.packages.find]
   where = src

  Listing 18-9: setup.cfg:9

  On the key where, I provide the name of the directory to search for
packages on, namely src.

Including Data
Not everything that ships in a package is code. I need to include some non-
code files as well. Returning to my [options] section, I indicate that
setuptools will be including some non-code files like this:
   [options]
   package_dir =
       = src
   packages = find:
   include_package_data = True

  Listing 18-10: setup.cfg:8b

  In setup.cfg, the values True and False are interpreted as boolean values,
not as strings.
  There are two ways to specify what non-code files to include. The
approach I’m taking in this project is to use the MANIFEST.in file to list all
non-code files I want included in the project. (I’ll cover this file shortly.)
   The second approach for including non-code files, which I’m not
showing here, is to use the [options.package_data] section. This gives you
finer-grained control over what is and isn’t included, but it is likely overkill
for your average project. The setuptools documentation has a good example
with this approach: https://setuptools.readthedocs.io/en/latest/userguide/dec
larative_config.html.

Dependencies
Next, I’ll define my project’s dependencies in the [options] section:

   [options]
   package_dir =
       = src
   packages = find:
   include_package_data = True
   python_requires = >=3.6, <4

  Listing 18-11: setup.cfg:8c

   I can specify the version of Python that the project requires, using
python_requires in place of a package name. Notice the key and value are still
separated by an equal sign, even though the value may also start with an
equal, greater-than, or less-than sign. Something like python_requires = ==3.8
is completely valid, as the ==3.8 is a string.
  I denote that Timecard requires Python 3.6 or later. I also assume it won’t
work with the theoretical Python 4, since major releases of Python aren’t
guaranteed to be backward compatible.
  Next, I’ll list the packages that my project depends on:

   [options]
   package_dir =
       = src
   packages = find:
   include_package_data = True
   python_requires = >=3.6, <4
   install_requires =
       PySide2>=5.15.0
       appdirs>=1.4.4

  Listing 18-12: setup.cfg:8d

   The install_requires key expects an indented list of values. Each value in
the list specifies a Python package dependency. Timecard relies on the
PySide2 library and uses features introduced in version 5.15.0 of that library.
Technically, I could have omitted the version and merely listed PySide2, but
that is often a bad idea. It’s better to test the different versions and
determine the oldest one your code will work with. You can always set this
to the version you are currently using and change it later.
  I could also require certain packages only for particular versions of
Python. I don’t need this behavior in this example, but here’s what it might
look like if I wanted to install PySide2 only for Python 3.7 and earlier:

   install_requires =
       PySide2>=5.15.0; python_requires <= "3.7"
       appdirs>=1.4.4

   After a semicolon at the end of the dependency I want to limit, I include
python_requires, a comparison operator, and the version in quotes. The quotes
are necessary, or you’ll get a cryptic Expected stringEnd error.
  In practice, it is seldom necessary to only install packages for certain
versions of Python.
   Optionally, I can use the [options.extras_require] section to specify
additional packages used for certain optional features. For example, if I
wanted to allow installing this distribution package with tests, I’d need the
following:

   [options.extras_require]
   test =
       pytest

  Listing 18-13: setup.cfg:10

   When I install Timecard via pip install Timecard-App[test], it will install
both the Timecard distribution package and everything I listed under test
here. You can name the keys whatever you like, as long as you use
alphanumeric characters and underscores. You can also include as many
keys as you like.

Adding Entry Points
Lastly, I need to specify the entry points, the means by which a user starts
the program. Instead of having to write custom executable Python scripts to
serve as entry points, I can let setuptools do this for me. It will even create
these scripts as .exe files on Windows.
  Entry points are specified in the section [options.entry_points], like this:

   [options.entry_points]
   gui_scripts =
       Timecard-App = timecard.__main__:main

  Listing 18-14: setup.cfg:11

   There are two possible keys here: 'gui_scripts', for starting the program’s
GUI, and 'console_scripts', for starting the command-line version of the
program. The value of each is a list of strings containing assignment
statements, which assign a particular function to a name that will be the
name of the executable file or script. In this case, Timecard needs a single
GUI script named Timecard-App, which calls the main() function in the
module timecard/__main__.py.
The setup.py File
Before setup.cfg became the convention, most projects used setup.py to
store their project’s metadata and build instructions. All the information
now provided to setup.cfg was instead passed directly to the
setuptools.setup() function as keyword arguments.

   The setup.py file is a Python module like any other, so using it for
packaging configuration is considered imperative—it focuses on how
packaging takes place. This stands in contrast to the data-centric (and more
error-proof) declarative approach with setup.cfg.
   One difficulty with this approach was that folks tended to get clever
about their setup configurations. All manner of unrelated functionality crept
in: scraping versions from files, creating git tags, publishing to PyPI, and so
on. This ran the risk of introducing confusing bugs into the packaging
process, which is already particularly hard to debug and could utterly block
someone else’s packaging efforts. This has happened to me before!
   Thankfully, in many modern projects, setup.py is no longer needed at all;
setup.cfg can be used for all setuptools configurations instead.
   However, if your project needs good backward compatibility, uses C-
extensions, or requires tools that depend on setup.py, you will want to
include the following minimal setup.py file:

   from setuptools import setup
   setup()

  Listing 18-15: setup.py

   That file merely imports the setup() function from the setuptools module
and calls it. In the past, all the packaging data would have been passed to
setup() as keyword arguments, but now, that all lives in setup.cfg.

   No shebang line is necessary in this file; let the build tools find the
interpreter they want to use.
The MANIFEST.in File
The manifest template, MANIFEST.in, provides a list of all the non-code
files that should be included in the distribution package. These files can
come from anywhere in your repository.

   include LICENSE *.md

  Listing 18-16: MANIFEST.in:1

   Since my setup files are using the README.md and LICENSE files, I
must include them here. I can list any number of files after an include
directive, separating each with spaces. Manifest templates also support glob
patterns, wherein I can use an asterisk (*) as a wildcard. For example, *.md
matches all Markdown files, so any markdown files in the root of my
repository, including README.md, are automatically included.
   I also want to include all the files in the directories
src/timecard/resources/ and distribution_resources/:

   graft src/timecard/resources
   graft distribution_resources

  Listing 18-17: MANIFEST.in:2

  The graft keyword includes all files that are in the specified directories
and below. The distribution_resources/ directory is where I keep OS-
specific installation files for this particular project.
   There are a few more important directives, which I’m not using for
Timecard. Here’s a more complex example with a different MANIFEST.in
file (not belonging to my Timecard project):

   recursive-include stuff *.ini
   graft data
   prune data/temp
   recursive-exclude data/important *.scary

   In this example, I add all files under the stuff/ directory that have the .ini
file extension. Next, I include the entire data/ directory with the graft
directive. The prune directive then goes back and excludes all files in the
data/temp/ subdirectory. I also exclude all files in data/important/ that have
the .scary file extension. None of the excluded files are deleted, but they are
left out of the package.
   The order of lines in the manifest template matters. Each subsequent
directive adds to or removes from the list of files compiled by the prior
lines. If you were to move the prune directive above the graft directive, the
files in data/temp/ would not be excluded!
   Your manifest template will be used by setuptools to compile a
MANIFEST file, which contains a complete list of all the non-code files
being included in your distribution package. While you could theoretically
write this MANIFEST file yourself, listing one file per line, this is strongly
discouraged, as it’s easier to mess up the MANIFEST file than the
MANIFEST.in file. Trust setuptools to follow the directives you give it in
the manifest template.
   There are a few more directives and patterns that you can use in
MANIFEST.in. Check out https://packaging.python.org/guides/using-manife
st-in/ for more information.

The requirements.txt File
You may remember this file from Chapter 2. The requirements.txt file
contains a list of Python packages that your project depends on. This
probably sounds like its duplicating install_requires from setup.cfg, but I
usually recommend that you use both, for reasons I’ll describe shortly.
  Here’s the requirements.txt for Timecard:

   PySide2 >= 5.11.0
   pytest

  Listing 18-18: requirements.txt

   You may wonder if there is a way to use the contents of requirements.txt
in setup.cfg, but in fact, it’s best if you keep the two separate. In practice,
they serve slightly different purposes.
   While the requirements listed in setup.cfg include everything you need to
install your distribution package, the requirements.txt file is best thought of
as a list of everything you need to re-create the complete development
environment—all the optional packages and development tools needed to
participate in developing your project, as opposed to merely using it.
   Under some circumstances, you may omit requirements.txt if you list all
your development dependencies as optional dependencies. The other benefit
of using requirements.txt, however, is the ability to use a specific version of
a library or tool—called pinning—for development, while enforcing looser
version requirements for your users via setup.cfg. For example, your
application might require click >= 7.0, but you’re developing the new
version to use click == 8.0.1 in particular. Pinning is mainly useful for
application development. If you’re developing a library, it’s best to avoid
pinning, since you can’t really make good assumptions about the package
versions that a user of your library will need.
  Another major benefit of having a requirements.txt file is that, as
mentioned in Chapter 2, you can quickly install everything needed for
development in one step:

   pip install -r requirements.txt

   I still recommend you keep requirements.txt to the things that your
project truly needs, especially when versions matter. You generally
wouldn’t include tools like black or flake8, which can be swapped out for
other tools without breaking anything. Sometimes, I’ll create a separate
dev-requirements.txt file (or requirements.dev.txt, if you prefer) with all of
my optional development tools. Then, to set up my complete environment
in a virtual environment, I’ll only need to run the following:

   pip install -r requirements.txt -r dev-requirements.txt

  If you have quite a number of packages installed in your working virtual
environment, it can be a pain to try to turn this into a requirements.txt file.
To aid you in this, you can use the command pip freeze to generate a
complete list, with versions, of all packages installed in the environment.
Then, you can redirect the contents into a file:
   venv/bin/pip freeze > requirements.txt

  That command works the same on Windows, macOS, and Linux,
exporting the complete list of packages installed within venv/, dependencies
and all, to the file requirements.txt. Be sure to inspect that file for errors and
remove your own package from it—it wouldn’t make sense for your
package to rely on itself.
   If you want both requirements.txt and dev-requirements.txt, you’ll want
to pip freeze on two separate virtual environments: one that runs your
package, and the other that contains your complete development
environment. In both cases, inspect the output file and remove your own
package from it!

The pyproject.toml File
The pyproject.toml file serves a few purposes, but the most important is to
specify the build system used to package your project, a standard introduced
in PEP 517 and PEP 518.

   [build-system]
   requires = ["setuptools>=40.8.0", "wheel"]
   build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

  Listing 18-19: pyproject.toml

   The [build-system] section contains information about what packages are
needed for building the distribution package: in this case, setuptools and
wheel. These requirements are specified by assigning a list of strings to
requires, with each string following the same convention as install_requires in
setup.py. You’ll notice here that I can use any version of wheel, but I must
use version 40.8.0 or later of setuptools. The latter is necessary since it is the
first version of setuptools that supports PEP 517 and PEP 518.
  The build-backend property specifies the scheme used for building the
project, in this case, setuptools.build_meta. If you were using a different build
tool, such as Poetry or Flit, you’d specify that here, according to the tool’s
documentation.
   The pyproject.toml file is also one of the common files for storing Python
tool configurations. Many of the major linters, autoformatters, and testing
tools (albeit not all of them) support their configurations being stored in this
file.
   PEP 518 introduced the pyproject.toml file for project configuration, but
it can increasingly be used to store tool configuration as well, thereby
cutting down on the number of files in a project. There is heated debate
about adding support for pyproject.toml to some prominent tools like
Flake8. It’s not as straightforward as it looks. If you really want Flake8 and
pyproject.toml to play well together, check out Flake9, a fork of Flake8 that
accomplishes just that.

Testing the Setup Configuration
If everything has been configured correctly, you’ll be able to install your
project in a virtual environment. I’ll do that now, using the following
command (assuming I have a fresh virtual environment called venv):

   venv/bin/pip install .

   I particularly recommend testing this out in a fresh virtual environment
the first time. The trailing dot installs whatever package is detailed by the
setup.cfg file in the current directory.
   Watch the output when you install and correct any warnings or errors.
Once your package is installed successfully, try to run your project using
the entry point(s) you specified in the setup.cfg, which should be installed
as executables in the bin/ directory of the virtual environment. I’d run the
following:

   venv/bin/Timecard-App

  If your project is a library, rather than an application, open the Python
shell within the virtual environment (venv/bin/python) and import the library.
Troubleshooting
Take the time to test out your project now. Does everything work as
expected? Most packaging and distribution tools depend on this instance
working correctly! If you encounter any new bugs or errors, go back and fix
them. A few common causes of problems appearing only in a virtual-
environment installation of your project include the following:

   Missing dependencies that need to be added to setup.cfg
   Data files not being included correctly via the MANIFEST.in or
   setup.cfg files
   False assumptions in your code about the current working directory

   Once you have your distribution package installed and working in a
virtual environment, you’re ready to move on to the next step!

Installing as Editable
In some circumstances, it can be useful to install your project in editable
mode, so the virtual environment will directly use the source code files in
src/. Any changes made to the code will immediately be reflected in the test
installation.
  To install in editable mode, supply the -e flag to pip, like this:

   venv/bin/pip install -e .

   Installing your package in editable mode makes testing and development
a lot easier, as you don’t have to reinstall the package each time. However,
it’s not without its drawbacks. Installing in editable mode can make it
possible for the virtual environment to find external packages and modules
that were not explicitly required in setup.cfg, thereby covering up
packaging problems. Only use -e for testing your code, not your packaging.
Building Your Package
Once you’ve ensured that your setup.cfg and related files are configured
correctly, it’s time to build your source distribution and wheel artifacts. Run
the following commands in your terminal, from the root of your project’s
repository.

   python3 -m pip install --upgrade setuptools wheel build
   python3 -m build

   The installation command ensures that setuptools, wheel, and build are
installed and up-to-date in the current environment.
   The next command builds according to whatever build-backend is specified
in pyproject.toml. In this case, the project will be built with setuptools,
applying the configuration in the setup.cfg file in the current directory. This
command builds a source distribution, or sdist, and a built distribution or
wheel.

                                    PEDANTIC NOTE
  If you need to build your project for Python 2 or a very old Python 3—such that you’re using
  either an old version of setuptools that doesn’t support PEP 517 and PEP 518 or the deprecated
  distutils—you’ll need to use the old-style setup.py and invoke that directly with python -m
  setup.py sdist bdist_wheel.

   The two artifacts are saved in the newly created dist/ directory: the .tar.gz
is your source distribution, and the .whl is the build distribution wheel.
   There are a few other commands available for build, which you will find
in the documentation: https://pypa-build.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
   Alternatively, if you’re only using the default invocation of build, you can
just run pyproject-build.

Publishing on pip (Twine)
From here, you’re ready to publish your distribution package! In this
section, I’ll do exactly that with Timecard.
Uploading to Test PyPI
Before you upload your project to the official PyPI index, test everything
out one more time via Test PyPI, which is an altogether separate index
specifically for testing out the tools. If you’re experimenting, you’re
welcome to use Test PyPI. Packages and user accounts are periodically
pruned, so don’t worry if you leave a bit of a mess.
   To upload to the index, you must first create an account at https://test.pyp
i.org/account/register/. If you had one a while back but it’s not working
now, don’t worry; as part of the regular pruning, old accounts are deleted.
You can safely make a new one.
   Once you’re logged in, go to Account settings and scroll down to API
tokens. Select Add API Token. You can name this token whatever you
like, but be certain you set Scope to Entire account if you’re uploading a
new project.
   After creating the API token, you must save the entire token (including
the leading pypi-) before leaving the page, as it will never be shown again.
You’ll need this token in the next step.
   By the way, you can always delete tokens from the Account settings
page. Do this any time you no longer remember the token or have no need
of it anymore.
  I’ll upload my Timecard-App distribution package to Test PyPI. (You’ll
need to try uploading a package with a different name; Timecard-App will
be taken by the time you read this.) For this step, I use a package called
twine, which I install to my user environment:

   python3 -m pip install --upgrade twine

  I use twine to upload the artifacts from my project’s dist/ directory:

   twine upload --repository testpypi dist/*

  Notice I’ve explicitly specified that I’m uploading to the testpypi
repository, which twine knows about by default.
   When prompted, enter the username __token__ and use your API key
from earlier as the password:

   Enter your username: __token__
   Enter your password: (your API token here)

  Watch the terminal output carefully for any errors or warnings. If you
need to make any corrections to your project or its packaging files, be
certain to delete the dist/ directory and cleanly rebuild the sdist and
bdist_wheel artifacts before trying to upload again.
   If all goes well, you will be given a URL where you can see your
distribution package on Test PyPI. Make sure everything on that page looks
correct.

                                  PEDANTIC NOTE
 As you may have noticed, pip works with more than just the default PyPI. If you need to, you
 can run your own Python package repository using devpi (https://devpi.net/) or your own PyPI
 mirror with Bandersnatch (https://bandersnatch.readthedocs.io/).

Installing Your Uploaded Package
Next, make sure you can install your distribution package from Test PyPI in
a fresh virtual environment. I’ll do that now with my Timecard-App
distribution package.
   For the next step to work, I’ll need to manually install the dependencies
for my package. This is one of the reasons I have a separate
requirements.txt file:

   venv/bin/pip install -r requirements.txt

  Now, I can install the package itself. Because this is a particularly long
command, I’m splitting it up UNIX-style, with the backslash character (\):

   venv/bin/pip install \
       --index-url https://test.pypi.org/simple/ \
        --no-deps/ \
        Timecard-App

   Because I’m testing the distribution package I uploaded to Test PyPI,
rather than the regular PyPI, I have to explicitly tell pip to use that as the
source repository, which I do with the --index-url argument. However, I
don’t want to install any of the package dependencies from test.pypi.org—
they might be missing, broken, malicious copycats, or otherwise wrong—so
I pass the --no-deps flag. Finally, I specify that I’m installing the distribution
package Timecard-App.

                                     GOTCHA ALERT
  Don’t get the idea that you can somehow get the dependency packages from the normal PyPI
  using the --extra-index-url argument you may have read about somewhere. If a package
  appears in both the main index and the extra index or indices you specify, Python isn’t always
  predictable about which one it picks.

   If all went well, I should be able to invoke Timecard-App within that
virtual environment:

   venv/bin/Timecard-App

   I try it out as before, to make sure everything works as expected, and it
does! At this point, I’d want to try it out on other machines to ensure it
functions as expected. I can use the pip install command from a moment
ago to install this distribution package on any machine that’s connected to
the internet.

Uploading to PyPI
Once I’m certain that Timecard-App is ready for prime time, I can repeat
the entire upload process with PyPI at https://pypi.org/: create a user
account (if necessary), log in, create an API key, and finally upload with
this:

   twine upload dist/*
  The official PyPI is the default target, so once that upload completes,
you’ll be given a new URL: the one for your project on the PyPI.
Congratulations! You can now share this link exuberantly. You’ve shipped
software!

Alternative Packaging Tools
As you can see, pip, setuptools, wheel, and twine do a pretty good job these
days, but there are a lot of steps and details to using them. There are a
couple of alternative tools you may benefit from learning on your own.

Poetry
If you only learn one of these alternative tools, make it this one!
  Instead of using four different tools, some Python developers prefer
Poetry, which handles everything from dependency management to
building and publishing your distribution package. Absolutely all of the
packaging configuration, from dependencies to metadata, goes into
pyproject.toml.
  Learning how to use Poetry is easy because it has excellent, succinct
documentation, which is especially clear if you’re already somewhat
familiar with setuptools. Information, installation instructions, and
documentation can all be found at https://python-poetry.org/.

Flit
Flit is a tool that focuses on making the easy packaging scenarios easier—
namely, by building and publishing pure Python distribution packages—and
leaving the hard stuff for other, more complex tools to handle. It uses a few
simple commands to handle building and publishing your distribution
package. Many of the ideas from Flit have trickled into other tools and
workflows.
  The official documentation is the best place to find more information
about Flit: https://flit.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html.
Distributing to End Users
There is still one leg of the journey to go before you reach your goal of
being able to distribute software to end users. Installing via pip is not a
good means of distributing your software to end users, for two reasons.
First, most users don’t know anything about pip. Second, pip was never
intended to deploy software in that manner. There are too many things that
could go wrong when installing from PyPI, all of which would require the
intervention of a Python developer well-versed in the ways of pip. To ship
software to non-developers, you need a more robust, user-oriented solution.
  Mahmoud Hashemi describes layers of the packaging gradient for
shipping to an end user. I’ve adapted them here:

 1. PEX: Uses system-wide Python.
 2. Freezers: Includes Python.
 3. Images and containers: Includes most or all system dependencies.
 4. Virtual machines: Includes kernel, the “heart” of the operating system.
 5. Hardware: Includes . . . well, everything!

  Let’s look at each of these options in a little more depth and consider
which would be appropriate for Timecard.

PEX
The lowest-level option for distributing a stand-alone artifact—one that
doesn’t need to be installed from pip—is a format called PEX (short for
Python Executable). It allows you to package an entire virtual environment
as a stand-alone file, which is essentially a neatly structured .zip file. This
PEX file then relies on the Python interpreter provided by whatever system
it’s being run on. Once you have a PEX, you can distribute it to anyone on
Mac or Linux who has Python installed.
   PEX is far from intuitive, in terms of usage. It’s easy enough to turn a
virtual environment into a PEX, but actually specifying a script to run on
execution takes a bit more work. What’s more, PEX only works on Mac or
Linux, so it’s not a viable option if you need to distribute on Windows.
   Since PEX is oriented toward developers, it’s definitely not a good fit for
distributing Timecard. If you want to learn more about PEX, read their
documentation at https://pex.readthedocs.io/. Alex Leonhardt also has an
excellent article about PEX (https://medium.com/ovni/pex-python-executabl
es-c0ea39cee7f1) that is considerably easier to digest than the
documentation.

Freezers
The most portable means by far of packaging and distributing a Python
application is with a freezer, which bundles the compiled Python code, the
Python interpreter, and all the package dependencies into a single artifact.
With some freezers, system dependencies are included as well. The benefit
of all this is that you wind up with a single executable file in the target
system’s preferred format, at the cost of an increased artifact size (usually
by about 2–12 MB).
  Far and away, this is one of the most common ways of distributing
Python applications. It’s used by such programs as Dropbox and Eve
Online.
   There are a number of freezers in existence, but the three most common
at present are PyInstaller, cx_Freeze, and py2app. If you’re building GUI-
based applications with the Qt 5 toolkit, fman Build System is another great
option. Yet another option is py2exe, although it is presently unmaintained.

PyInstaller
My personal favorite freezer is PyInstaller. It has the particular advantage of
working on all major operating systems. Although you will need to run
PyInstaller separately on each of the targeted environments, you will
seldom need to configure it more than once.
   There is quite a bit to learn about PyInstaller. You’ll find extensive
guidance for its use, as well as how to handle various errors and tricky
situations, in the official documentation: https://pyinstaller.readthedocs.io/.
PyOxidizer
One of the newer kids on the block is PyOxidizer. It’s a promising-looking
cross-platform tool for converting your project into a single executable file,
bundled with the Python interpreter. The focus is on ensuring it remains
easy to package, distribute, and install the end product.
   Complete documentation, as well as a breakdown of what gives
PyOxidizer an advantage over other tools, can be found at https://pyoxidize
r.readthedocs.io/en/stable/index.html.

py2app
If you only want to package your project for macOS, py2app is a great
option. It works off your project’s setup.py file and freezes down into a
single .app file.
  To learn more about py2app, see the official documentation at https://py2
app.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial.html.

cx_Freeze
Another option for freezing your project is cx_Freeze, a cross-platform tool
for building on Windows, Mac, and Linux. It’s quite a bit older than
PyInstaller, but it still works well. If you’re having trouble with PyInstaller
or py2app, try this one.
  Information and documentation can be found at https://cx_freeze.readthe
docs.org/.

fman Build System
If you’re building a GUI-based application using the Qt 5 library—
Timecard is one such application—you can build and package your project
once for all operating systems with fman Build System. Unlike other tools, it
even creates an executable installer on Windows, a .dmg on macOS, a .deb
package on Debian-based Linux, an .rpm on Fedora-based Linux, and a
.tar.xz for everyone else.
  The fman freezer requires you to set up your project in a particular
manner, so if you want to use it, you’ll have the best results if you use it
from the start of your project. Otherwise, you’ll need to restructure it
according to what fman Build System needs (which is why Timecard
doesn’t use it).
  You can find more information, a great tutorial, and the complete
documentation at https://build-system.fman.io/.

Nuitka
I mentioned back in Chapter 1 that the Nuitka compiler allows you to
transpile Python code to C and C++ and then assemble that down to
machine code. Nuitka is practically a separate implementation, and the end-
result executable is about two times faster than CPython.
  As of the date of this writing, Nuitka has reached feature parity with
Python 3.8. They’re working on adding 3.9+ features and further
optimization. In any case, this is an exciting project to watch.
   If you want truly “compiled” Python code, this is the tool you’re looking
for. More information and documentation are available at https://nuitka.net/
pages/overview.html.

Images and Containers
All the packaging options I’ve covered up to this point are limited by a
common factor: what system libraries are installed on the user’s machine.
It’s possible to bundle some of these libraries, such as is seen with
PyInstaller, but those are still subject to their own dependencies, some of
which cannot be bundled. When you start getting into more complex
applications, this can become a tricky problem to solve.
  This becomes particularly difficult when distributing on Linux. With so
many Linux-based operating systems (each with multiple versions) and
countless combinations of packages, building once for all can be a royal
pain. The solution is found in containers, which are self-contained
environments that bring all their own dependencies. Multiple applications
can be installed on the system, each in its own container, and it won’t
matter if they have different or even conflicting dependencies.
  Another advantage of using containers is sandboxing, which limits the
containerized application’s access to the system. This provides transparency
and control to users: they know what privileges any given container has,
and in many cases, they can control those privileges.
  At present, there are four major containers: Flatpak, Snapcraft,
Appimage, and Docker. Each one has unique advantages.

Flatpak
Flatpak allows you to package an application as a standalone unit that can
be installed on virtually any Linux environment, as well as Chrome OS. It is
highly forward compatible, meaning your package will continue to work
even on as-yet unreleased versions of operating systems that support
Flatpak. It is not a container in the strictest sense, but it functions similarly.
Even so, installed Flatpaks can share some dependencies they might have in
common.
   One of the reasons I particularly like Flatpak is that you can select or
build each of the dependencies or components you need. I can know that if
my Flatpak works on my machine, it will work on others. The extra degree
of control and predictability it provides makes it easier to work with snarly
packaging scenarios in Python.
   Flatpak also has its own app store, Flathub, which makes it easy for end
users to browse and install applications on their Linux machines. For more
information about and complete documentation on Flatpak, see their official
website: https://flatpak.org/.
  You can see how I packaged Timecard with Flatpak here: https://github.c
om/flathub/com.codemouse92.timecard.

Snapcraft
The Snapcraft format, maintained by Canonical (the company behind the
Ubuntu operating system), packages your application into a dedicated
container with its own filesystem. It is sandboxed from the rest of the
system, accessing and sharing as little as possible. Because of its structure,
you can build snaps from any development environment, including
Windows and macOS, although you cannot install snaps in those
environments. Snapcraft also has its own associated app store, the Snap
Store.
   Unfortunately, the footprint of an installed snap can be quite large, as it
brings everything for each container, excepting the kernel and a handful of
core dependencies; it does not share dependencies between snaps. It also
can be difficult to give a snap the correct permissions for many user
applications to function. Due to these and other criticisms, some Linux
environments have dropped their official support for Snapcraft.
  Despite all this, Snapcraft is still a viable container format with a fairly
loyal following. You can learn more about the format and find complete
documentation at https://snapcraft.io/.

AppImage
The AppImage format provides self-contained executables that don’t require
anything, including themselves, to be installed. In many ways, an
AppImage behaves like a macOS application. Unlike Flatpak and Snapcraft,
AppImage requires no infrastructure on the target system, although the user
may choose to use appimaged to automate registering AppImages with the
system.
   AppImage is intended to be decentralized, allowing you to provide your
own download to the end user. You can even issue updates to your package
by integrating AppImageUpdate. Technically, AppImage does have an app
store of sorts, AppImageHub, where you can browse through many of the
apps that are packaged in the format. New apps are added via a pull request
against the store on GitHub.
   The sole disadvantage of AppImage is that you need to test your package
against every Linux distribution you plan to support. Your package can rely
on existing system libraries, and in fact, it must do so for a few essentials
like libc (the C language standard library, which is used by nearly
everything). As a result, this can create a “works on my machine” scenario,
where the AppImage may be implicitly relying on a system library and then
may fail when run on another Linux system that lacks that library.
   To achieve that same aim, it is recommended you build your AppImage
on the oldest environment you want to support, as it collects and bundles
libraries from the current environment itself. AppImages are pretty decently
forward compatible, but they’re not intended to be backward compatible.
  Still, if you don’t mind working with some extra environments,
AppImage can be a fantastic way to distribute your software to any Linux
machine, without any other infrastructure being required. More information
about the format and complete documentation can be found at https://appim
age.org/.

Docker
In modern software development parlance, Docker is usually the first thing
that people think of when they hear “container.” It allows you to define a
custom environment, bringing everything except the kernel. This is the one
format out of the four I’m covering that will work on Windows and macOS,
in addition to Linux.
  Docker is primarily geared toward deploying on servers, rather than for
user applications, as it requires quite a bit of setup on the target machine.
Once Docker is configured, it’s relatively trivial to launch an image. This
makes it ideal for distributing server applications.
   Because a Docker image is a fully self-contained environment, it’s easy
to create one for your project. You start by defining a Dockerfile, which
outlines the steps for building the image. You start with a base image, such
as one for a particular operating system, and you install all the packages and
dependencies you need. You can even install via pip in the context of the
Dockerfile. Docker converts the Dockerfile into an image, which can be
uploaded to a registry like Docker Hub and then downloaded onto the client
machine.
   Complete information and exhaustive documentation can be found at http
s://www.docker.com/.

A Note on Native Linux Packaging
Linux users will notice that I haven’t touched native Debian or Fedora
packaging at all. These packaging formats are still relevant, but
decreasingly so as more portable formats like the preceding gain in
adoption. Both Debian and Fedora packaging can be particularly difficult,
while offering few, if any, advantages over portable formats.
   In case this sounds faddish, I assure you that I have been among the
slowest to consider Flatpak, Snapcraft, and Appimage as viable alternatives
to my beloved Debian packages. The difference in end user experience is
slightly improved in these newer portable formats, but more importantly,
the developer experience is significantly better. All three leverage varying
degrees of sandboxing, in a manner similar to virtual environments and in
stark contrast to native packaging formats, where one must be concerned
with the exact versions of dependencies on each end user machine. What’s
more, while portable packaging formats generally play well with virtual
environments and PyPI, native packaging formats seldom do, especially
when used in full compliance with the standards and policies of the
distribution’s package repositories.
  If you want to package your Python project using Debian or Fedora
packaging, you can certainly do so. Tools like dh-virtualenv can help! Still,
be prepared for a battle if your project has any significant dependencies.
Before you try to distribute your project in any native packaging format, be
absolutely certain that portable packaging formats will not suffice. This is a
decision only you can make.

Documentation
Every project needs documentation, and yes, that includes yours. The best
code in the world means nothing if the end user doesn’t know how to install
and use it!
  In the case of particularly small projects, a single README.md may be
sufficient, so long as it is easily discoverable by users. For anything more
robust, you need a better solution.
  The historic answer to documentation in Python was the built-in module
pydoc, but over the past several years, this has been utterly eclipsed by
Sphinx. Nearly all documentation in the Python world, including the official
documentation for Python itself, is built with Sphinx. In fact, while Sphinx
was originally built for Python projects, its robust feature set and ease of
use has led to its wide adoption across the entire programming industry.
  Sphinx builds the documentation using a markup language called
reStructuredText, abbreviated as reST. While a bit more complex and
exacting than Markdown, reST is packed full of powerful features for even
the most complicated technical writing. The end result can be exported to
HTML, PDF, ePUB, Linux man pages, and many other formats.
  Your project’s documentation belongs in a separate directory,
conventionally named docs/, in the project repository. If you have the sphinx
package installed in your environment—usually, your development virtual
environment—you can build the basic file structure and configuration by
running the following command:

   venv/bin/sphinx-quickstart

   You will be guided through several questions. For most things, I
recommend using the defaults, displayed in square brackets ([ ]) at each
prompt, until you know better.
   For most of your documentation, you will write your own
reStructuredText (.rst) files by hand, saving them in this docs/ directory.
There is no replacement for handwritten documentation! Expecting a user
to learn your software purely from API documentation is like teaching
someone to use a toaster by explaining the electrical specifications of the
heating element.
   At the same time, in some projects, especially libraries, it is useful to pull
in the docstrings from your code. This is possible with Sphinx as well,
using its autodoc feature.
   The best way to get started with Sphinx and reStructuredText, including
the autodoc feature, is to read the official Quick Start Guide at https://www.
sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/quickstart.html. That website also provides
the rest of the Sphinx documentation.
   When you’re getting ready to release your project, you will almost
certainly want to publish your documentation online. For open source
projects, one of the easiest ways to do this is to sign up for a free account on
Read the Docs. That service specifically works with Sphinx and
reStructuredText, and it can automatically update your documentation from
your repository. For more information and to sign up, visit https://readthedo
cs.org/.
Wrapping Up
When you’re getting ready to start a project, consider how you want to
handle packaging. There are a lot of options for packaging and distributing
Python applications, so that leaves the question of which tools to use. As the
developer of your own project, you’re the only person who can ultimately
determine the best packaging scheme for your situation. If you’re
completely lost, here’s my own opinion.
   First, I strongly recommend using a src/ directory for your code. It makes
everything else easier. Then, get your project set up so you can install it in a
virtual environment with pip. Personally, I use setuptools, although both
Poetry and Flit are excellent options; use whichever you like more.
   If you’re developing a library or command-line tool for other Python
developers to use, plan to publish it to the PyPI. If your project is an end
user application or command-line program, I recommend packaging it into
a stand-alone artifact using a tool like PyInstaller. For Linux distribution, I
also strongly recommend creating a Flatpak. If you’re building a server
application, on the other hand, I recommend packaging it into a Docker
image.
    The last level of the packaging gradient is to deploy your project
embedded on hardware. There are countless ways to do this, but some of
the more popular options include single-board computers like Arduino and
Raspberry Pi. This is a deep enough topic that entire books are dedicated to
it. In Chapter 21, I’ll refer you to some resources for further study in this
arena.
   Once again, these are my opinions, based on my own adventures in
Python packaging. Regardless, remember that all these tools exist for a
reason, and something that works well for my projects may not be suitable
for yours. As I said at the start of this chapter, whatever packaging
techniques you ultimately use, they should produce a reasonably portable,
stable, “just works” package.
