                                    21
         THE PARTING OF THE WAYS

             You’ve reached an important milestone
             on your programming journey: you now
             know Python! You’ve become familiar
             with the syntax and patterns, and
you’ve learned how to structure, design, and ship
production-quality software in the Python language.
Equipped with this foundational knowledge, you’ll
be able to understand the official documentation and
even participate in the pedantic discussions so
common among Python developers.
   However, there is a profound difference between knowing a language and
mastering it. Only by writing real-world code can you truly think in Python.
If you’ve been working on an actual project while reading this book, you
may already have reached this milestone. Otherwise, your next step is quite
simple and yet incredibly complicated: go build something!
  “Yes, but what?” you might say. “I know how Python works now, but
what can I really make with it?”
   You’re at a crossroads. From here, you can go in many directions. In this
chapter, I’ll point out several of the best-traveled roads and suggest further
resources for the next leg of your journey, whatever that may be. Finally,
I’ll show you how to get plugged into the Python community as a whole.
About the Future
Python is under perpetual development. Each version brings new features,
and each new feature typically starts life as a PEP, which can stem from
conversations anywhere in the community. From there, the PEP may be
debated, adjusted, reworked, and ultimately either accepted or rejected.
   Due to the nature of software development, not all changes to the
language are smooth. When a package is under consideration for addition to
the standard library, it may be marked as a provisional package or
provisional API, meaning it may change at any time, without regard to
backward compatibility. The documentation will warn you of provisional
packages, according to the rules outlined in PEP 411.
   On occasion, when a feature is slated to be released in a later version of
Python but the core developers want to allow users of the language to test a
preview version in live code in advance, the feature will be added to a
special module called __future__. The upcoming feature can be imported
from that module and used as if it had already been made part of the
language. As of the date of this writing, there’s only one upcoming feature
in __future__: postponed evaluation of annotations (PEP 563), which is a
feature of Python 3.10.
   If you want an insider’s view of possible new features and the future of
the language, sign up for the official forums at https://discuss.python.org/
and subscribe to the python-dev mailing list at https://mail.python.org/mailma
n3/lists/python-dev.python.org/.

Where Do You Go from Here?
Python’s versatility is a key reason it remains one of the most popular
programming languages. Yet it’s essential to remember: you cannot learn
everything, nor should you attempt it! Programming is not like riding a
bike. Knowledge, once gained, must be regularly practiced or it will be lost.
   The better route is to find a problem that you care about solving and
build a solution for it. The purpose of this section is to give you a sampling
of the sorts of problems Python is commonly used to solve.
  The future is in your hands. What will you build?

Application Development in Python
I personally enjoy building GUI-based user applications in Python. Whether
you’re developing for the desktop or mobile, Python is a great language for
application development because of its intuitive syntax and wide selection
of frameworks.
   Even in this internet age, desktop and mobile applications still have a
firm place in the market. Services like Spotify and Dropbox provide client
applications (both written in Python!) with additional device integration.
Desktop applications are still reliable workhorses in many fields and
workflows, from graphics design to data visualization. They are also in a
position to fully utilize system resources and hardware in ways that may be
more challenging in the browser.
  There are a number of GUI frameworks available for Python, including
Tkinter, the Python binding for the Tk framework. It’s one of the easiest
GUI frameworks to pick up, but its default graphics style is noticeably
outdated. Tkinter is included in the Python standard library, although some
Linux distributions distribute it as a separate package.

                                    GOTCHA ALERT
 If you want to use Tkinter on macOS 10.6 through at least 10.14, you’ll need to install a newer
 version of Python than the one that ships with the operating system. There are serious bugs in
 the version of Tkinter that ships with the Apple-provided Python distribution.

   One of the most prominent GUI frameworks is Qt (officially pronounced
“cute”), which provides everything you need to build clean, modern
applications across a spectacular array of environments and devices. There
are two Python bindings for the Qt framework: PySide2 (Qt 5) and PySide6
(Qt 6), the official bindings maintained by The Qt Company; and PyQt5 or
PyQt6, which are maintained by Riverbank Computing.
   Another popular GUI framework is GTK, a mature and robust framework
that is particularly prominent on Linux. PyGObject is the Python binding
for GTK3 and GTK4.
   Kivy is a GUI toolkit that works across major desktop and mobile
operating systems. It’s especially geared toward touch screen devices
(although it supports keyboard and mouse) and is particularly well-suited
for game development. As of this writing, it’s particularly difficult (and not
fully supported) to package a Kivy application for Linux. Some
improvements made in Kivy 2.0 are promising on this front, but I still
strongly recommend that you figure out your packaging before you start
building.
  There are quite a few more GUI frameworks, such as wxPython and
Flexx, but there are far too many to enumerate here. You can find a fairly
up-to-date list here: https://wiki.python.org/moin/GuiProgramming.
   If you don’t know where to start with GUI applications, I recommend
you start with Qt. If you prefer a guided approach, check out Create GUI
Applications with Python & Qt5 by Martin Fitzpatrick. He has editions of
the book for both PySide2 and PyQt5. Visit his website at https://www.learn
pyqt.com/ for more information, plus tutorials and examples.

Game Development in Python
Although it’s not as robust as many game engines, Python lends itself to
fairly streamlined game development. Prominent games like Civilization IV,
EVE Online, Frets on Fire, and Toontown Online were all built with Python.
Depending on the game, you may be able to get by with one of the general-
purpose GUI frameworks, but for best results, you’ll often want to pick up a
dedicated game development library.
  PyGame is one of the oldest and most frequently cited Python game
development libraries. It’s primarily a wrapper around the Simple
DirectMedia Layer (SDL2), which provides cross-platform access to the
hardware for working with graphics, sound, and devices. It also interfaces
with other graphics APIs, like OpenGL, Direct3D, and Vulkan.
   There are more options beyond PyGame, depending on the sort of game
you want to build. Wasabi2D and pyglet both work with OpenGL, which is
the underpinning of most major game engines. Panda3D and Ogre are two
popular options for creating real-time 3D games. There are many other
libraries besides.
  Whichever game development framework you want to use, its
documentation is the best place to start. Alternatively, if you’d prefer a
shallow learning curve with plenty of guided examples, check out Al
Sweigart’s Invent Your Own Computer Games with Python, 4th Edition (No
Starch Press, 2016), which will get you acclimated to PyGame and, more
importantly, the different concepts associated with game development.

Web Development in Python
Python excels as a server-side language, especially for rapidly developing
web applications and APIs. There are three libraries in the spotlight at
present for this: Django, Flask, and FastAPI.
   Django is the batteries-included option. It employs a Model View
Template (MVT) architecture, and it includes database integration, an
object-relational mapper (ORM), and just about everything you could need
to build a web application or API in Python. Django is used by BitBucket,
Instagram, the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), and the Washington
Times, among others. To get started with Django, visit their website at http
s://www.djangoproject.com/. Django Girls also has a particularly excellent
tutorial at https://tutorial.djangogirls.org/.
   Flask, by contrast, is the minimalist option. It’s lightweight, providing
the bare-minimum framework and leaving it to the developer to choose
what tools and components to use. The Flask community provides a wide
variety of extensions for adding functionality on par with Django, all of
which are selected and installed separately. Flask emphasizes leaving as
much control in the hands of the developer as possible. Websites like
Pinterest and LinkedIn are built in Flask. If you want to learn Flask, their
documentation will guide you through the entire process of setting up,
getting started, and working with every part of the framework: https://flask.
palletsprojects.com/.
   FastAPI is a framework aimed at web API design specifically. It is
designed for performance and stability, and it is fully compliant with the
OpenAPI (Swagger) and JSON Schema. See the documentation at https://fa
stapi.tiangolo.com/.
Client-Side Python
You may wonder if it is possible to run Python in the browser, client-side.
At present, there are a few implementations of Python attempting exactly
that. Here are just a few.
   Brython, which is short for Browser Python, is the more mature of the
two options. It works by transpiling Python to JavaScript. Brython is
designed to work with the W3C Document Object Model (DOM). More
information and full documentation are available at https://www.brython.inf
o/ and on the project’s GitHub at https://github.com/brython-dev/brython.
   Skulpt is a newer solution; it’s intended to be a complete implementation
of the Python language in JavaScript, as opposed to a transpiler. As of this
writing, Skulpt is still missing a lot of core language features. More
information is at https://skulpt.org/.
  Pyodide is a third option. It’s a port of CPython to WebAssembly and
Emscripten, and has support for many C extensions. More information and
documentation can be found at https://pyodide.org/en/stable/.

Data Science in Python
Python is one of the leading languages in the field of data science, which
focuses on gaining insights and extracting information by aggregating and
analyzing data. Data science is considered applied statistics and related to
but distinct from computer science. The task of distilling information out of
a data set is sometimes referred to as data mining. The term big data refers
to work with particularly large data sets.
  There is a vast ecosystem geared especially toward data science, although
many of these tools are also useful in software development.

The Data Science Environment
Jupyter Notebook is perhaps the single most important tool in the data
science ecosystem. It is a complete interactive-development environment
and is particularly well-suited to data science and scientific computing, as it
combines executable Python code with Markdown-formatted text,
mathematics equations, live charts and graphs, and other rich media. A
notebook document is a single Jupyter Notebook file, ending in the file
extension .ipynb (for IPython Notebook, the former name of Jupyter
Notebook). In addition to supporting Python, Jupyter works with the other
two most popular languages in data science, namely Julia and R. You can
learn more about Jupyter Notebook and its related projects at https://jupyter.
org/.
   Anaconda is a distinct Python distribution geared specifically toward data
science and scientific computing. It ships with over 250 of the most
common data science libraries and tools preinstalled, including Jupyter
Notebook. It also comes with its own integrated development environment,
Anaconda Navigator, and a dedicated package manager, conda. In addition
to all this, Anaconda offers a data science–oriented cloud service with both
free and paid plans. More information can be found at https://anaconda.or
g/.

Data Science Packages
There are hundreds of packages for data science in Python, but there are a
handful of particularly notable ones, many of which consistently lead the
pack:

   Pandas is considered essential for processing data. It supplies
   dataframes, which allow you to select, merge, reshape, and process data
   from databases, spreadsheets, tables, CSV files, and more, similar to the
   R language. Learn more at https://pandas.pydata.org/.
   NumPy is the leading package for handling numeric computing,
   everything from mathematics to statistical analysis, and even
   performing advanced processing of lists and arrays. Learn more at http
   s://numpy.org/about/.
   SciPy (the library) expands on NumPy, offering additional numeric
   routines for scientific computing, including linear algebra and numerical
   optimization. It is part of the SciPy ecosystem, along with NumPy,
   pandas, and several other tenants of this list. Learn more at https://scipy.
   org/.
   Matplotlib is one of the most popular libraries for generating plots,
   charts, graphs, and other data visualizations. Learn more at https://matpl
   otlib.org/.
   Seaborn expands on Matplotlib and is integrated with pandas, to
   provide more advanced data visualization tools (with all the pretty
   colors!) Learn more at https://seaborn.pydata.org/.
   Bokeh is another popular visualization library, independent of
   Matplotlib, that allows you to create interactive data visualizations that
   can be embedded in web pages and Jupyter notebooks. Learn more at ht
   tps://bokeh.org/.
   Dask is a Python parallelism library that is built specifically for working
   with major packages in data science and related fields. It allows you to
   speed up the execution time, especially when working with large data
   sets or CPU-intensive analysis. Learn more at https://dask.org/.
   Kedro is relatively new to the party, but it fulfills an important role in
   data science: the need for a framework to keep data pipelines scalable,
   easily maintainable, and production ready. Learn more at https://kedro.r
   eadthedocs.io/.

  There are plenty of subtopics in the realm of data science, including
geographic information systems (GIS) and the many branches of scientific
computing. These fields often have their own common libraries and tools.
  Also worth a mention is Numba, a just-in-time (JIT) compiler for Python
and NumPy, which allows you to compile specific, selected parts of your
Python program to machine code.
   One way to learn more about the Anaconda ecosystem, including many
of the libraries listed here, is to read Doing Science with Python by Lee
Vaughan (No Starch Press, 2022).

Machine Learning in Python
Another popular topic in Python is machine learning, which is at the heart
of artificial intelligence. Machine learning is the process by which an
algorithm can be made to improve automatically over time, based on data
and feedback provided to it. This is a process known as training. For
example, your smartphone uses machine learning to improve its
autocompletion suggestions while you type. The more you use your
smartphone, the better that algorithm gets at suggesting the word you’re
typing.
   Machine learning works using neural networks, which are data structures
that replicate the structure and behavior of biological neural networks, such
as the brain you are using right now. When you layer neural networks
together, you get into the topic of deep learning.
   The structure of a neural network isn’t particularly difficult to
comprehend, but there is a fair bit of advanced mathematics involved,
including linear algebra, multivariate calculus, and probability. If you’re
interested in machine learning, invest some time in understanding this math
well. Don’t worry about doing the math on paper; focus on mastering the
concepts and let the computer do the number crunching for you.
  Machine learning is often closely associated with data science. (The data
used to train the neural network has to come from somewhere!) Therefore,
you’ll find many of the same packages used across both specialties.
  Here are the five most popular machine learning packages:

   TensorFlow is a C++ and Python symbolic math library behind some of
   today’s larger machine learning projects, including artificial intelligence
   work at Google, where it got its start. It’s harder to learn than many of
   the other options, but it’s widely used, especially due to its speed. Learn
   more at https://www.tensorflow.org/.
   Keras is a deep- learning API that expands on TensorFlow, and it is
   generally considered easier to use besides. If you’re looking for a place
   to start, this is an excellent option. Learn more at https://keras.io/.
   Scikit-learn is a simpler machine learning library built atop NumPy. It is
   particularly useful for predictive data analysis and other data science
   applications. Learn more at https://scikit-learn.org/.
   PyTorch is based on Facebook’s Torch framework. It independently
   brings the same functionality you’d get out of NumPy, SciPy, and
   Scikit-learn. PyTorch offers acceleration via the GPU, and it can work
   with deep neural networks. Learn more at https://pytorch.org/.
   Aesera is a Python-only machine learning library that tightly integrates
   with NumPy and focuses primarily on some of the mathematics
   involved. Although it can be used by itself, it’s most often employed
   alongside other options, like Keras. Aesera is a continuation of the
   Theano library. Learn more at https://aesara.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.

   Within the arena of machine learning are a number of other specialties,
including natural language processing and computer vision. Once you
understand the basics of machine learning, you can branch out into
whatever subtopics you find interesting.
  If you’re interested in this field, two books to get you started are Deep
Learning: A Visual Approach by Andrew Glassner (No Starch Press, 2021)
and Practical Deep Learning by Ronald T. Kneusel (No Starch Press,
2021). If you prefer to learn as you go, start with Keras or Scikit-learn.

Security
Python is increasingly popular in the field of information security, or
infosec, which focuses on ensuring data, software, and computer systems
are safe and secure.
   A word of caution is prudent here. The techniques used to find flaws in
security that need to be shored up are the same techniques used to exploit
those flaws. The entire field of infosec operates on a fine legal and ethical
line, which separates ethical (“white hat”) hackers from criminal (“black
hat”) hackers. Both sides know how to construct and deploy malware,
reverse engineer software, and hack into systems: the difference is that the
ethical hackers use these techniques to find and report or close security
holes before criminal hackers can exploit them. For example, the infamous
Heartbleed and Spectre bugs were discovered and reported by ethical
hackers before they could be exploited.
   Two of the best books about Python and infosec are Black Hat Python,
2nd Edition, by Justin Seitz and Tim Arnold (No Starch Press, 2021) and
Gray Hat Python, also by Justin Seitz (No Starch Press, 2009). (The titles
are deliberately ironic.) If you’re interested in this field, those books
provide the best place to start.
  But once again, let me remind you: it is your responsibility to use your
powers for good. Using computers to commit crimes or cause trouble is
never okay, and doing so will earn you the derision of the entire Python
community. Keep your hacking ethical.

Embedded Development in Python
If maker culture is more your speed, you’ll be pleased to know that Python
is currently the fastest-growing language in embedded development,
wherein code is shipped directly on the hardware it controls. This means
you can use Python for robotics, Internet-of-Things devices, and many
other hardware projects.
   Python works with Raspberry Pi, which comes with the Thonny Python
IDE preinstalled. More information can be found at https://www.raspberryp
i.com/documentation/computers/os.html.
   Python can be used to program the Arduino microcontroller via pyserial:
https://pythonhosted.org/pyserial/.
   MicroPython is a separate implementation of Python that is geared
specifically toward embedded development. It works best with the pyboard
microcontroller. You can learn more about MicroPython and pyboard at http
s://micropython.org/.
   CircuitPython is another Python implementation. It is based on
MicroPython but geared primarily toward Adafruit microcontrollers. It can
also be used on a number of Raspberry Pi and Arduino microcontrollers, as
well as hardware from many other brands. Device-specific downloads and
links to documentation, tutorials, and guides can be found at https://circuitp
ython.org/.

Scripting
With all these vast and impressive uses of Python, it’s easy to forget that
one of the reasons this language exists is to facilitate automation and
scripting. Countless libraries exist to allow Python to interact with all sorts
of software, operating systems, and hardware. If you have a repetitive task
that needs a clean solution, there’s a good chance that Python can help with
that.
  Two excellent books for learning how to automate with Python are Real-
World Python by Lee Vaughan (No Starch Press, 2020) and Automate the
Boring Stuff with Python, 2nd Edition, by Al Sweigart (No Starch Press,
2019).

Python Flavors
As you’ve probably gathered, the default implementation of Python, known
formally as CPython, isn’t the only implementation out there. Quite a few
others exist, most of them with special uses.
   I have to start by mentioning a highly specialized implementation,
RPython, which is geared toward building interpreted languages. It’s a
restricted subset of the Python language with a just-in-time (JIT) compiler,
meaning the language is built to machine code immediately before
execution, instead of being interpreted during execution by an interpreter.
RPython is extensively documented at https://rpython.readthedocs.io/.
   PyPy is another implementation, and it is notable for being quite a bit
faster than CPython. It is implemented on RPython, instead of C. It owes its
speed to the fact that it is JIT compiled, instead of interpreted, allowing it to
reach performance comparable to C++ or Java. PyPy is always several
versions behind CPython—as of this writing, it is up to Python 3.6—but for
projects where performance matters, this is an acceptable compromise.
Additionally, because PyPy does not rely on C, it typically doesn’t work
with binary extensions, except for some built to that purpose in CFFI.
   Stackless Python is another peculiar implementation of Python that offers
some unique tools for improved concurrency and code structure. Stackless
is its own beast in many ways, and it must be learned as such. The best
place to start is with its wiki, which has links to further reading and
resources: https://github.com/stackless-dev/stackless/wiki.
   Earlier, I mentioned Brython (https://www.brython.info/), Skulpt (https://s
kulpt.org/), and Pyodide (https://pyodide.org/en/stable/), which are in-
browser implementations of Python geared toward web development. I also
mentioned MicroPython (https://micropython.org/) and CircuitPython (http
s://circuitpython.org/), which are implementations for embedded
development.
   Besides these, there are a handful of implementations of the Python
interpreter built in different languages. The four most notable of these are
RustPython, implemented in Rust; IronPython and Python.NET, both of
which integrate tightly with the .NET framework; and Jython, which is
written in Java for integration with the Java Virtual Machine (JVM). As of
this writing, RustPython supports up to Python 3.9, and Python.NET
supports up to Python 3.8, while IronPython is only on Python 3.4, and
Jython is still in line with Python 2.7. You can learn more about RustPython
at https://rustpython.github.io/, IronPython at https://ironpython.net/,
Python.NET at https://pythonnet.github.io/, and Jython at https://www.jytho
n.org/.
   No matter what implementation you use, remember that the official
implementation, CPython, serves as the baseline for all of them. Even if you
plan to spend most of your time in another implementation, it’s important to
know how to use CPython well.

Developing for Python
The Python ecosystem itself is maintained by thousands of developers
around the world. Some write libraries to answer specific needs, while
others extend and improve the Python language in all its different
implementations.
   If you’d like to become involved in the development of Python, it would
be helpful for you to have some experience or interest in other branches of
development, so you’ll understand what needs exist and how to best address
them. Very few developers set out to work on Python; rather, they drift into
it after recognizing an area of need in their own work. Even so, when
you’re able to contribute to the Python ecosystem, it’s a great feeling
indeed.

Developing Python Packages and Tools
The techniques you’ve learned in this book have fully prepared you to build
and ship production-quality packages, libraries, and development tools.
Maybe you have some ideas already, or maybe you’re still pondering what
you could build.
   In either case, I strongly recommend learning more about the existing
tools and packages you use on a regular basis. A large majority of projects
are maintained by a handful of volunteers, often thanklessly, and issues
sometimes come in faster than the volunteers can resolve them. Before you
set out to build a brand-new thing, consider if you could instead improve an
existing solution. Contributing to open source projects is an incredible way
to build your skills and make new professional connections. Your
contributions don’t even have to be massive. Whether you’re performing
code reviews on backlogged pull requests, fixing minor bugs, doing small
“housekeeping” tasks, tidying up the documentation, or polishing the
packaging, it all helps!
  There are also a number of projects that are abandoned or otherwise
unmaintained and are in need of a new maintainer to step up and take over.
When you adopt an abandoned project, you get the benefits of a working
code base (for some definitions of “working”) and an existing user base.
Often, projects are abandoned because they need to be ported to Python 3.
Also, working with legacy code can be a very rewarding experience.
   Nearly all packages on the Python Package Index (PyPI) have links to the
official website, source code, and issue tracker. Other packages list an email
address for the present maintainer. When you find a package that you use
regularly, you should seriously consider getting involved in its development
and maintenance.
  As for new projects, if you find yourself building a tool or library for
solving a problem you’re having in your development efforts, consider
publishing it for the rest of the world to use!

Developing Python Extensions
Binary extension modules, often just called extension modules or
extensions, add new functionality atop the CPython interpreter and allow
you to integrate CPython with C and C++ code.
   Wrapper modules expose C libraries to Python. PyGObject is an example
of this, as it wraps the GTK C library and several others besides, and it
makes them available to Python. Extensions can also wrap C++ and
FORTRAN libraries, among others.
   Another common use case for extensions is to provide low-level access
to the operating system, hardware, or the CPython runtime.
   Accelerator modules offer equivalent behavior to a pure Python module,
but they are actually written in C. One particular advantage of accelerator
modules is that they can be written to bypass the Global Interpreter Lock,
since they run as compiled machine code. These modules should provide a
pure Python fallback module for situations where the extension may not
work.
   There are quite a few ways to develop extensions. Traditionally, you can
include the Python.h header file in your C code and build from there.
Details and documentation about this can be found at https://docs.python.or
g/3/extending/index.html.
   However, working directly with Python.h is no longer considered the best
approach. Aside from this technique being quite clunky and error-prone,
extensions built this way often have significant difficulty working with
PyPy and other implementations of Python. Instead, there are a number of
third-party tools for building extensions, which are far simpler and more
obvious in their usage.
  The C Foreign Function Interface (CFFI) is one of the more popular
options. Unlike some other tools, CFFI doesn’t require you to learn an
additional specialty language. Instead, it uses purely C and Python. It works
with both CPython and PyPy. You can learn more about CFFI from its
extensive official documentation: https://cffi.readthedocs.io/.
   CFFI does not work with C++, so if you need C++ and Python
interoperability, check out cppyy. Official documentation lives at https://cpp
yy.readthedocs.io/.
   Cython is a separate programming language that is a superset of Python
and provides direct access to C and C++. You compile your Cython code up
front, as you would with C. More information and official documentation
can be found at https://cython.org/.
   Simplified Wrapper and Interface Generator (SWIG) is a tool for
interoperability between over a dozen programming languages, including
Python, C, C++, Java, C#, Perl, JavaScript, and Ruby. It can be used to
create Python binary extensions. Information, documentation, and tutorials
can be found on its official website at http://www.swig.org/.
   Development of Python binary extensions is a particularly deep topic,
especially as it involves the C language. The Python Packaging Authority
has an excellent guide that explores binary extension development,
particularly from a packaging standpoint: https://packaging.python.org/guid
es/packaging-binary-extensions/.

Contributing to Python
Python is an open source project with a rich community and a well-
maintained development pipeline. If you’re passionate about Python, the
language itself always welcomes new contributors! Your contributions
could include fixing bugs, testing patches, implementing new features, and
updating documentation. Even if you don’t have incredible C-coding skills,
there’s plenty for you to do. If you want to get started contributing to
Python, read through the official Python Developer’s Guide at https://devgu
ide.python.org/.
   If Java or .NET is more your speed, or if you’re fascinated with RPython,
you can instead contribute to Jython, RustPython, Python.NET, IronPython,
or PyPy. These are all considered important implementations in the Python
ecosystem, and there’s always more to do.

Changing the Language
Because Python is built by the community, you can propose changes to the
Python language or its standard library. This will involve a considerable
amount of work on your part, along with quite a bit of discussion,
diplomacy, debate, and testing. Somewhere along the way, you will need to
create a PEP outlining your proposed changes and all the discussion that’s
gone into it so far.
  Don’t embark on this process lightly! Even if your idea seems obvious to
you, you are likely underestimating the depth or merit of other viewpoints.
We all want Python to be the best it can be, and that means factoring in the
wildly divergent needs and perspectives of our diverse user base. That’s
why proposing a PEP is a significant time investment.
   If you’re certain you’re up for the challenge, see the official guides: http
s://devguide.python.org/langchanges/ for language changes and https://devg
uide.python.org/stdlibchanges/ for standard library changes.

Becoming a Core Developer
Once you’ve been making quality contributions to CPython for some time,
you can apply to become a core developer, which brings with it additional
authority and responsibility. Core developers are involved in leading Python
development, and their opinions regarding language direction and proposed
changes bear much weight.
   If you want to become a Python core developer, start by contributing
patches, which consist of code fixing a bug or implementing an approved
feature, to CPython. Keep at this until a core developer offers you commit
privileges. They’ll keep an eye on your work after that and help mentor you
in the Python development process. Eventually, if you do this well, you may
be offered an official opportunity to become a core developer.
  The entire process and all the responsibilities and steps involved are
outlined in the guide at https://devguide.python.org/coredev/, which itself is
based on the Python Language Governance policies outlined in PEP 13.

Getting Involved with Python
Wherever you go from here, I strongly recommend getting involved in the
Python community! You will learn a lot from your fellow Python
developers, and you can greatly benefit from helping and mentoring others.
There are a number of official and unofficial communities around the
internet, including the following:

   The DEV Community: https://dev.to/t/python
   Discord: https://pythondiscord.com/
   Forums (Official): https://www.python.org/community/forums/
   Libera.Chat IRC (Official): https://www.python.org/community/irc/
   Mailing Lists/Newsgroups (Official): https://www.python.org/communit
   y/lists/
   Reddit: https://www.reddit.com/r/learnpython/
   Slack: https://pyslackers.com/web

  Of the ones on this list, my personal favorites are DEV, where this book
got its start, and Libera.Chat IRC, where I met most of my technical editors.

Asking Questions
The primary reason developers first join a community is to ask questions.
This can feel intimidating at first, no matter what platform you’re on! Here
are a few principles for asking questions and getting help in the Python
community. These guidelines are true across most programming
communities, but especially in Python!
  First, do some research and experimentation yourself. Read the
documentation. Try out some possible solutions and take note of what
doesn’t work. We in the Python community are happy to help you, but we
want to see you bring your own efforts to the table, too.
   Second, be specific. The more information you can provide, the better we
can help you. When possible, give us code we can inspect and run, the exact
text of error messages or wrong output, details about your environment
(operating system, Python version, and library versions), and insight into
the outcomes of your own experimentation. When providing all this
information, be careful to follow community rules regarding large pastes.
Many platforms, including Libera.Chat IRC, ask that you use a paste-
sharing tool like bpaste.net, instead of dumping pastes into chat, where they
will clog up the backlog. Never paste multiple lines of code or output
directly into chat!
   Third, be prepared for unexpected threads of feedback. If a bug is
precipitating from poor design, incorrect assumptions, or nonidiomatic
practice, we’d much rather help you fix the design than the bug. We aren’t
interested in working code, so much as idiomatic code. You will likely be
asked things like “What is your goal, why are you doing it this way, and is
there a reason you aren’t doing X?” Stay calm and work with us.
                                    GOTCHA ALERT
 Expect us to challenge your implementation and goals! We are not making comments about you
 or your skills, only about your your code. Getting combative is the surest way to burn bridges
 and minimize your chances of getting help, now or later. We’re challenging you because we
 believe you to be smart and capable enough to handle it; we expect to be treated the same by our
 peers.

   Fourth, be polite and patient. All the online communities I’ve mentioned
are staffed by volunteers who give freely of their time and effort to help
others. It may take time to get an answer. Just ask your question outright in
the public space—never “ask to ask” or inquire after an expert in such and
such, as it only wastes people’s time—and then wait for someone to
respond. In the case of IRC, stay logged in or you’ll miss our response! In
any chat-based medium, if your message gets completely buried in backlog
(I’m talking three or more desktop screen pages), calmly repost it. On
forum-like platforms, resist the temptation to “bump” the thread.
   When you get a response, read it thoroughly and answer thoughtfully. We
will probably have many more questions for you as we try to home in on
the solution.

Answering Questions
Having made it through Dead Simple Python, you now know quite a lot
about Python! As a result, you will encounter questions from other
community members that you may be able to answer. This is a great way to
give back to the community and build relationships with other developers.
You’ll learn quite a bit in the process, too. Even so, when you’re getting
started, it can feel intimidating. Here are a few tips.
   First, don’t be afraid of making mistakes. If you feel like you can answer
a question, give it your best shot. This is a benefit of answering questions in
the community: if you get something wrong, someone else will often be
there to correct you. Python developers love pedantic correctness!
(Seriously; you should see some comments I’ve gotten from my technical
editors.) In the worst-case scenario, you’ll walk away from the encounter
having learned something. No one worthwhile will think less of you for it, I
promise.
   Second, more than half of the process of answering a question is asking
more questions. Like The Zen of Python says, “In the face of ambiguity,
refuse the temptation to guess.” Ultimately, your goal should be to guide the
asker toward the most Pythonic solution to the problem they’re trying to
solve.
  Third, it’s important to be kind. The only things up for critique are code
and practice, never people. Resist the temptation to deploy put-downs or
shutdowns, no matter how clever or “funny” they may be.
   On that note, be careful of issuing “read the documentation”
admonishments. Documentation can be infamously obtuse and difficult to
parse, especially for a beginner. It’s okay to share a link to the relevant page
or section, or to any other helpful resource, but you should never shame
anyone for not having previously read or understood the documentation or
other material. The same goes for web search results—it can sometimes
take real skill to determine which keywords are the best or which results are
relevant. In any case, be prepared in case they say that the link doesn’t solve
their problem; you may need to ask more questions to better understand
what issue they’re stuck on.

User Groups
Online communities are excellent resources, but nothing beats in-person
networking and collaboration! There are over 1,600 Python user groups
worldwide, providing opportunities for developers of all backgrounds and
skill levels to exchange knowledge, especially through events like social
meetings, speaking presentations, hack sessions, and even local
conferences.
   A complete list of Python user groups is maintained on the official
Python wiki: https://wiki.python.org/moin/LocalUserGroups. Consider
connecting with one in your area. If you don’t have a nearby user group,
you may consider starting one yourself! The wiki has a guide for that, too: h
ttps://wiki.python.org/moin/StartingYourUsersGroup.
PyLadies
Of particular note is PyLadies, a group organized by the Python Software
Foundation, which focuses on supporting and mentoring female developers
in the Python community.
   PyLadies organizes meetups and other events, and it provides resources.
In addition to the international online community, there are a number of
local PyLadies groups all over the world. If there isn’t one near you,
perhaps you could organize one. More information about PyLadies is
available at https://pyladies.com/. The official list of PyLadies groups is
maintained here: https://pyladies.com/locations/.

Conferences
Attending conferences is an incredible way to learn and grow as a
developer, while connecting with the larger Python community. There are a
number of fantastic conferences in the Python world, including PyCon US
(the official conference), Pyjamas, SciPy, Python Pizza, and PyData. There
are also versions of PyCon in many countries.
   The first thing that comes to mind when you think of a conference is
probably all the lectures. Talks are certainly among the highlights,
especially keynote presentations from important people in the Python
community, but they’re not the only thing going on. Workshops present
opportunities to get hands-on with a new topic. Lightning talk sessions are a
lot of fun, too: they let anyone present a 5- or 10-minute talk, sometimes
improvised right on the spot. Some presentations are amazingly insightful,
and others are downright hilarious. Many conferences also have sprints,
collaborative coding sessions (think “hackathon”) where attendees can
freely join teams to build or improve code.
   While attending a conference can be a lot of fun, getting involved can be
even more exciting! If you want to present a talk at a conference, be on the
lookout for the Call for Proposals (CFP), when you can submit a proposal
for a talk or workshop. If you’re brand-new to speaking, you may consider
presenting to your local Python User Group or giving a lightning talk. You
could also submit a project for a sprint, which can be an excellent way to
get new contributors and users while improving your code.
  Most conferences rely pretty heavily on volunteers, so consider
contacting any conference you’re thinking about attending, and then see
how you can help out. You’ll get to meet a lot of great people that way, and
volunteering is really fun.
   If you want to attend a conference but can’t afford to go, you can check if
there are scholarships or other financial aid available, especially if you’re a
volunteer. If you’re employed as a programmer, your employer may also be
willing to help with some of your conference expenses. After all, when you
get smarter, they benefit!
  A list of Python conferences is maintained on the Python wiki: https://ww
w.python.org/community/workshops/.

Joining the Python Software Foundation
The Python Software Foundation (PSF) is the nonprofit organization that
officially manages the Python language. They’re responsible for all the
major decisions, and they help to grow the community worldwide.
  The Python Software Foundation is an open-membership organization,
meaning anyone can join for free. Basic members need only sign up and
agree to the PSF Code of Conduct, which is the set of guidelines that the
entire Python community operates on. Members are subscribed to the
Python Software Foundation newsletter.
  There are three special types of members, all of whom get to vote in the
PSF Board of Directors elections. Supporting members donate to the PSF
annually. Managing members volunteer at least five hours a month in the
Python community, including helping to organize events and user groups or
volunteering on Python Software Foundation projects. Contributing
members volunteer at least five hours a month on free, publicly available
open source projects that advance the mission of the PSF. You can learn
more about PSF membership at https://www.python.org/psf/membership/.

And the Road Goes Ever On . . .
This, dear reader, is where I leave you. The direction you take from here is
up to you! I am certain there are many adventures ahead of you. I send you
forward into the brave frontier beyond with three final pieces of advice. If
you’ve been coding for a while, you may already know these things, but
they are always worth hearing again.
   First, it is dangerous to go alone. Shiny new solutions call to you from
the shadows, tempting you to stray from time-tested development paths.
Clever solutions lure you away as they steal time and sanity from your
future self and your colleagues. Bugs lurk in the dark recesses of your code,
waiting for midnight on a Friday to leap out at you with bared teeth and
inexplicable log files. The comradeship of your fellow Python developers is
the surest defense against these and many more dangers! There is safety in
numbers. I could never have written Dead Simple Python without the all the
support, insight, debate, and encouragement from the Python community.
We need each other to thrive.
   Second, embrace the adventure of making mistakes! You will always
learn more from solving a bug, working through a difficult problem, or
making a mistake, than you will ever learn from writing or reading the best
code in the world. I love how my colleague Wilfrantz Dede puts it
whenever he embarks on a new task: “I’m going to go write some bugs.”
Mistakes are an inevitable part of the learning process. Learn to expect
them, embrace them, conquer them, and laugh at them! Share your coding
mistakes with your colleagues. I promise you that most will think more of
you for it, not less, and anyone who would look down on you is merely
covering up their own egregious errors.
   Third and finally, you are a real programmer. Never again question that!
No matter how long you’re in this industry, you will always have more to
learn. There are even expert developers who have been programming for
decades but still feel the call of knowledge not yet gained.
   The journey is never really over. There is always one more crest of the
hill, one more bend in the road, and one more vast plain stretching ahead!
Embrace every step of the adventure. It never gets old.
