                         GLOSSARY

A
abstract base class (ABC)
A class that specifies an interface that must be implemented by any derived
class. An ABC cannot itself be instantiated. (See also virtual subclassing.)
abstract syntax tree (AST)
A tree data structure that represents the overall structure of the code. Used
by some static analyzers, such as Bandit.

accelerator module
A binary extension module that offers behavior equivalent to that of a pure
Python module but that is written in C, making it faster and able to bypass
the GIL. (See also wrapper module.) alias (v.)
To bind a mutable value to more than one name. Mutations performed on a
value bound to one name will be visible on all names bound to that mutable
value.

and
A logical operator where both operand expressions must evaluate to True for
this operator to evaluate as True itself. (See also not, or.) annotation
A piece of valid language syntax that is ignored by the language itself but
that provides additional information to the programmer or to a static
analyzer. (See also type hint.) anonymous
Describes any callable that is defined without a name; anonymous callables
can still be bound to names. (See also generator expression; lambda.)
arbitrary argument list
See argument, variadic.

arbitrary execution
A technique whereby strings can be directly executed as Python code. (See
also code injection attack.) argument
A value passed to a parameter of a callable. (See also argument, keyword;
argument, positional.) argument, keyword
An argument that is mapped to a parameter based on direct assignment to a
parameter name within the argument list. (See also argument, positional.)
argument, positional
An argument that is mapped to a parameter based on its sequential position
in the argument list. (See also argument, keyword.) argument, variadic
An argument that is passed to a variadic parameter. (See also argument,
variadic keyword; parameter, variadic positional.) argument, variadic
keyword
An argument that is passed to a variadic keyword parameter. (See also
argument, variadic; parameter, variadic keyword.) artifact
A by-product or end product of software development, especially one that
can be installed on an end user’s environment to run the finished program.

assembling
The act of compiling to native machine code.

assert
A keyword to declare an assert statement, the expression of which must
return True or the program will abort with an AssertionError. Assert statements
may be optimized out by the interpreter under some circumstances, so they
should not be used for data or input validation.

assignment
The act of binding a value to a name. Assignment never copies data.
assignment expression
An expression that allows you to assign a value to a name and use that
value in another expression at the same time. The special operator in an
assignment expression (:=) is known as the walrus operator.

assignment operator (=)
The operator that assigns a value to a name.

async
A keyword to declare a native coroutine or asynchronous generator (async
def), a for loop over an asynchronous iterator (async for), or a with statement
using an asynchronous context manager (async with).

asynchronous
Describes anything that is compatible with asynchrony. There are
asynchronous iterators, iterables, generators, and coroutines (which are
typically called native coroutines; see coroutine, native).

asynchrony
A form of concurrency in which Python manages the multitasking within a
single thread.

atomic
Describes an operation or function that consists of a single, indivisible CPU
instruction under the hood. Nonatomic operations are at risk of causing race
conditions when used in concurrency.

attribute
A variable that is a member of a class or instance.

attribute, class
An attribute that belongs to a class; its value is accessible, both on the class
itself and on any instance of the class.

attribute, instance
An attribute that belongs to a single instance of a class (an object) and is not
accessible from any other instance or from the class itself.
attribute, special
An attribute that is utilized by a core Python language feature. The name of
a special attribute always starts and ends with two underscores (__).

augmented assignment operator
An operator that performs an operation with the left and right operands and
assigns the result to the left operand.

autouse fixture
See fixture, autouse.

await
A keyword that calls an awaitable.

awaitable
A callable that can pause and resume midexecution.

B
base class
A class that is inherited by one or more other classes. (See also derived
class.) bdist
See built distribution (bdist).

benchmarking
The technique by which you establish that one piece of code is faster than
another. (See also profiling.) big-endian
See byte order.

binary
A base-2 number system consisting of only the digits 0 and 1, which
correspond to the closed and open positions of gates on circuit boards. In
Python, binary literal (integers) are prefixed with 0b. (See also hexadecimal;
octal.) binary extension module
An importable extension written in C that adds new functionality atop the
CPython interpreter. (See also accelerator module; wrapper module.) bind
To create a reference between a name and a value.

binding behavior
Behavior wherein an object controls how it is used as an attribute; its getter,
setter, and deleter methods are encapsulated.

bit
A single binary digit; the smallest unit of digital information.

bitmask
A binary value used in a bitwise operation to filter out unwanted bits in the
other operand.

bitwise operation
A low-level binary operation that works on individual bits in the operands.

break
A statement that exits the containing loop immediately. (See also continue;
for; while.) breakpoint

A place in the program where control is turned over to the debugger.

bubble up
To reraise an exception that has been caught.

buffer
A queue-like structure that data is pushed into and where data waits until it
is retrieved.

buffer protocol
A set of methods that provide and govern access to an underlying memory
array.

built distribution (bdist)
An artifact containing precompiled Python bytecode and any binary files
needed for the package to run.

byte
A unit of digital information that typically consists of eight bits.
bytearray
An immutable bytes-like object. (See also bytes (object).)

bytecode
Compact codes representing instructions for the Python interpreter to
execute. Python source code is compiled to bytecode.

byte order
The sequence in which bytes composing a larger value appear. The
sequence can be either big-endian, with the largest part of the composite
value represented first (on the left), or little-endian, with the smallest part of
the composite value represented first.

bytes (object)
An immutable bytes-like object. (See also bytearray.)

bytes-like object
An object that stores binary data with a fixed size and a specified byte
order.

bytes literal
A literal representation of a binary value. It looks like a string literal
prepended with b.

C
C3 method resolution order (C3 MRO)
See method resolution order.

C3 superclass linearization
See superclass linearization.

call (n.)
The execution of a callable.

callable
Any object that can be executed, typically by entering its name followed by
parentheses; zero or more values can be passed to the callable as arguments
by listing them in the parentheses.

callback
A native coroutine passed to a function to be called later.

call stack
The sequence of calls leading to the currently executing statement. (See
also traceback.) camel case
A naming convention wherein the first letter of each word is uppercase and
the rest of the letters are lowercase (e.g., FishAndChips). If the first letter is
capitalized, the naming convention is upper camel case; otherwise, it’s
lower camel case. Upper camel case is used for class names, according to
PEP 8. (See also screaming snake case; snake case.) canonical string
representation
A human-readable representation of a value or an object, generally
containing all the information needed to re-create the value or object.
Returned by repr().

cargo cult programming
An antipattern in which one imitates actions or structures in programming
without understanding them, in hopes of achieving a related outcome.
Especially prevalent in packaging.

chunking
The act of defining how much of a larger set of work is given to a single
thread or subprocess.

class
A compound statement that contains attributes (variables) and methods
(functions), and from which an instance (object) may be created. (See also
attribute; instance; method; object.) class, static
A class that contains only class attributes and class or static methods but
that is not intended to be instantiated. This technique is preferred over
singletons.
classifier
In packaging, a standardized string that facilitates organizing and searching
for packages on a package index, especially PyPI.

clause
A single part of a compound statement; it consists of a header and a suite.

closure
A callable that returns another callable that “closes over” one or more
nonlocal names.

closure, stateful
A closure that retains a little bit of state between calls.

cls
The name conventionally given to the first parameter of a class method,
which is intended to be bound to the class itself.

code coverage
The percentage of lines of code in a project that are executed, or covered,
by tests.

code injection attack
An attack in which your code can be used to execute code written by a third
party on an end user’s machine, typically for malicious purposes. (See also
arbitrary execution.) coercion
Implicitly casting a value from one type to another.

collection
An object that stores multiple values in an organized fashion; this is
Python’s name for a “data structure.” (See also dictionary; list; set; tuple.)
complex number
A number type that can store an imaginary part. (See also Decimal; floating-
point number; Fraction; integer.) composition
The relationship between two classes A and B, such that class B contains
one or more instances of class A as attributes. Also known as a “has-a”
relationship. (See also inheritance.) compound assignment operator
See augmented assignment operator or assignment expression.

comprehension
A form of a generator expression that directly evaluates to a collection. (See
also generator expression.) comprehension, dictionary
A form of a generator expression that produces a dictionary. Enclosed in
braces ({ }) and defines both the key and the value in the first part of the
generator expression, with a colon (:) separating the key and the value.

comprehension, list
A form of a generator expression that produces a list. Enclosed in square
brackets ([ ]).

comprehension, set
A form of a generator expression that produces a set. Enclosed in braces ({
}).

concatenate
To combine two or more strings into one.

concurrency
A technique in which a single thread of execution switches between
multiple tasks, thereby increasing the perceived responsiveness of the code.
Only one task is ever worked at a time. (See also asynchrony, parallelism,
threading.) constructor
The special class method __new__(), which creates and returns a new instance
from the class. The initializer is called immediately afterward. (See also
finalizer; initializer.) consumer
A thread or process that intakes data and processes it. (See also producer.)
context management protocol
A protocol that specifies that an object must implement __enter__() and
__exit__() to be compatible with a with statement.

context manager
An object that is compatible with a with statement and that can handle its
own setup and/or cleanup tasks.
context variables
Variables that can store different values, depending on which asynchronous
task accesses them. Also known as contextvars.

contextvars
See context variables.

continue
A statement that immediately skips the current iteration of the containing
loop. (See also break; for; while.) conversion
The act of explicitly casting a value from one type to another.

cooperative multitasking
See asynchrony.

copy (v.)
To create a new value in memory from the same data as another value.

core developers
Developers who are involved in leading Python development. Their
opinions regarding language direction and proposed changes bear much
weight.

coroutine, native
An awaitable coroutine that is based on a simple coroutine but that is
capable of being paused and resumed for use with asynchrony.

coroutine, simple
A generator that consumes data on demand, instead of (or in addition to)
producing data.

Counter
A variant of the dictionary designed for counting hashable objects. (See also
defaultdict; OrderedDict.) coverage

See code coverage.

CPU-bound
Describes any code execution whose speed is limited by the speed of the
CPU. (See also IO-bound.) CPython
The default implementation of Python, written in C.

current working directory
The directory the user (or system) is running commands from.

D
daemonic
Describes a thread that is tied to the lifespan of the process; when the main
thread ends, all associated daemonic threads are killed as well.

data
Information stored in a value. You may have copies of such data stored in
other values.

deadlock
An erroneous situation that occurs when the combined current status of two
or more locks causes all involved threads to wait, with no way to proceed.
(See also livelock; starvation.) Decimal
An object that stores fixed-point decimal numbers, rather than floating-
point numbers, thereby representing an exact numeric value with a decimal
part. (See also complex number; floating-point number; Fraction; integer.)
decorator
A special type of callable that “wraps” another callable or a class,
modifying its behavior without actually changing the callable’s suite.
Usually implemented as a closure.

deep-copy (v.)
To both copy an object to a new value and copy all the data from values
referenced within that object to new values.

default argument value
The value assigned to a parameter if no argument is passed. Defining this in
the parameter list makes the parameter optional. (See parameter, optional.)
defaultdict

A variant of the dictionary in which a default value is provided when
accessing on undefined keys. (See also Counter; OrderedDict.) delay
See future.

deque
A mutable, sequential (array-like) collection optimized for accessing the
first and last items. Deque literals are created by passing a list literal to the
deque() initializer. (See also dictionary; list; set; tuple.) derived class

A class that inherits, or derives, from another class. (See also base class.)
descriptor
An object with binding behavior.

descriptor, data
A descriptor that implements __get__(), as well as __set__() and/or
__delete__().

descriptor, non-data
A descriptor that only implements __get__().

descriptor, read-only data
A descriptor that implements both __get__() and __set__() but raises an
AttributeError from the latter.

descriptor protocol
A protocol that states that for an object to be a descriptor, it must implement
at least one of __get__(), __set__(), and __delete__().

deserialization
The process of converting stored data to Python values. (See also
serialization.) destructor
See finalizer.

dict
The type name for a dictionary collection.
dict comprehension
See comprehension, dictionary.

dictionary
A mutable, unordered collection of key-value pairs. Keys must be hashable.
Dictionary literals are comma delimited (with colons separating the key and
value in each pair) and enclosed in braces ({ }). (See also deque; set; tuple.)
distribution package
An artifact that bundles and versions the source distribution and the
associated built distribution (if any).

docstring
A string literal that appears at the top (just below the header, if any) of a
function, class, or module and contains documentation.

duck typing
Working with objects based on their functionality, rather than their data
type.

dunder method
See method, special.

E
eager evaluation
Behavior wherein each item in an iterable is evaluated when the iterable is
defined or initialized. (See also lazy evaluation.) Easier to Ask Forgiveness
than Permission (EAFP)
A coding philosophy wherein you catch and utilize exceptions to control
normal execution flow. (See also Look Before You Leap (LBYL).) eggs
See wheel.

elif
A clause in an if statement that is executed only if the conditions in all
preceding headers fail and the condition in its own header succeeds. (See
also else; if.) Ellipsis
A seldom-used built-in value consisting of three dots (...). Used in varying
ways by various libraries and modules, but not by the core language.

else
A clause that is (1) in an if statement that is executed only if all the
conditions in the headers of the other clauses fail, or (2) in a try statement
that is executed only if no exceptions are raised within the try suite, or (3) in
a while or for compound statement that is executed only once the condition
in the while or for clause header fails. (See also elif; else; finally; if; try.)
encapsulation
The intended purpose of classes: to associate data (attributes) with the
functions (methods) written to interpret or mutate that data.

endianness
See byte order.

entry point
The code that is run first when importing or executing a project.

error
An exception representing a program state caused by unexpected and
improper behavior. (See also exceptional state.) event loop
The loop in asynchrony that manages multitasking between awaitables and
provides the means of calling the first awaitable in the stack.

except
A clause in a try statement whose suite is executed if any exceptions
indicated in the header are raised within the try suite. (See also else; finally;
try.) exception

An object that represents an exceptional program state and stores
information associated with that state. When unhandled, exceptions are
fatal. (See also error; exceptional state; warning.) exceptional state
A program state wherein, in most cases, data must be changed or program
flow must be redirected to allow valid continued execution. (See also
exception; happy path.) exception chaining
The act of associating an exception with one or more preceding exceptions
in the call stack.

executor
An object that creates and manages threads in threading.

expression
A section of code that evaluates to a single value.

extension module
See binary extension module.

F
falsey
See truthiness.

field
See attribute.

file-like object
See stream.

file object
See stream.

finalizer
The special instance method __del__(), which is called when the instance is
deleted either with the del operator or by the garbage collector. (See also
constructor; initializer.) finally
A clause in a try statement that is always run after the other clauses, even if
the suite in another clause raises an exception or returns. (See also else;
except; try.) finder

An object that locates the module being imported.

finder, meta path
A finder that uses a particular strategy to find a module.

finder, path-based
A type of meta path finder that searches the filesystem for a module. Calls
one or more path entry finders.

finder, path entry
A finder that searches the filesystem for a module in a particular manner,
such as searching compressed files.

first-class citizen
A designation that indicates something can be treated as an object.
Functions are examples of first-class citizens in Python.

fixture
A function or method that sets up anything a test might need, especially
things that are shared by multiple tests. Can also perform teardown.

fixture, autouse
A fixture that is automatically applied to all tests.

flaky test
A test that may fail unexpectedly or periodically, for reasons other than a
flaw in the code that it’s testing.

float
See floating-point number.

floating-point number
A number with a decimal part that is stored internally according to the IEEE
754 standard. In Python, these are always stored with double precision.
Floating-point numbers are infamous for being unable to store exact values.
(See also complex number; Decimal; Fraction; integer.) flush (v.)
To force the retrieval of all data in a buffer; usually refers to printing all
data in the standard output stream or standard error stream.

for
A compound statement that defines a loop, iterates over the iterable(s) in the
header, and executes the suite on each iteration, unless explicitly exited.
(See also while.) format specification
A mini-language of various flags that control how a value is formatted in a
formatted string.

formatted string
A type of string literal that allows you to insert and format expressions and
their resulting values directly in the string value. Denoted by an f before the
opening quote. (See also raw string; string; string literal.) Fraction
An object that stores an exact fraction, rather than floating-point numbers,
thereby representing an exact fractional numeric value. (See also complex
number; Decimal; floating-point number; integer.) freeze (v.)
To execute the process of compiling Python source code to frozen code.

freezer
A tool that bundles the compiled Python code, the Python interpreter, and
all the package dependencies into a single artifact.

frozen code
C arrays of Python bytecode that is assembled into machine code. Frozen
code must still be executed by the Python interpreter.

frozenset
An immutable variant of a set.

f-string
See formatted string.

fully qualified name
The name of an object, such as a function, as the import system sees it;
includes the names of the packages and the module the object is contained
within. (See also qualified name.) function
A callable with a name that contains a suite of statements and can optionally
accept one or more arguments. (See also callable.) function, member
See method.
function, pure
A function or callable that (a) has no side effects, (b) does not affect the
behavior of other functions, and (c) is repeatable and stateless, such that
input X will always yield output Y.

functional programming
A programming paradigm that organizes around pure, stateless functions.
(See also object-oriented programming; procedural programming).

function annotation
Type hints applied to a function.

future
An object that will contain a value at some point in the future but can be
passed around like a normal object, even before it contains that value. Often
used in threading and multiprocessing. Known as a “promise” or “delay” in
other languages.

fuzzing
The act of generating random inputs in tests to find inputs that cause the
code to fail in unexpected ways.

G
garbage collection
The process of removing unneeded objects from memory.

garbage collector, generational
A garbage collector that handles all the odd situations a reference-counting
garbage collector cannot. (See also garbage collector, reference-counting.)
garbage collector, reference-counting
A garbage collector that removes values when their reference count reaches
zero. (See also garbage collector, generational.) generator
See generator function or generator object.

generator expression
An anonymous generator that is defined by a single expression and that
evaluates to a generator object. A generator expression is to a generator as a
lambda is to a function. (See also comprehension.) generator function
A function containing one or more yield statements. When called directly, it
produces a generator object.

generator object
An iterable object that produces values on demand. (See also
comprehension.) generic function
See single-dispatch generic function.

generic type
A type hint, usually referring to a collection, where the type of items in the
collection is passed as a parameter.

Global Interpreter Lock (GIL)
A mechanism in CPython that ensures any single Python process is
constrained to a single CPU core, regardless of how many cores are
available to the system.

god class
An antipattern; a class that violates the single-responsibility principle by
having too many purposes or functionalities. Prone to bugs and difficult to
maintain.

H
happy path
A program execution flow wherein all data and conditions are logically
correct and valid, such that no errors can occur. (See also exceptional state.)
hashable
Describes an object for which a hash value can be created and for which the
hash value never changes during the object’s lifetime. Must implement the
special method __hash__(). All immutable values are hashable, while many
mutable types are not.
hash value
A unique, immutable value, typically an integer, that is generated by
processing an object in some way. Two objects that have the same hash
value are usually guaranteed to be equivalent. Hash values are used by
some collections and algorithms because it’s faster to compare hash values
than most other values.

header
The first line of a clause, always terminated with a colon (:).

hexadecimal
A base-16 number system consisting of the digits 0 through 9, as well as the
digits A through F (which represent decimal values 10 through 15). In
Python, hexadecimal literals are prefixed with 0x. (See also binary; octal.)
hook, meta
A meta path finder stored in sys.meta_path.

hook, path entry
A path entry finder stored in sys.path_hooks.

I
identity
A reference to a particular value in memory. When two names share an
identity, they are bound to the same value in memory.

identity operator
See is.

if
A compound statement that executes a suite based on the condition of one
or more clause headers. If the if header condition fails, each subsequent elif
header in the compound statement is evaluated; if all conditions fail, the else
clause executes, if one is present. (See also elif; else.) immutable
Describes a value that CANNOT be modified in place. Attempting to
mutate on a name referencing an immutable value will instead rebind the
name to a new value. (See also mutable.) import, absolute
An import statement that uses the fully qualified name of the module,
starting from the top-level package.

import, relative
An import statement that uses the qualified name of a module relative to the
current package.

importer
An object that serves as both a finder and a loader.

importer, built-in
An importer that finds and loads built-in modules.

importer, frozen
An importer that finds and loads frozen modules.

in
An operator that is used to check whether a particular value is contained in
any collection or other object that implements the special method
__contains__().

indirect parametrization
See parametrization, indirect.

infinite iterator
An iterator that will continue to yield values until explicitly stopped.

infinite loop
A loop with no means of exiting; see loop, infinite.

inheritance
The relationship between two classes A and B, such that class B has one or
more attributes or methods defined in class A, in addition to one or more
attributes or methods first defined and/or redefined in class B. Also known
as an “is-a” relationship. (See also composition.) initializer
The special instance method __init__(), which is called immediately after a
new instance is created from a class by the constructor. (See also
constructor; finalizer.) instance
An organized collection of attributes (variables) and methods (functions)
created according to a class and existing in memory as a single value. (See
also class; object.) integer
A whole number.

interactive session
A console in which you enter and run code through the interpreter in real
time and see the outcomes.

interface
The set of public methods that are used to interact with the class or object.

interpreted language
A language in which the source code or the bytecode created from the
source code is interpreted and executed at runtime, on the client’s machine,
by the language’s interpreter.

interpreter
A program that interprets and executes source code or bytecode.

interpreter shutdown
A special phase of the interpreter, wherein all allocated resources are
gradually freed.

intra-package reference
See import, relative.

introspection
The ability of code to access information about itself at runtime.

is
An operator comparing the identity of two operands. Typically only used
when comparing an operand with the value True, False, or None.
iterable
An object that can be traversed by an iterator; must supply an iterator object
via the special method __iter__(). All collections are iterables. (See also
iteration; iterative; iterator.) iteration
The process of acting on each individual value in a group of one or more
values, which are either contained within a collection or provided one by
one, on demand, by a statement. (See also iterable; iterative; iterator.)
iterative
Describes something employing iteration.

iterator
An object that can traverse an iterable object; must implement the special
method __next__() and return itself from __iter__(). (See also iterable;
iteration; iterative.)

K
key function
A callable that returns the part of a collection or object that should be used
for sorting.

L
lambda
An anonymous function made up of a single expression, the value of which
is implicitly returned.

lazy evaluation
Behavior wherein each item in an iterable is evaluated on demand, instead
of up front. (See also eager evaluation.) LEGB
See scope resolution order.

linter
A static analyzer that checks source code for common mistakes, potential
errors, and style inconsistencies.

list
A mutable, sequential (array-like) collection. List literals are comma
delimited and enclosed in square brackets ([ ]). (See also deque; dictionary;
set; tuple.) list comprehension
See comprehension, list.

literal
An expression that explicitly defines a value in place.

little-endian
See byte order.

livelock
An erroneous situation similar to deadlock, except that threads keep
infinitely repeating the same interactions, instead of merely waiting on one
other. (See also starvation.) loader
An object that loads a module using its module spec.

lock
An object that ensures only one task, thread, or process can access a shared
resource at once, to help prevent race conditions. (See also deadlock,
livelock, starvation.) Look Before You Leap (LBYL)
A coding philosophy wherein you prevent errors by testing a value before
using it. (See also Easier to Ask Forgiveness than Permission (EAFP).)
lookup chain
The rules that determine where Python searches for an attribute and in what
order. The order is as follows: data descriptors, object attributes, non-data
descriptors, and finally class attributes according to the superclass
linearization.

loop, infinite
A loop with no means of exiting. (See infinite loop.)
loose coupling
A pattern in which two or more components interact solely via their public
interfaces, without regard to their implementation.

M
magic method
See method, special.

marking
The application of metadata to tests and fixtures. (See also
parametrization.) memoryview
An object that provides access to the raw memory of any object
implementing the buffer protocol.

metaclass
The object from which a class is instantiated.

meta hook
See hook, meta.

meta path finder
See finder, meta path.

method
A function that is a member of a class or instance.

method, class
A method that belongs to the class itself and can be called on the class or on
any instance of the class. Can access class attributes but cannot access
instance attributes. (See also method, instance; method, static.) method,
dunder
See method, special.

method, instance
A method that belongs to the instance and can access the attributes of the
particular instance. (See also method, class; method, static.) method, magic
See method, special.

method, special
A method that implements a core Python language feature on a class or
instance; for example, any instance that supports the addition operator (+)
implements the special method __add__(). The name of a special method
always starts and ends with two underscores (__).

method, static
A method that belongs to the class but cannot access either the class
attributes or the instance attributes. (See also method, class; method,
instance.) method resolution order
The rules that determine the order in which the classes in an inheritance
relationship are checked for a method or attribute. (See also superclass
linearization.) mixin
A class that exists purely to contain methods and attributes that you may
want to compose into other classes. It may be incomplete or even invalid by
itself, as it is not intended to be instantiated directly.

mocking
The act of temporarily replacing parts of the code with versions that will
simulate inputs or other scenarios during testing.

module
An object of organization in Python. Usually executable and often
implemented as a Python file (.py). (See also package.) module search path
The directory that defines where Python looks for packages and modules
and what order it searches in.

module spec
An object containing all the information about how to load a module.

multiprocessing
A technique for achieving parallelism in Python by running tasks on
different independent Python processes. (See also concurrency; parallelism;
threading.) mutable
Describes a value that can be modified in place.

mutate
To change a value in place.

N
name
A token composed of letters, numbers, and underscores, which is always
bound to a value. Commonly thought of as a “variable” in Python. Names
have scope but not type.

namedtuple
A tuple with named fields.

name mangling
A behavior of Python wherein a name belonging to a class is renamed,
usually to prevent naming conflicts or to provide a weak form of data
hiding. Any name belonging to a class that is preceded by two underscores
(__) will be name mangled. (See also non-public; public.) namespace
An explicitly defined path to something, such as a function.

None
A dedicated value universally representing a lack of a value, rather than a
value equivalent to False or 0.

NoneType
The data type of the None value.

non-public
An attribute or method that is not intended to be called or mutated outside
of the containing class, although such access is still possible. Non-public
names always begin with an underscore (_). (See also name mangling;
public.) not
A logical operator that reverses the boolean result of an expression. When
paired with the is operator (is not), it checks that two values do not have the
same identity. (See also and; or.) number system
A system whereby numeric values are represented with sequences of digits.
For example, the decimal, or base-10, number system consists of the digits
0 through 9. (See also binary; hexadecimal; octal.)

O
object
An instance of a class. In Python, the maxim is “Everything is an object.”

object-oriented programming
A programming paradigm that is organized around classes and objects by
coupling data and its related logic. (See also functional programming.)
obvious
How any idiomatic Python solution should feel, once you know it.

octal
A base-8 number system consisting of the digits 0 through 7. In Python,
octal literals are prefixed with 0o. (See also binary; hexadecimal.) operator
A token, usually a symbol, which together with one or two operands
(values) forms an expression. All operators in Python call a special method
behind the scenes.

operator, binary
An operator that accepts two operands.

operator, unary
An operator that accepts one operand.

or
A logical operator where one or both operand expressions must evaluate to
True for the operator to return True. (See also and; not .)

OrderedDict
A variant of the dictionary with extra functionality for tracking and
managing the order of key-value pairs. (See also Counter; defaultdict.)

P
package
A term that usually refers to a regular package. (See package, regular.)
package, namespace
A specialized type of package, lacking an __init__.py module, which allows
you to distribute a package in multiple portions. Should not be confused
with a package, regular.

package, regular
A special type of module containing other modules or packages. Usually
exists as a directory containing an __init__.py module.

parallelism
A technique in which multiple tasks are executed simultaneously on
different CPU cores. (See also concurrency; multiprocessing.) parameter
A name defined in the header of a function to which a value can be passed
(assigned) when the function is called. (See also argument.) parameter,
keyword-only
A parameter that only accepts a keyword argument. (See also parameter,
positional-only.) parameter, optional
A parameter for which an argument may be omitted in the call. A parameter
is made optional by defining a default argument value in the parameter list.
(See also parameter, required.) parameter, positional-only
A parameter that only accepts a positional argument. (See also parameter,
keyword-only.) parameter, required
A parameter for which an argument must be provided in the call. (See also
parameter, optional.) parameter, variadic
See parameter, variadic positional.

parameter, variadic keyword
A parameter that can accept an arbitrary number of keyword arguments and
that packs them into a dictionary. The variadic keyword parameter name is
preceded by two asterisks (**). Conventionally named kwargs. (See also
argument, variadic keyword; parameter, variadic.) parameter, variadic
positional
A parameter that can accept an arbitrary number of positional arguments,
packing them into a tuple. The variadic parameter name is preceded by a
single asterisk (*). Conventionally named args. (See also argument,
variadic; parameter, variadic keyword.) parametrization
The expansion of a single test out into multiple tests, each with the same
logic but different data. Accomplished via marking.

parametrization, indirect
The act of relaying parametrized values to a fixture.

pass
A keyword that has no effect. Usually used as a placeholder for a suite.

path, absolute
A path that starts from the root of the filesystem.

path, concrete
A path-like object that provides methods for interacting with the filesystem.

path, pure
A path-like object that does not access the underlying filesystem.

path, relative
A path that starts from some nonroot location on the filesystem.

path-like object
An object that represents a filesystem path. Inherits from the abstract class
os.Pathlike.

pdb
See Python Debugger (pdb).

PEP
See Python Enhancement Proposal.

PEP 8
The Python style guide.

picklable
Describes any value that can be serialized by the pickle protocol.

pickle
A serialization format that is extraordinarily slow and insecure in most use
cases, but which remains useful in multiprocessing.

pin (v.)
To set a dependency in packaging to use a specific version of the
dependency.

platform wheel
See wheel, platform.

polymorphism
A pattern wherein multiple classes, with different behaviors and features,
offer a common interface.

portion
Part of a larger package distributed with namespace packages.

postmortem (v.)
To run a debugger after a fatal crash has taken place.

pre-emptive multitasking
See threading.
priming
The act of making an initial call to a simple coroutine, advancing it to its
first yield statement so it can receive a value via send(). Performed either by
calling send(None) on the simple coroutine or by passing the simple coroutine
to next().

procedural programming
A programming paradigm that organizes around control blocks and focuses
on control flow. (See also functional programming; object-oriented
programming.) process (n.)
An instance of a running computer program on a system. (See also
multiprocessing; subprocess; thread.) producer
A thread or process that provides data. (See also consumer.)

profiling
The technique by which you identify performance bottlenecks and common
inefficiencies in existing code, thus finding where that code can be
optimized. (See also benchmarking.) promise
See future.

provisional
A term applied to a package or API that may change at any time, without
regard to backward compatibility.

property
A name belonging to a class instance. Behaves externally like an attribute
but is internally implemented as one to three instance methods: a getter, a
setter, and a deleter.

public
An attribute or method that is intended to be called or mutated outside of
the containing class. (See also non-public.) pure function
See function, pure.

PyPA
See Python Packaging Authority (PyPA).
PyPI
See Python Package Index (PyPI).

Python Debugger (pdb)
A debugger for Python, with a workflow similar to other command line
debuggers.

Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP)
A document formally proposing an addition or modification to an official
policy, standard, or specification related to the Python programming
language.

Pythonic
Describes idiomatic Python code, which is code that makes good use of
Python’s syntax and behavior.

Python Package Index (PyPI)
An online repository of Python packages.

Python Packaging Authority (PyPA) A quasi-official working
group made up of Python community members who maintain
projects and who want to make Python packaging a better
experience.

Python Software Foundation (PSF)
The nonprofit organization that officially manages the Python language.

Q
qualified name
The name of an object, such as a function, preceded by its complete
namespace within one of its modules and packages, if any. (See also fully
qualified name.)
R
race condition
A bug-causing situation in concurrency or parallelism where an outcome is
dependent on the order in which various tasks, threads, or processes start,
pause, resume, and/or finish. (This order is always unpredictable.) Race
conditions can be infamously hard to detect and debug. (See also lock.) raw
string
A type of string literal wherein the backslash is always treated as a literal
character, rather than an escape character. Denoted by an r before the
opening quote. (See also formatted string; string; string literal.) rebind
To bind an existing name to a different value.

recursion
A callable calling itself; can be used as a form of looping. (See also
recursion.) recursion depth
The number of open (not yet returned) recursive calls to a callable from
itself.

recursion limit
The maximum recursion depth before Python raises an error; can be set via
sys.setrecursionlimit().

reentrant (adj.)
Describes something that can be paused mid-execution while being called
again concurrently, without any odd effects. This is an important concept in
concurrency and parallelism.

reference
The association between a name and a value.

reference count
A count of how many references exist for a given value.

repr
See canonical string representation.
return
A statement that immediately exits a function, optionally passing back to
the function caller the value that follows the keyword.

S
scope
The enclosing code structure within which a name is accessible. (See also
scope, global; scope, local; scope, nonlocal.) scope, global
The scope shared by the entire program; any name defined in the top level
of a module is in global scope.

scope, local
The scope that is defined by a function, lambda, or comprehension; any
name defined within local scope is only accessible within that scope.

scope, nonlocal
The scope that is local to the enclosing scope, rather than the present scope.
Seen in nested functions, where function A contains function B; A is the
nonlocal scope of B.

scope resolution order
The order in which scopes are searched for a given name. Best remembered
via the acronym LEGB, for local, enclosing-function local (aka nonlocal),
global, and built-in.

screaming snake case
A naming convention using all-caps letters (screaming) and underscores
(snakes); for example, INTEREST_RATE. Normally used for variables intended to
be used as constants, according to PEP 8. (See also camel case; snake case.)
sdist
See source distribution (sdist).

segmentation fault
A fatal system error resulting from a program trying to access computer
memory it doesn’t have permission to access. This is a common possible
outcome of undefined behavior.

self
The name conventionally given to the first parameter of an instance
method, which is intended to be bound to the instance itself.

sequence
An array-like collection.

serialization
The process of converting data to a format that can be stored. (See also
deserialization.) set
A mutable, unordered collection where all items are guaranteed to be
unique. Set literals are comma delimited and enclosed in braces ({ }). (See
also deque; dictionary; frozenset; tuple.) set comprehension
See comprehension, set.

severity level
The relative importance of a message sent to a logger.

shadow (v.)
To obscure a name with another name; especially, to obscure a built-in or
global name with a local name or to obscure a class attribute with an
instance attribute.

shallow copy
See copy.

shebang
A special comment at the top of a Python file by which you can make the
file directly executable. Short for “haSH-BANG” (#!), which appears at the
beginning of the comment.

side effects
Any changes made to state outside of the local scope of a function.

simple coroutine
See coroutine, simple.

single-dispatch generic function
A function that behaves differently for parameters of different types.

single-responsibility principle
A principle stating that a function, class, or module should have one clear
and distinct responsibility.

singleton
A design pattern in which a class only allows one version of itself to be
instantiated at any one time. Generally discouraged in Python; static classes
are preferred. (See class, static.) slice notation
A form of subscripting by which you can iterate over multiple values in a
specified range or pattern. Slice notation is enclosed in square brackets ([ ])
and consists of three integer parts: [start:stop:step]. Any of these three parts
may be omitted.

slots
A tuple of predefined attributes on an object, declared with the __slots__
special class attribute. Using slots is faster than the default behavior,
wherein attributes are stored in a dictionary.

snake case
A naming convention, typically using all lowercase letters, with underscores
(snakes) in place of spaces (e.g., interest_rate). Normally used for variable
and function names in Python, according to PEP 8. (See also camel case;
screaming snake case.) software test fixture
See fixture.

source distribution (sdist)
One or more Python packages bundled into a compressed archive.

special attribute
See attribute, special.

special method
See method, special.

starred expression
A name that is preceded by an asterisk (*) and into which multiple values
may be unpacked.

starvation
An erroneous situation in which a thread is permanently stuck, waiting for a
future or waiting to join a thread, especially to acquire some data or
resource it needs. (See also deadlock; livelock.) state
Data stored between executions of a callable that typically affect the
callable’s behavior.

statement
A single executable unit of code in Python; analogous to a sentence in
English. (See also expression; statement, compound.) statement, compound
A structure that organizes additional statements into one or more clauses
and affects the execution of those statements in some manner. Python has
seven types of compound statements: if, while, for, try, with, def, and class.

statement, simple
Typically, a single line of code. (See also statement.)

static analyzer
A tool that checks source code for potential problems or deviations from
standards. (See also linter.) stream
A buffer object that offers methods for reading from or writing to a file or
other input/output source.

stream, standard error
A stream provided by the operating system. Serves as a buffer that prints to
the terminal but marks the messages as related to errors, instead of normal
output.

stream, standard input
A stream provided by the operating system. Serves as a buffer that contains
data typed into the terminal.
stream, standard output
A stream provided by the operating system. Serves as a buffer that prints to
the terminal.

string
A value consisting of one or more Unicode or ASCII characters. (See also
formatted string; raw string; string literal.) string literal
A literal representation of a string. It is wrapped in a matching pair of single
quotes ('...'), double quotes ("..."), or triple quotes ("""...""").

struct
A module for converting between Python values and binary data, including
for interoperability with C values.

stub class
A class that contains little to no data.

subprocess
A separate process that is linked to the main process. (See also
multiprocessing.) subscript
A reference to an individual value within a collection or other object created
by specifying an index integer in square brackets ([ ]).

subscriptable
Describes any collection or object that allows you to access, modify, or
delete individual items by specifying an index integer in square brackets ([
]). For an object to be subscriptable, it must implement one or more of the
following special methods, as appropriate: __getitem__(), __setitem__(),
__delitem__(). (See also slice notation.) suite

A “block” of code; one or more statements that belong to (are the “body”
of) a clause and thus belong to a compound statement, which controls their
execution.

super()
A function that accesses the next class in the superclass linearization for the
current class.
superclass linearization
The list of base classes a class inherits from, in the order they are to be
searched for the method being called. (See also method resolution order.)

T
task
A special object that runs native coroutines without blocking.

teardown
Cleanup tasks like closing streams or database connections or deleting
temporary files. (See also fixture.) ternary expression
A compact conditional expression that produces a value. Follows the form a
if expression else b, where the ternary expression evaluates to a if expression
evaluates to True, or to b otherwise.

test fixture
See fixture.

test-driven development (TDD)
The practice of writing tests before writing the code and then writing the
code to make the tests pass.

thread
A single flow of execution within a process. A single process may have
multiple threads.

threading
A form of concurrency in which the operating system manages multitasking
by running each task in a thread. (See also asynchrony, parallelism.) thread
safety
Techniques to avoid concurrency-related bugs, especially race conditions.

timeout
In concurrency and parallelism, the maximum time until the program gives
up waiting on a thread or process to join.
traceback
The complete call stack leading to an exception, along with any information
about the exception itself.

truthiness
The implied boolean value of any expression or value; it is truthy if
evaluating to True and falsey if evaluating to False. Values equivalent to False,
0, or None are falsey; all others are truthy.

truthy
See truthiness.

try
A compound statement that catches any exceptions raised within the initial
clause and handles them according to the subsequent except, else, and finally
clauses. (See also else; except; finally.) tuple
An immutable, sequential (array-like) collection. Tuple literals are comma
delimited and normally enclosed in parentheses (( )). (See also deque;
dictionary; list; namedtuple; set.) Turing-complete
Describes a quality of a language whereby you could implement any other
programming language in it and execute any program written in that
language.

type
The metaclass from which nearly all classes are instantiated.

type alias
A name bound to a type hint, especially a parameterized generic type, for
easier reuse.

type annotations
See type hint.

type hint
An annotation that describes the expected data type associated with a name,
parameter, or function return. Only used by certain static analyzers; entirely
ignored by the Python language itself.
U
undefined behavior
A situation in code with no formal definition for how it should be handled.
(See also segmentation fault.) unit test
A test that verifies the behavior of a single unit, such as a function or a
conditional path through a function.

unpack
To assign each of the values in a collection or other iterable to multiple
names.

V
value
A unique copy of data in memory. There must be a reference to the value, or
else it is deleted. Values have type but not scope.

variable
A term referring to a name and its value together.

variable, member
See attribute.

version control system
Software that tracks revisions to source code and other files. Git is a major
example.

virtual environment
A sandboxed environment containing separate installations of desired
packages.

virtual subclassing
A technique wherein an ABC reports certain classes as being derived, even
if they aren’t.
W
walrus operator
See assignment expression.

warning
A message about a problem that has been worked around or another piece
of important information. Warnings are nonfatal by default. (See also
exception.) warnings filter
An argument passed to the Python interpreter that controls which warnings
are displayed and how.

weakref
A reference that doesn’t increase the reference count on the value.

wheel
A standardized format for Python built distributions, defined in PEP 237.
Superseded eggs, a more limited format with similar goals.

wheel, platform
A wheel built for a specific system.

while
A compound statement that defines a loop; as long as the condition in the
header is true, the suite is executed, unless explicitly exited. (See also for.)
wrapper module
A binary extension module that exposes a C library to Python. (See also
accelerator module.)

Y
yield
A keyword used in generators and simple coroutines. Either (a) returns the
value of the expression following the operator to the caller of the
generator’s __next__() method or (b) passes to the assignment operator
preceding this operator the value sent to the coroutine via its send() method.
(See also generator; yield from.) yield from
A statement that passes execution control flow from the current generator to
the iterable following this operator. (See also generator; yield.)

Z
Zen of Python, The
A poem by Tim Peters that expresses the philosophy of the Python
language.
