
    3. Terms, definitions, and symbols

1   For the purposes of this document, the terms and definitions given in ISO/IEC 2382, ISO 80000–2,
    and the following apply.
2   ISO and IEC maintain terminology databases for use in standardization at the following addresses:

      — ISO Online browsing platform: available at https://www.iso.org/obp

      — IEC Electropedia: available at https://www.electropedia.org/

3   Additional terms are defined where they appear in italic type or on the left side of a syntax rule.
    Terms explicitly defined in this document are not to be presumed to refer implicitly to similar terms
    defined elsewhere.

    3.1
1   access (verb)
    ⟨execution-time action⟩ read or modify the value of an object
2   Note 1 to entry: Where only one of these two actions is meant, "read" or "modify" is used.
3   Note 2 to entry: "Modify" includes the case where the new value being stored is the same as the previous
    value.
4   Note 3 to entry: Expressions that are not evaluated do not access objects.

    3.2
1   alignment
    requirement that objects of a particular type be located on storage boundaries with addresses that
    are particular multiples of a byte (3.7) address

    3.3
1   argument
    actual argument
    DEPRECATED: actual parameter
    expression in the comma-separated list bounded by the parentheses in a function call expression, or
    a sequence of preprocessing tokens in the comma-separated list bounded by the parentheses in a
    function-like macro invocation

    3.4
1   arithmetically negate
    produce the negative of a given number
2   Note 1 to entry: For a floating-point number (5.2.5.3.3), this changes the sign; for an integer, this is equivalent
    to subtracting from zero.

    3.5
1   behavior
    external appearance or action

    3.5.1
1   implementation-defined behavior
    unspecified behavior where each implementation documents how the choice is made

    § 3.5.1                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                      General — 3

2   Note 1 to entry: J.3 gives an overview over properties of C programs that lead to implementation-defined
    behavior.
3   EXAMPLE An example of implementation-defined behavior is the propagation of the high-order bit when a
    signed integer is shifted right.

    3.5.2
1   locale-specific behavior
    behavior that depends on local conventions of nationality, culture, and language that each implemen-
    tation documents
2   Note 1 to entry: J.4 gives an overview over properties of C programs that lead to locale-specific behavior.
3   EXAMPLE An example of locale-specific behavior is whether the islower function returns true for characters
    other than the 26 lowercase Latin letters.

    3.5.3
1   undefined behavior
    behavior, upon use of a nonportable or erroneous program construct or of erroneous data, for which
    this document imposes no requirements
2   Note 1 to entry: Possible undefined behavior ranges from ignoring the situation completely with unpredictable
    results, to behaving during translation or program execution in a documented manner characteristic of the
    environment (with or without the issuance of a diagnostic message), to terminating a translation or execution
    (with the issuance of a diagnostic message).
3   Note 2 to entry: J.2 gives an overview over properties of C programs that lead to undefined behavior.
4   Note 3 to entry: Any other behavior during execution of a program is only affected as a direct consequence of
    the concrete behavior that occurs when encountering the erroneous or non-portable program construct or data.
    In particular, all observable behavior (5.1.2.4) appears as specified in this document when it happens before an
    operation with undefined behavior in the execution of the program.
5   EXAMPLE An example of undefined behavior is the behavior on dereferencing a null pointer.

    3.5.4
1   unspecified behavior
    behavior, that results from the use of an unspecified value, or other behavior upon which this
    document provides two or more possibilities and imposes no further requirements on which is
    chosen in any instance
2   Note 1 to entry: J.1 gives an overview over properties of C programs that lead to unspecified behavior.
3   EXAMPLE An example of unspecified behavior is the order in which the arguments to a function are evaluated.

    3.6
1   bit
    unit of data storage in the execution environment large enough to hold an object that can have one
    of two values. It may not be possible to express the address of each individual bit of an object.

    3.7
1   byte
    addressable unit of data storage large enough to hold any member of the basic character set of the
    execution environment
2   Note 1 to entry: It is possible to express the address of each individual byte of an object uniquely.

    3.8
1   low-order bit
    the least significant bit within a byte

                                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                     § 3.8
                                                      General — 4

    3.9
1   high-order bit
    the most significant bit within a byte

    3.10
1   character
    ⟨abstract⟩ member of a set of elements used for the organization, control, or representation of data

    3.10.1
1   character
    single-byte character
    ⟨C⟩ bit representation that fits in a byte

    3.10.2
1   multibyte character
    sequence of one or more bytes representing a member of the extended character set of either the
    source or the execution environment
2   Note 1 to entry: The extended character set is a superset of the basic character set.

    3.10.3
1   wide character
    value representable by an object of type wchar_t, capable of representing any character in the
    current locale

    3.11
1   constraint
    restriction, either syntactic or semantic, by which the exposition of language elements is interpreted

    3.12
1   correctly rounded result
    representation in the result format that is nearest in value, subject to the current rounding mode, to
    what the result would be given unlimited range and precision
2   Note 1 to entry: In this document, the words "correctly rounded" may apply to an operation that produces a
    correctly rounded result, or to input for such an operation.
3   Note 2 to entry: ISO/IEC 60559 or implementation-defined rules apply for extreme magnitude results if the
    result format contains infinity.

    3.13
1   diagnostic message
    message belonging to an implementation-defined subset of the implementation’s message output

    3.14
1   forward reference
    reference to a subsequent subclause in this document that contains additional information relevant
    to the subclause containing the reference

    3.15
1   implementation
    particular set of software, running in a particular translation environment under particular con-
    trol options, that performs translation of programs for, and supports execution of functions in, a

    § 3.15                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                     General — 5

    particular execution environment

    3.16
1   implementation limit
    restriction imposed upon programs by the implementation

    3.17
1   memory location
    either an object of scalar type, or a maximal sequence of adjacent bit-fields all having nonzero width
2   Note 1 to entry: Two threads of execution can update and access separate memory locations without interfering
    with each other.
3   Note 2 to entry: A bit-field and an adjacent non-bit-field member are in separate memory locations. The same
    applies to two bit-fields, if one is declared inside a nested structure declaration and the other is not, or if the
    two are separated by a zero-length bit-field declaration, or if they are separated by a non-bit-field member
    declaration. It is not safe to concurrently update two non-atomic bit-fields in the same structure if all members
    declared between them are also (nonzero-length) bit-fields, no matter what the sizes of those intervening
    bit-fields happen to be.
4   EXAMPLE A structure declared as

             struct {
                   char a;
                   int b:5, c:11,:0, d:8;
                   struct { int ee:8; } e;
             }

    contains four separate memory locations: The member a, and bit-fields d and e.ee are each separate memory
    locations, and can be modified concurrently without interfering with each other. The bit-fields b and c together
    constitute the fourth memory location. The bit-fields b and c cannot be concurrently modified, but b and a, for
    example, can be.

    3.18
1   object
    region of data storage in the execution environment, the contents of which can represent values
2   Note 1 to entry: When referenced, an object can be interpreted as having a particular type; see 6.3.2.1.

    3.19
1   parameter
    formal parameter
    DEPRECATED: formal argument
    object declared as part of a function declaration or definition that acquires a value on entry to the
    function, or an identifier from the comma-separated list bounded by the parentheses immediately
    following the macro name in a function-like macro definition

    3.20
1   recommended practice
    specification that is strongly recommended as being in keeping with the intent of the standard, but
    that may be impractical for some implementations

    3.21
1   runtime-constraint
    requirement on a program when calling a library function
2   Note 1 to entry: Despite the similar terms, a runtime-constraint is not a kind of constraint as defined by 3.11,

                                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                      § 3.21
                                                       General — 6

    and it is not necessary for it to be diagnosed at translation time.
3   Note 2 to entry: Implementations that support the extensions in Annex K are required to verify that the
    runtime-constraints for a library function are not violated by the program; see K.3.1.4.
4   Note 3 to entry: Implementations that support Annex L are permitted to invoke a runtime-constraint handler
    when they perform a trap.

    3.22
1   value
    precise meaning of the contents of an object when interpreted as having a specific type

    3.22.1
1   implementation-defined value
    unspecified value where each implementation documents how the choice is made

    3.22.2
1   unspecified value
    valid value of the relevant type where this document imposes no requirements on which value is
    chosen in any instance

    3.23
1   indeterminate representation
    object representation that either represents an unspecified value or is a non-value representation

    3.24
1   non-value representation
    an object representation that does not represent a value of the object type

    3.25
1   perform a trap
    interrupt execution of the program such that no further operations are performed
2   Note 1 to entry: Fetching a non-value representation permits an implementation to perform a trap but is not
    required to (see 6.2.6.1).
3   Note 2 to entry: Implementations that support Annex L are permitted to invoke a runtime-constraint handler
    when they perform a trap.

    3.26
1   ⌈x⌉
    ceiling of x
    the least integer greater than or equal to x
2   EXAMPLE ⌈2.4⌉ is 3, ⌈−2.4⌉ is −2.

    3.27
1   ⌊x⌋
    floor of x
    the greatest integer less than or equal to x
2   EXAMPLE ⌊2.4⌋ is 2, ⌊−2.4⌋ is −3.

    3.28
1   wraparound

    § 3.28                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                      General — 7

the process by which a value is reduced modulo 2N , where N is the width of the resulting type

                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                           § 3.28
                                           General — 8
