
    5. Environment
1   An implementation translates C source files and executes C programs in two data-processing-system
    environments, which will be called the translation environment and the execution environment in this
    document. Their characteristics define and constrain the results of executing conforming C programs
    constructed according to the syntactic and semantic rules for conforming implementations.
    Forward references: In this clause, only a few of many possible forward references have been
    noted.

    5.1 Conceptual models
    5.1.1 Translation environment
    5.1.1.1 Program structure
1   A C program is not required to be translated in its entirety at the same time. The text of the program
    is kept in units called source files, (or preprocessing files) in this document. A source file together
    with all the headers and source files included via the preprocessing directive #include is known
    as a preprocessing translation unit. After preprocessing, a preprocessing translation unit is called a
    translation unit. Previously translated translation units may be preserved individually or in libraries.
    The separate translation units of a program communicate by (for example) calls to functions whose
    identifiers have external linkage, manipulation of objects whose identifiers have external linkage, or
    manipulation of data files. Translation units may be separately translated and then later linked to
    produce an executable program.
    Forward references: linkages of identifiers (6.2.2), external definitions (6.9), preprocessing directives
    (6.10).

    5.1.1.2     Translation phases
1   The precedence among the syntax rules of translation is specified by the following phases.3)

       1. Physical source file multibyte characters are mapped, in an implementation-defined manner, to
          the source character set (introducing new-line characters for end-of-line indicators) if necessary.

       2. Each instance of a backslash character (\) immediately followed by a new-line character is
          deleted, splicing physical source lines to form logical source lines. Only the last backslash on
          any physical source line shall be eligible for being part of such a splice. A source file that is
          not empty shall end in a new-line character, which shall not be immediately preceded by a
          backslash character before any such splicing takes place.

       3. The source file is decomposed into preprocessing tokens4) and sequences of white-space
          characters (including comments). A source file shall not end in a partial preprocessing token or
          in a partial comment. Each comment is replaced by one space character. New-line characters
          are retained. Whether each nonempty sequence of white-space characters other than new-line
          is retained or replaced by one space character is implementation-defined.

       4. Preprocessing directives are executed, macro invocations are expanded, and _Pragma unary
          operator expressions are executed. If a character sequence that matches the syntax of a univer-
          sal character name is produced by token concatenation (6.10.5.3), the behavior is undefined. A
          #include preprocessing directive causes the named header or source file to be processed from
          phase 1 through phase 4, recursively. All preprocessing directives are then deleted.
       3) This requires implementations to behave as if these separate phases occur, even though many are typically folded together

    in practice. Source files, translation units, and translated translation units necessarily can be stored as files or through/within
    any other implementation-defined medium. There does not have to be any one-to-one correspondence between these entities
    and any external representation. The description is conceptual only, and does not specify any particular implementation.
       4) As described in 6.4, the process of dividing a source file’s characters into preprocessing tokens is context-dependent. For

    example, see the handling of < within a #include preprocessing directive.

    § 5.1.1.2                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Environment — 11

       5. Each source character set member and escape sequence in character constants and string
          literals is converted to the corresponding member of the execution character set. Each instance
          of a source character or escape sequence for which there is no corresponding member is
          converted in an implementation-defined manner to some member of the execution character
          set other than the null (wide) character.5)
       6. Adjacent string literal tokens are concatenated.
       7. White-space characters separating tokens are no longer significant. Each preprocessing token
          is converted into a token. The resulting tokens are syntactically and semantically analyzed
          and translated as a translation unit.
       8. All external object and function references are resolved. Library components are linked to
          satisfy external references to functions and objects not defined in the current translation. All
          such translator output is collected into a program image which contains information needed
          for execution in its execution environment.

    Forward references: universal character names (6.4.3), lexical elements (6.4), preprocessing direc-
    tives (6.10), external definitions (6.9).

    5.1.1.3 Diagnostics
1   A conforming implementation shall produce at least one diagnostic message (identified in an
    implementation-defined manner) if a preprocessing translation unit or translation unit contains
    a violation of any syntax rule or constraint, even if the behavior is also explicitly specified as
    undefined or implementation-defined. Diagnostic messages are not required to be produced in other
    circumstances.
2   EXAMPLE An implementation is required to issue a diagnostic for the translation unit:

            char i;
            int i;

    because in those cases where wording in this document describes the behavior for a construct as being both a
    constraint error and resulting in undefined behavior, the constraint error is still required to be diagnosed.

    Recommended practice
3   An implementation is encouraged to identify the nature of, and where possible localize, each
    violation. Of course, an implementation is free to produce any number of diagnostic messages, often
    referred to as warnings, as long as a valid program is still correctly translated. It can also successfully
    translate an invalid program. Annex I lists a few of the more common warnings.

    5.1.2    Execution environments
    5.1.2.1 General
1   Two execution environments are defined: freestanding and hosted. In both cases, program startup
    occurs when a designated C function is called by the execution environment. All objects with static
    storage duration shall be initialized (set to their initial values) before program startup. The manner
    and timing of such initialization are otherwise unspecified. Program termination returns control to
    the execution environment.
    Forward references: storage durations of objects (6.2.4), initialization (6.7.11).

    5.1.2.2 Freestanding environment
1   In a freestanding environment (in which C program execution may take place without any ben-
    efit of an operating system), the name and type of the function called at program startup are
    implementation-defined. Any library facilities available to a freestanding program, other than the
    minimal set required by Clause 4, are implementation-defined.
2   The effect of program termination in a freestanding environment is implementation-defined.
      5) An implementation may convert each instance of the same non-corresponding source character to a different member of

    the execution character set.

                                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                      § 5.1.2.2
                                                     Environment — 12

    5.1.2.3 Hosted environment
    5.1.2.3.1 General
1   A hosted environment is not required to be provided, but shall conform to the following specifica-
    tions if present.

    5.1.2.3.2 Program startup
1   The function called at program startup is named main. The implementation declares no prototype
    for this function. It shall be defined with a return type of int and with no parameters:

              int main(void) { /* ... */ }

    or with two parameters (referred to here as argc and argv, though any names may be used, as they
    are local to the function in which they are declared):

              int main(int argc, char *argv[]) { /* ... */ }

    or equivalent;6) or in some other implementation-defined manner.
2   If they are declared, the parameters to the main function shall obey the following constraints:

      — The value of argc shall be nonnegative.

      — argv[argc] shall be a null pointer.

      — If the value of argc is greater than zero, the array members argv[0] through argv[argc-1]
        inclusive shall contain pointers to strings, which are given implementation-defined values
        by the host environment prior to program startup. The intent is to supply to the program
        information determined prior to program startup from elsewhere in the hosted environment.
        If the host environment is not capable of supplying strings with letters in both uppercase and
        lowercase, the implementation shall ensure that the strings are received in lowercase.

      — If the value of argc is greater than zero, the string pointed to by argv[0] represents the
        program name; argv[0][0] shall be the null character if the program name is not available
        from the host environment. If the value of argc is greater than one, the strings pointed to by
        argv[1] through argv[argc-1] represent the program parameters.

      — The parameters argc and argv and the strings pointed to by the argv array shall be modifiable
        by the program, and retain their last-stored values between program startup and program
        termination.

    5.1.2.3.3 Program execution
1   In a hosted environment, a program may use all the functions, macros, type definitions, and objects
    described in the library clause (Clause 7).

    5.1.2.3.4 Program termination
1   If the return type of the main function is a type compatible with int, a return from the initial call
    to the main function is equivalent to calling the exit function with the value returned by the main
    function as its argument;7) reaching the } that terminates the main function returns a value of 0. If
    the return type is not compatible with int, the termination status returned to the host environment
    is unspecified.
    Forward references: definition of terms (7.1.1), the exit function (7.24.4.4).
       6) Thus, int can be replaced by a typedef name defined as int, or the type of argv can be written as char
                                                                                                                     ** argv, or the
    return type may be specified by typeof(1), and so on.
       7) In accordance with 6.2.4, the lifetimes of objects with automatic storage duration declared in main will have ended in the

    former case, even where they would not have in the latter.

    § 5.1.2.3.4                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Environment — 13

     5.1.2.4 Program semantics
1    The semantic descriptions in this document describe the behavior of an abstract machine in which
     issues of optimization are irrelevant.
2    An access to an object through the use of an lvalue of volatile-qualified type is a volatile access. A
     volatile access to an object, modifying an object, modifying a file, or calling a function that does any
     of those operations are all side effects,8) which are changes in the state of the execution environment.
     Evaluation of an expression in general includes both value computations and initiation of side effects.
     Value computation for an lvalue expression includes determining the identity of the designated
     object.
3    Sequenced before is an asymmetric, transitive, pair-wise relation between evaluations executed by a
     single thread, which induces a partial order among those evaluations. Given any two evaluations
     A and B, if A is sequenced before B, then the execution of A shall precede the execution of B.
     (Conversely, if A is sequenced before B, then B is sequenced after A.) If A is not sequenced before or
     after B, then A and B are unsequenced. Evaluations A and B are indeterminately sequenced when A is
     sequenced either before or after B, but it is unspecified which.9) The presence of a sequence point
     between the evaluation of expressions A and B implies that every value computation and side effect
     associated with A is sequenced before every value computation and side effect associated with B. (A
     summary of the sequence points is given in Annex C.)
4    In the abstract machine, all expressions are evaluated as specified by the semantics. An actual
     implementation is not required to evaluate part of an expression if it can deduce that its value is not
     used and that no needed side effects are produced (including any caused by calling a function or
     through volatile access to an object).
5    When the processing of the abstract machine is interrupted by receipt of a signal, the values of objects
     that are neither lock-free atomic objects nor of type volatile sig_atomic_t are unspecified, as is
     the state of the dynamic floating-point environment. The representation of any object modified by
     the handler that is neither a lock-free atomic object nor of type volatile sig_atomic_t becomes
     indeterminate when the handler exits, as does the state of the dynamic floating-point environment if
     it is modified by the handler and not restored to its original state.
6    The least requirements on a conforming implementation are:

        — Volatile accesses to objects are evaluated strictly according to the rules of the abstract machine.
        — At program termination, all data written into files shall be identical to the result that execution
          of the program according to the abstract semantics would have produced.
        — The input and output dynamics of interactive devices shall take place as specified in 7.23.3.
          The intent of these requirements is that unbuffered or line-buffered output appear as soon as
          possible, to ensure that prompting messages appear prior to a program waiting for input.

     This is the observable behavior of the program.
7    What constitutes an interactive device is implementation-defined.
8    More stringent correspondences between abstract and actual semantics may be defined by each
     implementation.
9    EXAMPLE 1 An implementation can define a one-to-one correspondence between abstract and actual semantics:
     at every sequence point, the values of the actual objects would agree with those specified by the abstract
     semantics. The keyword volatile would then be redundant.
10   Alternatively, an implementation can perform various optimizations within each translation unit, such that the
     actual semantics would agree with the abstract semantics only when making function calls across translation
        8) ISO/IEC 60559 requires certain user-accessible status flags and control modes. Floating-point operations implicitly set

     the status flags; modes affect result values of floating-point operations. Implementations that support such floating-point
     state are required to regard changes to it as side effects — see Annex F for details. The floating-point environment library
     <fenv.h> provides a programming facility for indicating when these side effects matter, freeing the implementations in other
     cases.
        9) The executions of unsequenced evaluations can interleave. Indeterminately sequenced evaluations cannot interleave, but

     can be executed in any order.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 5.1.2.4
                                                         Environment — 14

     unit boundaries. In such an implementation, at the time of each function entry and function return where the
     calling function and the called function are in different translation units, the values of all externally linked
     objects and of all objects accessible via pointers therein would agree with the abstract semantics. Furthermore,
     at the time of each such function entry the values of the parameters of the called function and of all objects
     accessible via pointers therein would agree with the abstract semantics. In this type of implementation, objects
     referred to by interrupt service routines activated by the signal function would require explicit specification of
     volatile storage, as well as other implementation-defined restrictions.
11   EXAMPLE 2 In executing the fragment

                 char c1, c2;
                 /* ... */
                 c1 = c1 + c2;

     the "integer promotions" require that the abstract machine promote the value of each variable to int size and
     then add the two ints and truncate the sum. Provided the addition of two chars can be done without integer
     overflow, or with integer overflow wrapping silently to produce the correct result, the actual execution need
     only produce the same result, possibly omitting the promotions.
12   EXAMPLE 3 Similarly, in the fragment

                 float f1, f2;
                 double d;
                 /* ... */
                 f1 = f2 * d;

     the multiplication can be executed using float arithmetic if the implementation can ascertain that the result
     would be the same as if it were executed using double arithmetic (for example, if d were replaced by the
     constant 2.0, which has type double).
13   EXAMPLE 4 Implementations employing wide registers have to take care to honor appropriate semantics.
     Values are independent of whether they are represented in a register or in memory. For example, an implicit
     spilling of a register is not permitted to alter the value. Also, an explicit store and load is required to round to
     the precision of the storage type. In particular, casts and assignments are required to perform their specified
     conversion. For the fragment

                 double d1, d2;
                 float f;
                 d1 = f = expression;
                 d2 = (float) expression;

     the values assigned to d1 and d2 are required to have been converted to float.
14   EXAMPLE 5 Rearrangement for floating-point expressions is often restricted because of limitations in precision
     as well as range. The implementation cannot generally apply the mathematical associative rules for addition
     or multiplication, nor the distributive rule, because of roundoff error, even in the absence of overflow and
     underflow. Likewise, implementations cannot generally replace decimal constants to rearrange expressions. In
     the following fragment, rearrangements suggested by mathematical rules for real numbers are often not valid
     (see F.9).

                 double x, y, z;
                 /* ... */
                 x = (x * y) * z;     // not equivalent to x *= y * z;
                 z = (x - y) + y;     // not equivalent to z = x;
                 z = x + x * y;       // not equivalent to z = x * (1.0 + y);
                 y = x / 5.0;         // not equivalent to y = x * 0.2;

15   EXAMPLE 6 To illustrate the grouping behavior of expressions, in the following fragment

                 int a, b;
                 /* ... */
                 a = a + 32760 + b + 5;

     § 5.1.2.4                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Environment — 15

     the expression statement behaves exactly the same as

               a = (((a + 32760) + b) + 5);

     due to the associativity and precedence of these operators. Thus, the result of the sum (a + 32760) is next
     added to b, and that result is then added to 5 which results in the value assigned to a. On a machine in
     which integer overflows produce an explicit trap and in which the range of values representable by an int is
     [−32768, +32767], the implementation cannot rewrite this expression as

               a = ((a + b) + 32765);

     since if the values for a and b were, respectively, −32754 and −15, the sum a + b would produce a trap while
     the original expression would not; nor can the expression be rewritten either as

               a = ((a + 32765) + b);

     or

               a = (a + (b + 32765));

     since the values for a and b may have been, respectively, 4 and −8 or −17 and 12. However, on a machine
     in which integer overflow silently generates some value and where positive and negative integer overflows
     cancel, the preceding expression statement can be rewritten by the implementation in any of the previously
     specified ways because the same result will occur.
16   EXAMPLE 7 The grouping of an expression does not completely determine its evaluation. In the following
     fragment:

               #include <stdio.h>
               int sum;
               char *p;
               /* ... */
               sum = sum * 10 - ’0’ + (*p++ = getchar());

     the expression statement is grouped as if it were written as

               sum = (((sum * 10) - ’0’) + ((*(p++)) = (getchar())));

     but the actual increment of p can occur at any time between the previous sequence point and the next sequence
     point (the ;), and the call to getchar can occur at any point prior to the need of its returned value.
     Forward references: expressions (6.5.1), type qualifiers (6.7.4), statements (6.8), floating-point
     environment <fenv.h> (7.6), the signal function (7.14), files (7.23.3).

     5.1.2.5 Multi-threaded executions and data races
1    Under a hosted implementation that does not define __STDC_NO_THREADS__, a program can have
     more than one thread of execution (or thread) running concurrently. The execution of each thread
     proceeds as defined by the remainder of this document. The execution of the entire program consists
     of an execution of all its threads.10) Under a freestanding implementation, it is implementation-
     defined whether a program can have more than one thread of execution.
2    The value of an object visible to a thread T at a particular point is the initial value of the object, a
     value stored in the object by T , or a value stored in the object by another thread, according to the
     rules in the rest of this subclause.
3    NOTE 1 In some cases, there could instead be undefined behavior. Much of this section is motivated by the
     desire to support atomic operations with explicit and detailed visibility constraints. However, it also implicitly
     supports a simpler view for more restricted programs.
4    Two expression evaluations conflict if one of them modifies a memory location and the other one
     reads or modifies the same memory location.
       10) The execution can usually be viewed as an interleaving of all the threads. However, some kinds of atomic operations, for

     example, allow executions inconsistent with a simple interleaving as described in this subclause.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 5.1.2.5
                                                         Environment — 16

5    The library defines atomic operations (7.17) and operations on mutexes (7.28.4) that are specially
     identified as synchronization operations. These operations play a special role in making assignments
     in one thread visible to another. A synchronization operation on one or more memory locations is
     one of an acquire operation, a release operation, both an acquire and release operation, or a consume
     operation. A synchronization operation without an associated memory location is a fence and can
     be either an acquire fence, a release fence, or both an acquire and release fence. In addition, there
     are relaxed atomic operations, which are not synchronization operations, and atomic read-modify-write
     operations, which have special characteristics.
6    NOTE 2 For example, a call that acquires a mutex will perform an acquire operation on the locations composing
     the mutex. Correspondingly, a call that releases the same mutex will perform a release operation on those same
     locations. Informally, performing a release operation on A forces prior side effects on other memory locations
     to become visible to other threads that later perform an acquire or consume operation on A. Relaxed atomic
     operations are not included as synchronization operations although, like synchronization operations, they
     cannot contribute to data races.
7    All modifications to a particular atomic object M occur in some particular total order, called the
     modification order of M . If A and B are modifications of an atomic object M , and A happens before B,
     then A shall precede B in the modification order of M , which is defined later in this subclause.
8    NOTE 3 This states that the modification orders are expected to respect the "happens before" relation.
9    NOTE 4 There is a separate order for each atomic object. There is no requirement that these can be combined
     into a single total order for all objects. In general this will be impossible since different threads can observe
     modifications to different variables in inconsistent orders.
10   A release sequence headed by a release operation A on an atomic object M is a maximal contiguous
     sub-sequence of side effects in the modification order of M , where the first operation is A and every
     subsequent operation either is performed by the same thread that performed the release or is an
     atomic read-modify-write operation.
11   Certain library calls synchronize with other library calls performed by another thread. In particular,
     an atomic operation A that performs a release operation on an object M synchronizes with an atomic
     operation B that performs an acquire operation on M and reads a value written by any side effect in
     the release sequence headed by A.
12   NOTE 5 Except in the specified cases, reading a later value does not necessarily ensure visibility as described
     later in this subclause. Such a requirement would sometimes interfere with efficient implementation.
13   NOTE 6 The specifications of the synchronization operations define when one reads the value written by
     another. For atomic variables, the definition is clear. All operations on a given mutex occur in a single total
     order. Each mutex acquisition "reads the value written" by the last mutex release.
14   An evaluation A carries a dependency11) to an evaluation B if:

       — the value of A is used as an operand of B, unless:

                 • B is an invocation of the kill_dependency macro,
                 • A is the left operand of a && or || operator,
                 • A is the left operand of a ?: operator, or
                 • A is the left operand of a , operator;

            or

       — A writes a scalar object or bit-field M , B reads from M the value written by A, and A is
         sequenced before B, or

       — for some evaluation X, A carries a dependency to X and X carries a dependency to B.

15   An evaluation A is dependency-ordered before12) an evaluation B if:
      11) The "carries a dependency" relation is a subset of the "sequenced before" relation, and is similarly strictly intra-thread.
       12) The "dependency-ordered before" relation is analogous to the "synchronizes with" relation, but uses release/consume in

     place of release/acquire.

     § 5.1.2.5                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Environment — 17

       — A performs a release operation on an atomic object M , and, in another thread, B performs a
         consume operation on M and reads a value written by any side effect in the release sequence
         headed by A, or

       — for some evaluation X, A is dependency-ordered before X and X carries a dependency to B.

16   An evaluation A inter-thread happens before an evaluation B if A synchronizes with B, A is
     dependency-ordered before B, or, for some evaluation X:

       — A synchronizes with X and X is sequenced before B,

       — A is sequenced before X and X inter-thread happens before B, or

       — A inter-thread happens before X and X inter-thread happens before B.

17   NOTE 7 The "inter-thread happens before" relation describes arbitrary concatenations of "sequenced before",
     "synchronizes with", and "dependency-ordered before" relationships, with two exceptions. The first exception
     is that a concatenation is not permitted to end with "dependency-ordered before" followed by "sequenced
     before". The reason for this limitation is that a consume operation participating in a "dependency-ordered
     before" relationship provides ordering only with respect to operations to which this consume operation carries
     a dependency. The reason that this limitation applies only to the end of such a concatenation is that any
     subsequent release operation will provide the required ordering for a prior consume operation. The second
     exception is that a concatenation is not permitted to consist entirely of "sequenced before". The reasons for this
     limitation are (1) to permit "inter-thread happens before" to be transitively closed and (2) the "happens before"
     relation, defined subsequently in this subclause, provides for relationships consisting entirely of "sequenced
     before".
18   An evaluation A happens before an evaluation B if A is sequenced before B or A inter-thread happens
     before B. The implementation shall ensure that no program execution demonstrates a cycle in the
     "happens before" relation.
19   NOTE 8 This cycle would otherwise be possible only through the use of consume operations.
20   A visible side effect A on an object M with respect to a value computation B of M satisfies the
     conditions:

       — A happens before B, and

       — there is no other side effect X to M such that A happens before X and X happens before B.

     The value of a non-atomic scalar object M , as determined by evaluation B, shall be the value stored
     by the visible side effect A.
21   NOTE 9 If there is ambiguity about which side effect to a non-atomic object is visible, then there is a data race
     and the behavior is undefined.
22   NOTE 10 This states that operations on ordinary variables are not visibly reordered. This is not detectable
     without data races, but ensures that data races, as defined here, and with suitable restrictions on the use of
     atomics, correspond to data races in a simple interleaved (sequentially consistent) execution.
23   The value of an atomic object M , as determined by evaluation B, shall be the value stored by some
     side effect A that modifies M , where B does not happen before A.
24   NOTE 11 The set of side effects from which a given evaluation may take its value is also restricted by the rest
     of the rules described here, and in particular, by the coherence requirements subsequently in this subclause.
25   If an operation A that modifies an atomic object M happens before an operation B that modifies M ,
     then A shall be earlier than B in the modification order of M .
26   NOTE 12 Such a requirement is known as "write-write coherence".
27   If a value computation A of an atomic object M happens before a value computation B of M , and A
     takes its value from a side effect X on M , then the value computed by B shall either be the value
     stored by X or the value stored by a side effect Y on M , where Y follows X in the modification
     order of M .

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                  § 5.1.2.5
                                                    Environment — 18

28   NOTE 13 Such a requirement is known as "read-read coherence".
29   If a value computation A of an atomic object M happens before an operation B on M , then A shall
     take its value from a side effect X on M , where X precedes B in the modification order of M .
30   NOTE 14 Such a requirement is known as "read-write coherence".
31   If a side effect X on an atomic object M happens before a value computation B of M , then the
     evaluation B shall take its value from X or from a side effect Y that follows X in the modification
     order of M .
32   NOTE 15 Such a requirement is known as "write-read coherence".
33   NOTE 16 This effectively disallows compiler reordering of atomic operations to a single object, even if both
     operations are "relaxed" loads. By doing so, it effectively makes the "cache coherence" guarantee provided by
     most hardware available to C atomic operations.
34   NOTE 17 The value observed by a load of an atomic object depends on the "happens before" relation, which in
     turn depends on the values observed by loads of atomic objects. The intended reading is that there exists an
     association of atomic loads with modifications they observe that, together with suitably chosen modification
     orders and the "happens before" relation derived as described previously, satisfy the resulting constraints as
     imposed here.
35   The execution of a program contains a data race if it contains two conflicting actions in different
     threads, at least one of which is not atomic, and neither happens before the other. Any such data
     race results in undefined behavior.
36   NOTE 18 It can be shown that programs that correctly use simple mutexes and memory_order_seq_cst
     operations to prevent all data races, and use no other synchronization operations, behave as though the
     operations executed by their constituent threads were simply interleaved, with each value computation of an
     object being the last value stored in that interleaving. This is normally referred to as "sequential consistency".
     However, this applies only to data-race-free programs, and data-race-free programs cannot observe most
     program transformations that do not change single-threaded program semantics. In fact, most single-threaded
     program transformations continue to be allowed, since any program that behaves differently as a result of such
     transformations necessarily has undefined behavior even before such a transformation is applied.
37   NOTE 19 Compiler transformations that introduce assignments to a potentially shared memory location that
     would not be modified by the abstract machine are generally precluded by this document, since such an
     assignment can overwrite another assignment by a different thread in cases in which an abstract machine
     execution would not have encountered a data race. This includes implementations of data member assignment
     that overwrite adjacent members in separate memory locations. Reordering of atomic loads in cases in which
     the atomics in question can alias is also generally precluded, since this could violate the coherence requirements.
38   NOTE 20 Transformations that introduce a speculative read of a potentially shared memory location may not
     preserve the semantics of the program as defined in this document, since they potentially introduce a data race.
     However, they are typically valid in the context of an optimizing compiler that targets a specific machine with
     well-defined semantics for data races. They would be invalid for a hypothetical machine that is not tolerant of
     races or provides hardware race detection.

     5.2 Environmental considerations
     5.2.1 Character sets
1    Two sets of characters and their associated collating sequences shall be defined: the set in which source
     files are written (the source character set), and the set interpreted in the execution environment (the
     execution character set). Each set is further divided into a basic character set, whose contents are given
     by this subclause, and a set of zero or more locale-specific members (which are not members of the
     basic character set) called extended characters. The combined set is also called the extended character
     set. The values of the members of the execution character set are implementation-defined.
2    In a character constant or string literal, members of the execution character set shall be represented by
     corresponding members of the source character set or by escape sequences consisting of the backslash
     \ followed by one or more characters. A byte with all bits set to 0, called the null character, shall exist
     in the basic execution character set; it is used to terminate a character string.
3    Both the basic source and basic execution character sets shall have the following members: the 26
     uppercase letters of the Latin alphabet

     § 5.2.1                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Environment — 19

            A   B   C   D   E   F    G   H     I   J    K   L   M
            N   O   P   Q   R   S    T   U     V   W    X   Y   Z

    the 26 lowercase letters of the Latin alphabet
            a   b   c   d   e   f    g   h     i   j    k   l   m
            n   o   p   q   r   s    t   u     v   w    x   y   z

    the 10 decimal digit
            0   1   2   3   4   5    6   7     8   9

    the following 32 graphic characters
            !   "   #   %   &   ’    (   )     *   +    ,   -   .   /   :
            ;   <   =   >   ?   [    \   ]     ^   _    {   |   }   ~
            @   $   `

    the space character, and control characters representing horizontal tab, vertical tab, and form feed.
    The representation of each member of the source and execution basic character sets shall fit in a
    byte. In both the source and execution basic character sets, the value of each character after 0 in
    the preceding list of decimal digits shall be one greater than the value of the previous. In source
    files, there shall be some way of indicating the end of each line of text; this document treats such an
    end-of-line indicator as if it were a single new-line character. In the basic execution character set,
    there shall be control characters representing alert, backspace, carriage return, and new line. If any
    other characters are encountered in a source file (except in an identifier, a character constant, a string
    literal, a header name, a comment, or a preprocessing token that is never converted to a token), the
    behavior is undefined.
4   A letter is an uppercase letter or a lowercase letter as defined previously in this subclause; in this
    document the term does not include other characters that are letters in other alphabets.
5   The universal character name construct provides a way to name other characters.
    Forward references: universal character names (6.4.3), character constants (6.4.4.5), preprocessing
    directives (6.10), string literals (6.4.5), comments (6.4.9), string (7.1.1).

    5.2.2       Multibyte characters
1   The source character set may contain multibyte characters, used to represent members of the
    extended character set. The execution character set may also contain multibyte characters, which are
    not required to have the same encoding as for the source character set. For both character sets, the
    following shall hold:

      — The basic character set shall be present and each character shall be encoded as a single byte.
      — The presence, meaning, and representation of any additional members is locale-specific.
      — A multibyte character set may have a state-dependent encoding, wherein each sequence of
        multibyte characters begins in an initial shift state and enters other locale-specific shift states
        when specific multibyte characters are encountered in the sequence. While in the initial shift
        state, all single-byte characters retain their usual interpretation and do not alter the shift state.
        The interpretation for subsequent bytes in the sequence is a function of the current shift state.
      — A byte with all bits zero shall be interpreted as a null character independent of shift state. Such
        a byte shall not occur as part of any other multibyte character.

2   For source files, the following shall hold:

      — An identifier, comment, string literal, character constant, or header name shall begin and end
        in the initial shift state.
      — An identifier, comment, string literal, character constant, or header name shall consist of a
        sequence of valid multibyte characters.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                         § 5.2.2
                                                       Environment — 20

    5.2.3       Character display semantics
1   The active position is that location on a display device where the next character output by the
    fputc function would appear. The intent of writing a printing character (as defined by the isprint
    function) to a display device is to display a graphic representation of that character at the active
    position and then advance the active position to the next position on the current line. The direction
    of writing is locale-specific. If the active position is at the final position of a line (if there is one), the
    behavior of the display device is unspecified.
2   Alphabetic escape sequences representing non-graphic characters in the execution character set are
    intended to produce actions on display devices as follows:

    \a (alert) Produces an audible or visible alert without changing the active position.

    \b (backspace) Moves the active position to the previous position on the current line. If the active
        position is at the initial position of a line, the behavior of the display device is unspecified.
    \f (form feed) Moves the active position to the initial position at the start of the next logical page.

    \n (new line) Moves the active position to the initial position of the next line.

    \r (carriage return) Moves the active position to the initial position of the current line.

    \t (horizontal tab) Moves the active position to the next horizontal tabulation position on the current
        line. If the active position is at or past the last defined horizontal tabulation position, the behavior
        of the display device is unspecified.
    \v (vertical tab) Moves the active position to the initial position of the next vertical tabulation
        position. If the active position is at or past the last defined vertical tabulation position, the
        behavior of the display device is unspecified.

3   Each of these escape sequences shall produce a unique implementation-defined value which can be
    stored in a single char object. The external representations in a text file are not necessarily identical
    to the internal representations, and are outside the scope of this document.
    Forward references: the isprint function (7.4.2.8), the fputc function (7.23.7.3).

    5.2.4       Signals and interrupts
1   Functions shall be implemented such that they may be interrupted at any time by a signal, or may be
    called by a signal handler, or both, with no alteration to earlier, but still active, invocations’ control
    flow (after the interruption), function return values, or objects with automatic storage duration.
    All such objects shall be maintained outside the function image (the instructions that compose the
    executable representation of a function) on a per-invocation basis.

    5.2.5       Environmental limits
    5.2.5.1 General
1   Both the translation and execution environments constrain the implementation of language trans-
    lators and libraries. The following summarizes the language-related environmental limits on a
    conforming implementation; the library-related limits are discussed in Clause 7.

    5.2.5.2 Translation limits
1   The implementation shall be able to translate and execute a program that uses but does not exceed
    the following limitations for these constructs and entities:13)

      — 127 nesting levels of blocks
      — 63 nesting levels of conditional inclusion
      — 12 pointer, array, and function declarators (in any combinations) modifying an arithmetic,
        structure, union, or void type in a declaration
     13) Implementations are encouraged to avoid imposing fixed translation limits whenever possible.

    § 5.2.5.2                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Environment — 21

      — 63 nesting levels of parenthesized declarators within a full declarator

      — 63 nesting levels of parenthesized expressions within a full expression

      — 63 significant initial characters in an internal identifier or a macro name (each universal
        character name or extended source character is considered a single character)

      — 31 significant initial characters in an external identifier (each universal character name speci-
        fying a short identifier of 00FFFF or less is considered 6 characters, each universal character
        name specifying a short identifier of 010000 or more is considered 10 characters, and each
        extended source character is considered the same number of characters as the corresponding
        universal character name, if any)14)

      — 4095 external identifiers in one translation unit

      — 511 identifiers with block scope declared in one block

      — 4095 macro identifiers simultaneously defined in one preprocessing translation unit

      — 127 parameters in one function definition

      — 127 arguments in one function call

      — 127 parameters in one macro definition

      — 127 arguments in one macro invocation

      — 4095 characters in a logical source line

      — 4095 characters in a string literal (after concatenation)

      — 32767 bytes in an object (in a hosted environment only)

      — 15 nesting levels for #included files

      — 1023 case labels for a switch statement (excluding those for any nested switch statements)

      — 1023 members in a single structure or union

      — 1023 enumeration constants in a single enumeration

      — 63 levels of nested structure or union definitions in a single member declaration list

    5.2.5.3 Numerical limits
    5.2.5.3.1 General
1   An implementation is required to document all the limits specified in this subclause, which are
    specified in the headers <limits.h> and <float.h>. Additional limits are specified in <stdint.h>.
    Forward references: integer types <stdint.h> (7.22).

    5.2.5.3.2 Characteristics of integer types <limits.h>
1   The values given subsequently shall be replaced by constant expressions suitable for use in condi-
    tional expression inclusion preprocessing directives. Their implementation-defined values shall be
    equal or greater to those shown.

      — width for an object of type bool15)

             BOOL_WIDTH                                 1

      — number of bits for smallest object that is not a bit-field (byte)
     14) See "future language directions" (6.11.3).
     15) This value is exact.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                § 5.2.5.3.2
                                                      Environment — 22

            CHAR_BIT                             8

          The macros CHAR_WIDTH, SCHAR_WIDTH, and UCHAR_WIDTH that represent the width of the
          types char, signed char and unsigned char shall expand to the same value as CHAR_BIT.

      — width for an object of type unsigned short int

            USHRT_WIDTH                         16

          The macro SHRT_WIDTH represents the width of the type short int and shall expand to the
          same value as USHRT_WIDTH.

      — width for an object of type unsigned int

            UINT_WIDTH                          16

          The macro INT_WIDTH represents the width of the type int and shall expand to the same value
          as UINT_WIDTH.

      — width for an object of type unsigned long int

            ULONG_WIDTH                          32

          The macro LONG_WIDTH represents the width of the type long int and shall expand to the
          same value as ULONG_WIDTH.

      — width for an object of type unsigned long long int

            ULLONG_WIDTH                         64

          The macro LLONG_WIDTH represents the width of the type long long int and shall expand to
          the same value as ULLONG_WIDTH.

      — maximum width of a bit-precise integer type

            BITINT_MAXWIDTH       /* see the following */

          The macro BITINT_MAXWIDTH represents the maximum width N supported by the declaration
          of a bit-precise integer (6.2.5) in the type specifier _BitInt( N). The value BITINT_MAXWIDTH
          shall expand to a value that is greater than or equal to the value of ULLONG_WIDTH.

      — maximum number of bytes in a multibyte character, for any supported locale

            MB_LEN_MAX                           1

2   For all unsigned integer types for which <limits.h> or <stdint.h> define a macro with suffix
    _WIDTH holding its width N , there is a macro with suffix _MAX holding the maximal value 2N − 1
    that is representable by the type and that has the same type as would an expression that is an object
    of the corresponding type converted according to the integer promotions. If the value is in the range
    of the type uintmax_t (7.22.1.5) the macro is suitable for use in conditional expression inclusion
    preprocessing directives.
3   For all signed integer types for which <limits.h> or <stdint.h> define a macro with suffix _WIDTH
    holding its width N , there are macros with suffix _MIN and _MAX holding the minimal and maximal
    values −2N −1 and 2N −1 − 1 that are representable by the type and that have the same type as
    would an expression that is an object of the corresponding type converted according to the integer
    promotions. If the values are in the range of the type intmax_t (7.22.1.5) the macros are suitable for
    use in conditional expression inclusion preprocessing directives.

    § 5.2.5.3.2                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                             Environment — 23

4    If an object of type char can hold negative values, the value of CHAR_MIN shall be the same as that of
     SCHAR_MIN and the value of CHAR_MAX shall be the same as that of SCHAR_MAX. Otherwise, the value
     of CHAR_MIN shall be 0 and the value of CHAR_MAX shall be the same as that of UCHAR_MAX (see 6.2.5.).
     Forward references: representations of types (6.2.6), conditional inclusion (6.10.2), integer types
     <stdint.h> (7.22).

     5.2.5.3.3 Characteristics of floating types <float.h>
1    The characteristics of floating types are defined in terms of a model that describes a represen-
     tation of floating-point numbers and allows other values. The characteristics provide informa-
     tion about an implementation’s floating-point arithmetic.16) An implementation that defines
     __STDC_IEC_60559_BFP__ or __STDC_IEC_559__ shall implement floating types and arithmetic
     conforming to ISO/IEC 60559 as specified in Annex F of this document. An implementation that
     defines __STDC_IEC_60559_COMPLEX__ or __STDC_IEC_559_COMPLEX__ shall implement complex
     types and arithmetic conforming to ISO/IEC 60559 as specified in Annex G of this document.
2    The following parameters are used to define the model for each floating type:
            s      sign (±1)
            b      base or radix of exponent representation (an integer > 1)
            e      exponent (an integer between a minimum emin and a maximum emax )
            p      precision (the number of base-b digits in the significand)
            fk     nonnegative integers less than b (the significand digits)
     For each floating type, the parameters b, p, emin , and emax are fixed constants.
3    For each floating type, a floating-point number (x) is defined by the following model:
                       p
            x = sbe         fk b−k ,
                       P
                                       emin ≤ e ≤ emax
                      k=1

4    Model floating-point numbers x with f1 > 0 are called normalized floating-point numbers.
5    Model floating-point numbers x ̸= 0 with f1 = 0 and e = emin are called subnormal floating-point
     numbers.
6    Model floating-point numbers x ̸= 0 with f1 = 0 and e > emin are called unnormalized floating-point
     numbers.
7    Model floating-point numbers x with all fk = 0 are zeros.
8    Floating types shall be able to represent signed zeros or an unsigned zero and all normalized floating-
     point numbers. In addition, floating types may be able to contain other kinds of floating-point
     numbers, such as subnormal floating-point numbers and unnormalized floating-point numbers, and
     values that are not floating-point numbers, such as NaNs and (signed and unsigned) infinities.
9    NOTE 1 Some implementations have types that include finite numbers with range and/or precision that are
     not covered by the model.
10   A NaN is a value signifying Not-a-Number. A quiet NaN propagates through almost every arithmetic
     operation without raising a floating-point exception; a signaling NaN generally raises a floating-point
     exception when occurring as an arithmetic operand.
11   NOTE 2 ISO/IEC 60559 specifies quiet and signaling NaNs. For implementations that do not support
     havior.
12   Wherever values are unsigned, any requirement in this document to get the sign shall produce an
     unspecified sign, and any requirement to set the sign shall be ignored, unless otherwise specified.
13   NOTE 3 Bit representations of floating-point values can include a sign bit, even if the values can be regarded as
     unsigned; ISO/IEC 60559 NaNs are such values.
14   Whether and in what cases subnormal numbers are treated as zeros is implementation-defined.
     Subnormal numbers that in some cases are treated by arithmetic operations as zeros are properly
       16) The floating-point model is intended to clarify the description of each floating-point characteristic and does not require

     the floating-point arithmetic of the implementation to be identical.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 5.2.5.3.3
                                                          Environment — 24

     classified as subnormal. However, object representations that could represent subnormal numbers
     but that are always treated by arithmetic operations as zeros are non-canonical zeros, and the values
     are properly classified as zero, not subnormal. ISO/IEC 60559 arithmetic (with default exception
     handling) always treats subnormal numbers as nonzero.
15   A value is negative if and only if it compares less than 0. Thus, negative zeros and NaNs are not
     negative values.
16   An implementation may prefer particular representations of values that have multiple representa-
     tions in a floating type, 6.2.6.1 not withstanding. The preferred representations of a floating type,
     including unique representations of values in the type, are called canonical. A floating type may
     also contain non-canonical representations, for example, redundant representations of some or all its
     values, or representations that are extraneous to the floating-point model. Typically, floating-point
     operations deliver results with canonical representations. ISO/IEC 60559 operations deliver results
     with canonical representations, unless specified otherwise.
17   NOTE 4 The library operations iscanonical and canonicalize distinguish canonical (preferred) representa-
     tions, but this distinction alone does not imply that canonical and non-canonical representations are of different
     values.
18   NOTE 5 Some of the values in the ISO/IEC 60559 decimal formats have non-canonical representations (as well
     as a canonical representation).
19   The minimum range of representable values for a floating type is the most negative finite floating-
     point number representable in that type through the most positive finite floating-point number
     representable in that type. In addition, if negative infinity is representable in a type, the range of
     that type is extended to all negative real numbers; likewise, if positive infinity is representable in a
     type, the range of that type is extended to all positive real numbers.
20   The accuracy of the floating-point operations (+, -, *, /) and of most of the library functions in
     <math.h> and <complex.h> that return floating-point results is implementation-defined, as is the
     accuracy of the conversion between floating-point internal representations and string representations
     performed by the library functions in <stdio.h>, <stdlib.h>, and <wchar.h>. The implemen-
     tation may state that the accuracy is unknown. Decimal floating-point operations have stricter
     requirements.
21   All integer values in the <float.h> header, except FLT_ROUNDS, shall be constant expressions
     suitable for use in conditional expression inclusion preprocessing directives; all floating val-
     ues shall be arithmetic constant expressions. All except CR_DECIMAL_DIG (F.5), DECIMAL_DIG,
     DEC_EVAL_METHOD, FLT_EVAL_METHOD, FLT_RADIX, and FLT_ROUNDS have separate names for
     all floating types. The floating-point model representation is provided for all values except
     DEC_EVAL_METHOD, FLT_EVAL_METHOD and FLT_ROUNDS.
22   The remainder of this subclause specifies characteristics of standard floating types.
23   The rounding mode for floating-point addition for standard floating types is characterized by the
     implementation-defined value of FLT_ROUNDS. Evaluation of FLT_ROUNDS correctly reflects any
     execution-time change of rounding mode through the function fesetround in <fenv.h>.

     −1      indeterminable

      0      toward zero

      1      to nearest, ties to even

      2      toward positive infinity

      3      toward negative infinity

      4      to nearest, ties away from zero

     All other values for FLT_ROUNDS characterize implementation-defined rounding behavior.

     § 5.2.5.3.3                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Environment — 25

24   Whether a type has the same base (b), precision (p), and exponent range (emin ≤ e ≤ emax ) as an
     DBL_IS_IEC_60559 and LDBL_IS_IEC_60559 (this does not imply conformance to Annex F):

     0 type does not have the precision and exponent range of an ISO/IEC 60559 format

     1 type has the precision and exponent range of an ISO/IEC 60559 format

25   NOTE 6 Outside of the normalized floating-point numbers, the representability of values (e.g. negative zero)
     of the ISO/IEC 60559 format is not implied.
26   The values of floating type yielded by operators subject to the usual arithmetic conversions, including
     the values yielded by the implicit conversion of operands, and the values of floating constants are
     evaluated to a format whose range and precision may be greater than required by the type. Such a
     format is called an evaluation format. In all cases, assignment and cast operators yield values in the
     format of the type. The extent to which evaluation formats are used is characterized by the value of
     FLT_EVAL_METHOD:17)

     −1      indeterminable;

      0      evaluate all operations and constants just to the range and precision of the type;

      1      evaluate operations and constants of type float and double to the range and precision of
             the double type, evaluate long double operations and constants to the range and precision
             of the long double type;

      2      evaluate all operations and constants to the range and precision of the long double type.

     All other negative values for FLT_EVAL_METHOD characterize implementation-defined behavior. The
     value of FLT_EVAL_METHOD does not characterize values returned by function calls (see 6.8.7.5, F.6).
27   The presence or absence of subnormal numbers is characterized by the implementation-defined
     values of FLT_HAS_SUBNORM, DBL_HAS_SUBNORM, and LDBL_HAS_SUBNORM:

     −1      indeterminable

      0      absent (type does not support subnormal numbers)

      1      present (type does support subnormal numbers)

     The use of FLT_HAS_SUBNORM, DBL_HAS_SUBNORM, and LDBL_HAS_SUBNORM macros is an obsolescent
     feature.
28   Each of the signaling NaN macros

               FLT_SNAN
               DBL_SNAN
               LDBL_SNAN

     is defined if and only if the respective type contains signaling NaNs. They expand to a constant
     expression of the respective type representing a signaling NaN. If an optional unary + or - operator
     followed by a signaling NaN macro is used as an initializer that is evaluated at translation time, the
     object is initialized with a signaling NaN value.
29   The macro

               INFINITY

      17) The evaluation method determines evaluation formats of expressions involving all floating types, not just real types.

     For example, if FLT_EVAL_METHOD is 1, then the product of two float _Complex operands is represented in the double
     _Complex format, and its parts are evaluated to double.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                     § 5.2.5.3.3
                                                       Environment — 26

     is defined if and only if the implementation supports an infinity for the type float. It expands to a
     constant expression of type float representing positive or unsigned infinity.
30   The macro

              NAN

     is defined if and only if the implementation supports quiet NaNs for the float type. It expands to a
     constant expression of type float representing a quiet NaN.
31   The values given in the following list shall be replaced by constant expressions with implementation-
     defined values that are greater or equal in magnitude (absolute value) to those shown, with the
     same sign:

       — radix of exponent representation, b

             FLT_RADIX                             2

       — number of base-FLT_RADIX digits in the floating-point significand, p

             FLT_MANT_DIG
             DBL_MANT_DIG
             LDBL_MANT_DIG

       — number of decimal digits, n, such that any floating-point number with p radix b digits can be
         rounded to a floating-point number with n decimal digits and back again without change to
         the value,
               (
                 p log10 b       if b is a power of 10
                 ⌈1 + p log10 b⌉ otherwise

             FLT_DECIMAL_DIG                        6
             DBL_DECIMAL_DIG                       10
             LDBL_DECIMAL_DIG                      10

       — number of decimal digits, n, such that any floating-point number in the widest of the supported
         floating types and the supported ISO/IEC 60559 encodings with pmax radix b digits can be
         rounded to a floating-point number with n decimal digits and back again without change to
         the value,
               (
                 pmax log10 b        if b is a power of 10
                 ⌈1 + pmax log10 b⌉ otherwise

             DECIMAL_DIG                          10

           This is an obsolescent feature, see 7.33.8.
       — number of decimal digits, q, such that any floating-point number with q decimal digits can be
         rounded into a floating-point number with p radix b digits and back again without change to
         the q decimal digits,
               (
                 p log10 b         if b is a power of 10
                 ⌊(p − 1) log10 b⌋ otherwise

             FLT_DIG                               6
             DBL_DIG                              10
             LDBL_DIG                             10

     § 5.2.5.3.3                       © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                               Environment — 27

       — minimum negative integer such that FLT_RADIX raised to one less than that power is a normal-
         ized floating-point number, emin

            FLT_MIN_EXP
            DBL_MIN_EXP
            LDBL_MIN_EXP

       — minimum negative integer
                                 such that 10 raised to that power is in the range of normalized
         floating-point numbers, log 10 bemin −1

            FLT_MIN_10_EXP                     -37
            DBL_MIN_10_EXP                     -37
            LDBL_MIN_10_EXP                    -37

       — maximum integer such that FLT_RADIX raised to one less than that power is a representable
         finite floating-point number; if that representable finite floating-point number is normalized,
         the value of the macro is emax

            FLT_MAX_EXP
            DBL_MAX_EXP
            LDBL_MAX_EXP

       — maximum integer such that 10 raised to that power is in the range of representable finite
         floating-point numbers, ⌊log 10 ((1 − b−p )bemax )⌋

            FLT_MAX_10_EXP                     +37
            DBL_MAX_10_EXP                     +37
            LDBL_MAX_10_EXP                    +37

32   The values given in the following list shall be replaced by constant expressions with implementation-
     defined values that are greater than or equal to those shown:

       — maximum representable finite floating-point number; if that number is normalized, its value is
         (1 − b−p )bemax

            FLT_MAX                          1E+37
            DBL_MAX                          1E+37
            LDBL_MAX                         1E+37

       — maximum normalized floating-point number, (1 − b−p )bemax

            FLT_NORM_MAX                     1E+37
            DBL_NORM_MAX                     1E+37
            LDBL_NORM_MAX                    1E+37

33   The values given in the following list shall be replaced by constant expressions with implementation-
     defined (positive) values that are less than or equal to those shown:

       — the difference between 1 and the least normalized value greater than 1 that is representable in
         the given floating type, b1−p

            FLT_EPSILON                       1E-5
            DBL_EPSILON                       1E-9
            LDBL_EPSILON                      1E-9

                                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                         § 5.2.5.3.3
                                              Environment — 28

       — minimum normalized positive floating-point number, bemin −1

              FLT_MIN                                 1E-37
              DBL_MIN                                 1E-37
              LDBL_MIN                                1E-37

       — minimum positive floating-point number

              FLT_TRUE_MIN                            1E-37
              DBL_TRUE_MIN                            1E-37
              LDBL_TRUE_MIN                           1E-37

     Recommended practice
34   Conversion between real floating type and decimal character sequence with at most T_DECIMAL_DIG
     digits should be correctly rounded, where T is the macro prefix for the type. This assures conversion
     from real floating type to decimal character sequence with T_DECIMAL_DIG digits and back, using
     to-nearest rounding, is the identity function.
35   EXAMPLE 1 The following describes an artificial floating-point representation that meets the minimum
     requirements of this document, and the appropriate values in a <float.h> header for type float:
           x = s16e         fk 16−k ,
                       P
                                         −31 ≤ e ≤ +32
                      k=1

               FLT_RADIX                                   16
               FLT_MANT_DIG                                 6
               FLT_EPSILON                    9.53674316E-07F
               FLT_DECIMAL_DIG                              9
               FLT_DIG                                      6
               FLT_MIN_EXP                                -31
               FLT_MIN                        2.93873588E-39F
               FLT_MIN_10_EXP                             -38
               FLT_MAX_EXP                                +32
               FLT_MAX                        3.40282347E+38F
               FLT_MAX_10_EXP                             +38

36   EXAMPLE 2
     The following describes floating-point representations that also meet the requirements for binary32 and binary64
     numbers in ISO/IEC 60559,18) and the appropriate values in a <float.h> header for types float and double.
     Note that the decimal floating constants may not give correct values (and hence are not appropriate values
     in a <float.h> header) if FLT_EVAL_METHOD is not 0 or if a translation-time rounding mode other than the
     pragma). The hexadecimal floating constants are correct in all such cases because their values are exactly
     representable in the type.
           xf = s2e         fk 2−k ,
                       P
                                         −125 ≤ e ≤ +128
                      k=1

           xd = s2e         fk 2−k ,
                      P
                                         −1021 ≤ e ≤ +1024
                      k=1

               FLT_IS_IEC_60559                             1
               FLT_RADIX                                    2
               FLT_MANT_DIG                                24
               FLT_EPSILON                    1.19209290E-07F // decimal constant
               FLT_EPSILON                           0X1P-23F // hex constant

       18) The floating-point model in ISO/IEC 60559 sums powers of b from zero, so the values of the exponent limits are one less

     than shown here.

     § 5.2.5.3.3                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                       Environment — 29

            FLT_DECIMAL_DIG                    9
            FLT_DIG                            6
            FLT_MIN_EXP                     -125
            FLT_MIN              1.17549435E-38F // decimal constant
            FLT_MIN                    0X1P-126F // hex constant
            FLT_TRUE_MIN         1.40129846E-45F // decimal constant
            FLT_TRUE_MIN               0X1P-149F // hex constant
            FLT_HAS_SUBNORM                    1
            FLT_MIN_10_EXP                   -37
            FLT_MAX_EXP                     +128
            FLT_MAX              3.40282347E+38F // decimal constant
            FLT_MAX              0X1.fffffeP127F // hex constant
            FLT_MAX_10_EXP                   +38
            DBL_MANT_DIG                      53
            DBL_IS_IEC_60559                   1
            DBL_EPSILON   2.2204460492503131E-16 // decimal constant
            DBL_EPSILON                  0X1P-52 // hex constant
            DBL_DECIMAL_DIG                   17
            DBL_DIG                           15
            DBL_MIN_EXP                    -1021
            DBL_MIN      2.2250738585072014E-308 // decimal constant
            DBL_MIN                    0X1P-1022 // hex constant
            DBL_TRUE_MIN 4.9406564584124654E-324 // decimal constant
            DBL_TRUE_MIN               0X1P-1074 // hex constant
            DBL_HAS_SUBNORM                    1
            DBL_MIN_10_EXP                  -307
            DBL_MAX_EXP                    +1024
            DBL_MAX      1.7976931348623157E+308 // decimal constant
            DBL_MAX       0X1.fffffffffffffP1023 // hex constant
            DBL_MAX_10_EXP                  +308

    Forward references: conditional inclusion (6.10.2), predefined macro names (6.10.10), complex
    arithmetic <complex.h> (7.3), extended multibyte and wide character utilities <wchar.h> (7.31),
    floating-point environment <fenv.h> (7.6), general utilities <stdlib.h> (7.24), input/output
    <stdio.h> (7.23), mathematics <math.h> (7.12), ISO/IEC 60559 floating-point arithmetic (Annex F),

    5.2.5.3.4 Characteristics of decimal floating types in <float.h>
1   This subclause specifies macros in <float.h> that provide characteristics of decimal floating types
    (an optional feature) in terms of the model presented in 5.2.5.3.3. An implementation shall provide
    these macros if and only if it defines __STDC_IEC_60559_DFP__. The prefixes DEC32_, DEC64_, and
    DEC128_ denote the types _Decimal32, _Decimal64, and _Decimal128 respectively.
2   DEC_EVAL_METHOD is the decimal floating-point analog of FLT_EVAL_METHOD (5.2.5.3.3). Its
    implementation-defined value characterizes the use of evaluation formats for decimal floating
    types:

    −1     indeterminable;
    0      evaluate all operations and constants just to the range and precision of the type;
    1     evaluate operations and constants of type _Decimal32 and _Decimal64 to the range and
          precision of the _Decimal64 type, evaluate _Decimal128 operations and constants to the
          range and precision of the _Decimal128 type;
    2      evaluate all operations and constants to the range and precision of the _Decimal128 type.

3   Each of the decimal signaling NaN macros

            DEC32_SNAN
            DEC64_SNAN

                                     © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                           § 5.2.5.3.4
                                             Environment — 30

             DEC128_SNAN

    expands to a constant expression of the respective decimal floating type representing a signaling
    NaN. If an optional unary + or - operator followed by a signaling NaN macro is used for initializing
    an object of the same type that has static or thread storage duration, the object is initialized with a
    signaling NaN value.
4   The macro

             DEC_INFINITY

    expands to a constant expression of type _Decimal32 representing positive infinity.
5   The macro

             DEC_NAN

    expands to a constant expression of type _Decimal32 representing a quiet NaN.
6   The integer values given in the following lists shall be replaced by constant expressions suitable for
    use in conditional expression inclusion preprocessing directives:

      — radix of exponent representation, b(=10)
          For the standard floating types, this value is implementation-defined and is specified by the
          macro FLT_RADIX. For the decimal floating types there is no corresponding macro, since the
          value 10 is an inherent property of the types. Wherever FLT_RADIX appears in a description
          of a function that has versions that operate on decimal floating types, it is noted that for the
          decimal floating-point versions the value used is implicitly 10, rather than FLT_RADIX.

      — number of digits in the coefficient

            DEC32_MANT_DIG       7
            DEC64_MANT_DIG       16
            DEC128_MANT_DIG      34

      — minimum exponent

            DEC32_MIN_EXP        -94
            DEC64_MIN_EXP        -382
            DEC128_MIN_EXP       -6142

      — maximum exponent

            DEC32_MAX_EXP        97
            DEC64_MAX_EXP        385
            DEC128_MAX_EXP       6145

      — maximum representable finite decimal floating-point number (there are 6, 15 and 33 9’s after
        the decimal points respectively)

            DEC32_MAX            9.999999E96DF
            DEC64_MAX            9.999999999999999E384DD
            DEC128_MAX           9.999999999999999999999999999999999E6144DL

      — the difference between 1 and the least value greater than 1 that is representable in the given
        floating type

    § 5.2.5.3.4                       © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                              Environment — 31

            DEC32_EPSILON               1E-6DF
            DEC64_EPSILON               1E-15DD
            DEC128_EPSILON              1E-33DL

       — minimum normalized positive decimal floating-point number

            DEC32_MIN                   1E-95DF
            DEC64_MIN                   1E-383DD
            DEC128_MIN                  1E-6143DL

       — minimum positive subnormal decimal floating-point number

            DEC32_TRUE_MIN              0.000001E-95DF
            DEC64_TRUE_MIN              0.000000000000001E-383DD
            DEC128_TRUE_MIN             0.000000000000000000000000000000001E-6143DL

7    For decimal floating-point arithmetic, it is often convenient to consider an alternate equivalent
     model where the significand is represented with integer rather than fraction digits. With s, b, e, p,
     and fk as defined in 5.2.5.3.3, a floating-point number x is defined by the model:
                            p
                            X
           x = s · b(e−p)         fk · b(p−k)
                            k=1

8    With b fixed to 10, a decimal floating-point number x is thus:
                             p
                             X
           x = s · 10(e−p)         fk · 10(p−k)
                             k=1

     The quantum exponent is q = e − p and the coefficient is c = f1 f2 · · · fp , which is an integer between
     0 and 10p − 1, inclusive. Thus, x = s · c · 10q is represented by the triple of integers (s, c, q). The
     quantum of x is 10q , which is the value of a unit in the last place of the coefficient.

                                           Table 5.1: Quantum exponent ranges

            Type                                              _Decimal32    _Decimal64    _Decimal128
            Maximum Quantum Exponent (qmax )                      90               369        6111
            Minimum Quantum Exponent (qmin )                     −101              −398      −6176

9    For binary floating-point arithmetic following ISO/IEC 60559, representations in the model described
     in 5.2.5.3.3 that have the same numerical value are indistinguishable in the arithmetic. However,
     for decimal floating-point arithmetic, representations that have the same numerical value but
     different quantum exponents, e.g. (+1, 10, −1) representing 1.0 and (+1, 100, −2) representing
     1.00, are distinguishable. To facilitate exact fixed-point calculation, operation results that are of
     decimal floating type have a preferred quantum exponent, as specified in ISO/IEC 60559, which is
     determined by the quantum exponents of the operands if they have decimal floating types (or by
     specific rules for conversions from other types). Table 5.2 gives rules for determining preferred
     quantum exponents for results of ISO/IEC 60559 operations, and for other operations specified
     in this document. When exact, these operations produce a result with their preferred quantum
     exponent, or as close to it as possible within the limitations of the type. When inexact, these
     operations produce a result with the least possible quantum exponent. For example, the preferred
     quantum exponent for addition is the minimum of the quantum exponents of the operands. Hence
     (+1, 123, −2) + (+1, 4000, −3) = (+1, 5230, −3) or 1.23 + 4.000 = 5.230.
10   Table 5.2 shows, for each operation delivering a result in decimal floating-point format, how the
     preferred quantum exponents of the operands, Q(x), Q(y), etc., determine the preferred quantum

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                     § 5.2.5.3.4
                                                       Environment — 32

     exponent of the operation result, provided the table formula is defined for the arguments. For
     the cases where the formula is undefined and the function result is ±∞, the preferred quantum
     exponent is immaterial because the quantum exponent of ±∞ is defined to be infinity. For the
     other cases where the formula is undefined and the function result is finite, the preferred quantum
     exponent is unspecified.
11   NOTE Although unspecified in ISO/IEC 60559, a preferred quantum exponent of 0 for these cases would be a
     reasonable implementation choice.

                                    Table 5.2: Preferred quantum exponents

      Operation                                         Preferred quantum exponent of result
      roundeven, round, trunc, ceil, floor,             max(Q(x), 0)
      rint, nearbyint
      nextup, nextdown, nextafter, nexttoward           least possible
      remainder                                         min(Q(x), Q(y))
      fmin, fmax, fminimum, fmaximum,                   Q(x) if x gives the result, Q(y) if y gives the result
      fminimum_mag, fmaximum_mag,
      fminimum_num, fmaximum_num,
      fminimum_mag_num, fmaximum_mag_num
      scalbn, scalbln                                   Q(x) + n
      ldexp                                             Q(x) + p
      logb                                              0
      postfix ++ operator, postfix -- operator,         min(Q(x), 0)
      prefix ++ operator, prefix -- operator
      +, d32add, d64add                                 min(Q(x), Q(y))
      -, d32sub, d64sub                                 min(Q(x), Q(y))
      *, d32mul, d64mul                                 Q(x) + Q(y)
      /, d32div, d64div                                 Q(x) − Q(y)
      sqrt, d32sqrt, d64sqrt                            ⌊Q(x)/2⌋
      fma, d32fma, d64fma                               min(Q(x) + Q(y), Q(z))
      conversion from integer type                      0
      exact conversion from non-decimal floating        0
      type
      inexact conversion from non-decimal               least possible
      floating type
      conversion between decimal floating types         Q(x)
      *cx returned by canonicalize                      Q(*x )
      strto, wcsto, scanf, floating constants of        see 7.24.1.6
      decimal floating type
      -(x ), +(x )                                      Q(x)
      fabs                                              Q(x)
      copysign                                          Q(x)
      quantize                                          Q(y)
      quantum                                           Q(x)
      *encptr returned by encodedec,                    Q(*xptr )
      encodebin
      *xptr returned by decodedec, decodebin            Q(*encptr )
      fmod                                              min(Q(x), Q(y))
      fdim                                              min((Q(x), Q(y)) if x > y, 0 if x ≤ y
      cbrt                                              ⌊Q(x)/3⌋
      hypot                                             min(Q(x), Q(y))
      pow                                               ⌊y × Q(x)⌋
      modf                                              Q(value)
      *iptr returned by modf                            max(Q(value), 0)

     § 5.2.5.3.4                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                               Environment — 33

 frexp                                            Q(value) if value = 0, –(length of coefficient of
                                                  value) otherwise
 *res returned by setpayload,                     0 if pl does not represent a valid payload, not
 setpayloadsig                                    applicable otherwise (NaN returned)
 getpayload                                       0 if *x is a NaN, unspecified otherwise
 compoundn                                        ⌊n × min(0, Q(x))⌋
 pown                                             ⌊n × Q(x)⌋
 powr                                             ⌊y × Q(x)⌋
 rootn                                            ⌊Q(x)/n⌋
 rsqrt                                            −⌊Q(x)/2⌋
 transcendental functions                         0

A function family listed in Table 5.2 indicates the functions for all decimal floating types, where the
function family is represented by the name of the functions without a suffix. For example, ceil
indicates the functions ceild32, ceild64, and ceild128.
Forward references: extended multibyte and wide character utilities <wchar.h> (7.31), floating-
point environment <fenv.h> (7.6), general utilities <stdlib.h> (7.24), input/output <stdio.h>
(7.23), mathematics <math.h> (7.12), type-generic mathematics <tgmath.h> (7.27), ISO/IEC 60559
floating-point arithmetic (Annex F).

                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                          § 5.2.5.3.4
                                          Environment — 34
