
    6. Language

    6.1   Notation
1   In the syntax notation used in this clause, syntactic categories (nonterminals) are indicated by italic
    type, and literal words and character set members (terminals) by bold type. A colon (:) following
    a nonterminal introduces its definition. Alternative definitions are listed on separate lines, except
    when prefaced by the words "one of". An optional symbol is indicated by the subscript "opt", so
    that
              { expressionopt }
    indicates an optional expression enclosed in braces.
2   When syntactic categories are referred to in the main text, they are not italicized and words are
    separated by spaces instead of hyphens.
3   A summary of the language syntax is given in Annex A.

    6.2 Concepts
    6.2.1 Scopes of identifiers, type names, and compound literals
1   An identifier can denote:

      — a standard attribute, an attribute prefix, or an attribute name;

      — an object;

      — a function;

      — a tag or a member of a structure, union, or enumeration;

      — a typedef name;

      — a label name;

      — a macro name;

      — or, a macro parameter.

    The same identifier can denote different entities at different points in the program. A member
    of an enumeration is called an enumeration constant. Macro names and macro parameters are not
    considered further here, because prior to the semantic phase of program translation any occurrences
    of macro names in the source file are replaced by the preprocessing token sequences that constitute
    their macro definitions.
2   For each different entity that an identifier designates, the identifier is visible (i.e. can be used) only
    within a region of program text called its scope. Different entities designated by the same identifier
    either have different scopes or are in different name spaces. There are four kinds of scopes: function,
    file, block, and function prototype. (A function prototype is a declaration of a function.)
3   A label name is the only kind of identifier that has function scope. It can be used (in a goto statement)
    anywhere in the function in which it appears, and is declared implicitly by its syntactic appearance
    (followed by a : and a statement).
4   Every other identifier has scope determined by the placement of its declaration (in a declarator
    or type specifier). If the declarator or type specifier that declares the identifier appears outside
    of any block or list of parameters, the identifier has file scope, which terminates at the end of the
    translation unit. If the declarator or type specifier that declares the identifier appears inside a block
    or within the list of parameter declarations in a function definition, the identifier has block scope,
    which terminates at the end of the associated block. If the declarator or type specifier that declares

    § 6.2.1                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 35

    the identifier appears within the list of parameter declarations in a function prototype (not part of a
    function definition), the identifier has function prototype scope, which terminates at the end of the
    function declarator. If an identifier designates two different entities in the same name space, the
    scopes can overlap. If so, the scope of one entity (the inner scope) will end strictly before the scope of
    the other entity (the outer scope). Within the inner scope, the identifier designates the entity declared
    in the inner scope; the entity declared in the outer scope is hidden (and not visible) within the inner
    scope.
5   Unless explicitly stated otherwise, where this document uses the term "identifier" to refer to an
    entity (as opposed to the syntactic construct), it refers to the entity in the relevant name space whose
    declaration is visible at the point the identifier occurs.
6   Two identifiers have the same scope if and only if their scopes terminate at the same point.
7   Structure, union, and enumeration tags have scope that begins just after the appearance of the tag
    in a type specifier that declares the tag. Each enumeration constant has scope that begins just after
    the appearance of its defining enumerator in an enumerator list. An ordinary identifier that has an
    underspecified definition has scope that starts when the definition is completed; if the same ordinary
    identifier declares another entity with a scope that encloses the current block, that declaration is
    hidden as soon as the inner declarator is completed.19) Any other identifier has scope that begins
    just after the completion of its declarator.
8   As a special case, a type name (which is not a declaration of an identifier) is considered to have
    a scope that begins just after the place within the type name where the omitted identifier would
    appear were it not omitted. A compound literal (which is an expression that provides access to an
    anonymous object) is associated with the scope of the type name used in its definition; that scope is
    either file scope, function prototype scope, or block scope.
    Forward references: declarations (6.7), function calls (6.5.3.3), function calls (6.5.3.6), function
    definitions (6.9.2), identifiers (6.4.2), macro replacement (6.10.5), name spaces of identifiers (6.2.3),
    source file inclusion (6.10.3), statements and blocks (6.8).

    6.2.2     Linkages of identifiers
1   An identifier declared in different scopes or in the same scope more than once can be made to refer
    to the same object or function by a process called linkage.20) There are three kinds of linkage: external,
    internal, and none.
2   In the set of translation units and libraries that constitutes an entire program, each declaration of a
    particular identifier with external linkage denotes the same object or function. Within one translation
    unit, each declaration of an identifier with internal linkage denotes the same object or function. Each
    declaration of an identifier with no linkage denotes a unique entity.
3   If the declaration of a file scope identifier for:

      — an object contains any of the storage-class specifiers static or constexpr;

      — or, a function contains the storage-class specifier static,

    then the identifier has internal linkage.21)
4   For an identifier declared with the storage-class specifier extern in a scope in which a prior dec-
    laration of that identifier is visible,22) if the prior declaration specifies internal or external linkage,
    the linkage of the identifier at the later declaration is the same as the linkage specified at the prior
    declaration. If no prior declaration is visible, or if the prior declaration specifies no linkage, then the
    identifier has external linkage.
5   If the declaration of an identifier for a function has no storage-class specifier, its linkage is determined
    exactly as if it were declared with the storage-class specifier extern. If the declaration of an identifier
     19) That means, that the outer declaration is not visible for the initializer.
     20) There is no linkage between different identifiers.
     21) A function declaration can contain the storage-class specifier static only if it is at file scope; see 6.7.2.
     22) As specified in 6.2.1, the later declaration can hide the prior declaration.

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 6.2.2
                                                              Language — 36

    for an object has file scope and does not contain the storage-class specifier static or constexpr, its
    linkage is external.
6   The following identifiers have no linkage: an identifier declared to be anything other than an object
    or a function; an identifier declared to be a function parameter; a block scope identifier for an object
    declared without the storage-class specifier extern.
7   If, within a translation unit, the same identifier appears with both internal and external linkage, the
    behavior is undefined.
    Forward references: declarations (6.7), expressions (6.5.1), external definitions (6.9), statements
    (6.8).

    6.2.3      Name spaces of identifiers
1   If more than one declaration of a particular identifier is visible at any point in a translation unit, the
    syntactic context disambiguates uses that refer to different entities. Thus, there are separate name
    spaces for various categories of identifiers, as follows:

       — label names (disambiguated by the syntax of the label declaration and use);
       — the tags of structures, unions, and enumerations (disambiguated by following any23) of the
         keywords struct, union, or enum);
       — the members of structures or unions; each structure or union has a separate name space for its
         members (disambiguated by the type of the expression used to access the member via the . or
        -> operator);

       — standard attributes and attribute prefixes (disambiguated by the syntax of the attribute specifier
         and name of the attribute token) (6.7.13);
       — the trailing identifier in an attribute prefixed token; each attribute prefix has a separate name
         space for the implementation-defined attributes that it introduces (disambiguated by the
         attribute prefix and the trailing identifier token);
       — all other identifiers, called ordinary identifiers (declared in ordinary declarators or as enumera-
         tion constants).

    Forward references: enumeration specifiers (6.7.3.3), labeled statements (6.8.2), structure and union
    specifiers (6.7.3.2), structure and union members (6.5.3.4), tags (6.7.3.4), the goto statement (6.8.7.2).

    6.2.4      Storage durations of objects
1   An object has a storage duration that determines its lifetime. There are four storage durations: static,
    thread, automatic, and allocated. Allocated storage is described in 7.24.3.
2   The lifetime of an object is the portion of program execution during which storage is guaranteed
    to be reserved for it. An object exists, has a constant address,24) and retains its last-stored value
    throughout its lifetime.25) If an object is referred to outside of its lifetime, the behavior is undefined.
    If a pointer value is used in an evaluation after the object the pointer points to (or just past) reaches
    the end of its lifetime, the behavior is undefined. The representation of a pointer object becomes
    indeterminate when the object the pointer points to (or just past) reaches the end of its lifetime.
3   An object whose identifier is declared without the storage-class specifier thread_local, and either
    with external or internal linkage or with the storage-class specifier static, has static storage duration.
    Its lifetime is the entire execution of the program and its stored value is initialized only once, prior
    to program startup.
4   An object whose identifier is declared with the storage-class specifier thread_local has thread
    storage duration. Its explicit or implicit initializer is evaluated prior to program execution, its lifetime
     23) There is only one name space for tags even though three are possible.
     24) The term "constant address" means that two pointers to the object constructed at possibly different times will compare

    equal. The address can be different during two different executions of the same program.
     25) In the case of a volatile object, the last store is not required to be explicit in the program.

    § 6.2.4                                    © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                            Language — 37

    is the entire execution of the thread for which it is created, and its stored value is initialized with the
    previously determined value when the thread is started. There is a distinct object per thread, and
    use of the declared name in an expression refers to the object associated with the thread evaluating
    the expression. The result of attempting to indirectly access an object with thread storage duration
    from a thread other than the one with which the object is associated is implementation-defined.
5   An object whose identifier is declared with no linkage and without the storage-class specifier static
    has automatic storage duration, as do some compound literals. The result of attempting to indirectly
    access an object with automatic storage duration from a thread other than the one with which the
    object is associated is implementation-defined.
6   For such an object that does not have a variable length array type, its lifetime extends from entry
    into the block with which it is associated until execution of that block ends in any way. (Entering
    an enclosed block or calling a function suspends, but does not end, execution of the current block.)
    If the block is entered recursively, a new instance of the object is created each time. The initial
    representation of the object is indeterminate. If an initialization is specified for the object and it is not
    specified with constexpr, it is performed each time the declaration or compound literal is reached
    in the execution of the block; if it is specified with constexpr the initializer is evaluated once at
    translation time and the new instance of the object is initialized to that fixed value each time the
    specification is reached; otherwise, the representation of the object becomes indeterminate each time
    the declaration is reached.
7   For such an object that does have a variable length array type, its lifetime extends from the declaration
    of the object until execution of the program leaves the scope of the declaration.26) If the scope is
    entered recursively, a new instance of the object is created each time. The initial representation of
    the object is indeterminate.
8   A non-lvalue expression with structure or union type, where the structure or union contains a
    member with array type (including, recursively, members of all contained structures and unions)
    refers to an object with automatic storage duration and temporary lifetime.27) Its lifetime begins when
    the expression is evaluated and its initial value is the value of the expression. Its lifetime ends
    when the evaluation of the containing full expression ends. Any attempt to modify an object with
    temporary lifetime results in undefined behavior. An object with temporary lifetime behaves as if it
    were declared with the type of its value for the purposes of effective type. Such an object may not
    have a unique address.
    Forward references: array declarators (6.7.7.3), compound literals (6.5.3.6), declarators (6.7.7),
    function calls (6.5.3.3), initialization (6.7.11), statements (6.8), effective type (6.5.1).

    6.2.5     Types
1   The meaning of a value stored in an object or returned by a function is determined by the type of the
    expression used to access it. (An identifier declared to be an object is the simplest such expression;
    the type is specified in the declaration of the identifier.) Types are partitioned into object types (types
    that describe objects) and function types (types that describe functions). At various points within a
    translation unit an object type may be incomplete28) (lacking sufficient information to determine the
    size of objects of that type) or complete (having sufficient information).29)
2   An object declared as type bool is large enough to store the values false and true.
3   An object declared as type char is large enough to store any member of the basic execution char-
    acter set. If a member of the basic execution character set is stored in a char object, its value is
    guaranteed to be nonnegative. If any other character is stored in a char object, the resulting value is
    implementation-defined but shall be within the range of values that can be represented in that type.

      26) Leaving the innermost block containing the declaration, or jumping to a point in that block or an embedded block prior

    to the declaration, leaves the scope of the declaration.
      27) The address of such an object is taken implicitly when an array member is accessed.
      28) An incomplete type can only be used when the size of an object of that type is not needed. It is not needed, for example,

    when a typedef name is declared to be a specifier for a structure or union, or when a pointer to or a function returning a
    structure or union is being declared. The specification has to be complete before such a function is called or defined.
      29) A type can be incomplete or complete throughout an entire translation unit, or it can change states at different points

    within a translation unit.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                            § 6.2.5
                                                          Language — 38

4    There are five standard signed integer types, designated as signed char, short int, int, long int,
     and long long int. (These and other types may be designated in several additional ways, as
     described in 6.7.3.)
5    A bit-precise signed integer type is designated as _BitInt( N) where N is an integer constant expression
     that specifies the number of bits that are used to represent the type, including the sign bit. Each
     value of N designates a distinct type.30)
6    There may also be implementation-defined extended signed integer types.31) The standard signed
     integer types, bit-precise signed integer types, and extended signed integer types are collectively
     called signed integer types.32)
7    An object declared as type signed char occupies the same amount of storage as a "plain" char
     object. A "plain" int object has the natural size suggested by the architecture of the execution
     environment (large enough to contain any value in the range INT_MIN to INT_MAX as defined in the
     header <limits.h>).
8    For each of the signed integer types, there is a corresponding (but different) unsigned integer type
     (designated with the keyword unsigned) that uses the same amount of storage (including sign
     information) and has the same alignment requirements. The type bool and the unsigned integer
     types that correspond to the standard signed integer types are the standard unsigned integer types.
     The unsigned integer types that correspond to the extended signed integer types are the extended
     unsigned integer types. In addition to the unsigned integer types that correspond to the bit-precise
     signed integer types there is the type unsigned _BitInt(1), which uses one bit to represent the
     type. Collectively, unsigned _BitInt(1) and the unsigned integer types that correspond to the bit-
     precise signed integer types are the bit-precise unsigned integer types. The standard unsigned integer
     types, bit-precise unsigned integer types, and extended unsigned integer types are collectively called
     unsigned integer types.33)
9    The standard signed integer types and standard unsigned integer types are collectively called the
     standard integer types; the bit-precise signed integer types and bit-precise unsigned integer types
     are collectively called the bit-precise integer types; the extended signed integer types and extended
     unsigned integer types are collectively called the extended integer types.
10   For any two integer types with the same signedness and different integer conversion rank (see
     6.3.1.1), the range of values of the type with smaller integer conversion rank is a subrange of the
     values of the other type.
11   The range of nonnegative values of a signed integer type is a subrange of the corresponding unsigned
     integer type, and the representation of the same value in each type is the same.34) The range of
     representable values for the unsigned type is 0 to 2N − 1 (inclusive). A computation involving
     unsigned operands can never produce an overflow, because arithmetic for the unsigned type is
     performed modulo 2N .
12   There are three standard floating types, designated as float, double, and long double.35) The set of
     values of the type float is a subset of the set of values of the type double; the set of values of the
     type double is a subset of the set of values of the type long double.
13   There are three decimal floating types, designated as _Decimal32, _Decimal64, and _Decimal128
     . Respectively, they have the ISO/IEC 60559 formats: decimal32,36) decimal64, and decimal128.
     (Decimal floating types are a conditional feature that implementations may not support; see 6.10.10.4.)

      30) Thus, _BitInt(3) is not the same type as _BitInt(4).
      31) Implementation-defined keywords have the form of an identifier reserved for any use as described in 7.1.3.
       32) Any statement in this document about signed integer types also applies to the bit-precise signed integer types and the

     extended signed integer types, unless otherwise noted.
       33) Any statement in this document about unsigned integer types also applies to the bit-precise unsigned integer types and

     the extended unsigned integer types, unless otherwise specified.
       34) The same representation and alignment requirements are meant to imply interchangeability as arguments to functions,

     return values from functions, and members of unions.
       35) See "future language directions" (6.11.1).
       36) ISO/IEC 60559 specifies decimal32 as a data-interchange format that does not require arithmetic support; however,
     _Decimal32 is a fully supported arithmetic type.

     § 6.2.5                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 39

14   The standard floating types and the decimal floating types are collectively called the real floating
     types..
15   There are three complex types, designated as float _Complex, double _Complex, and long double
     _Complex.37) (Complex types are a conditional feature that implementations may not support; see
     6.10.10.4.) The real floating and complex types are collectively called the floating types.
16   For each floating type there is a corresponding real type, which is always a real floating type. For real
     floating types, it is the same type. For complex types, it is the type given by deleting the keyword
     _Complex from the type name.

17   Each complex type has the same representation and alignment requirements as an array type
     containing exactly two elements of the corresponding real type; the first element is equal to the real
     part, and the second element to the imaginary part, of the complex number.
18   The type char, the signed and unsigned integer types, and the floating types are collectively called
     the basic types. The basic types are complete object types. Even if the implementation defines two or
     more basic types to have the same representation, they are nevertheless distinct types.
19   NOTE An implementation can define new keywords that provide alternative ways to designate a basic (or
     any other) type; this does not violate the requirement that all basic types be different. Implementation-defined
     keywords have the form of an identifier reserved for any use as described in 7.1.3.
20   The three types char, signed char, and unsigned char are collectively called the character types.
     The implementation shall define char to have the same range, representation, and behavior as either
     signed char or unsigned char.38)
21   An enumeration comprises a set of named integer constant values. Each distinct enumeration
     constitutes a different enumerated type.
22   The type char, the signed and unsigned integer types, and the enumerated types are collectively
     called integer types. The integer and real floating types are collectively called real types.
23   Integer and floating types are collectively called arithmetic types. Each arithmetic type belongs to
     one type domain: the real type domain comprises the real types, the complex type domain comprises the
     complex types.
24   The void type comprises an empty set of values; it is an incomplete object type that cannot be
     completed.
25   Any number of derived types can be constructed from the object and function types, as follows:

       — An array type describes a contiguously allocated nonempty set of objects with a particular
         member object type, called the element type. The element type shall be complete whenever the
         array type is specified. Array types are characterized by their element type and by the number
         of elements in the array. An array type is said to be derived from its element type, and if its
         element type is T, the array type is sometimes called "array of T". The construction of an array
         type from an element type is called "array type derivation".

       — A structure type describes a sequentially allocated nonempty set of member objects (and, in
         certain circumstances, an incomplete array), each of which has an optionally specified name
         and possibly distinct type.

       — A union type describes an overlapping nonempty set of member objects, each of which has an
         optionally specified name and possibly distinct type.

       — A function type describes a function with specified return type. A function type is characterized
         by its return type and the number and types of its parameters. A function type is said to
         be derived from its return type, and if its return type is T, the function type is sometimes
         called "function returning T". The construction of a function type from a return type is called
         "function type derivation".
      37) A specification for imaginary types is in Annex G.
      38) CHAR_MIN, defined in <limits.h>, will have one of the values 0 or SCHAR_MIN, and this can be used to distinguish the

     two options. Irrespective of the choice made, char is a separate type from the other two and is not compatible with either.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.2.5
                                                          Language — 40

        — A pointer type may be derived from a function type or an object type, called the referenced type. A
          pointer type describes an object whose value provides a reference to an entity of the referenced
          type. A pointer type derived from the referenced type T is sometimes called "pointer to T".
          The construction of a pointer type from a referenced type is called "pointer type derivation".
          A pointer type is a complete object type.

        — An atomic type describes the type designated by the construct _Atomic (type-name). (Atomic
          types are a conditional feature that implementations may not support; see 6.10.10.4.)

     These methods of constructing derived types can be applied recursively.
26   Arithmetic types, pointer types, and the nullptr_t type are collectively called scalar types. Array
     and structure types are collectively called aggregate types.39)
27   An array type of unknown size is an incomplete type. It is completed, for an identifier of that type,
     by specifying the size in a later declaration (with internal or external linkage). A structure or union
     type of unknown content (as described in 6.7.3.4) is an incomplete type. It is completed, for all
     declarations of that type, by declaring the same structure or union tag with its defining content later
     in the same scope.
28   A complete type shall have a size that is less than or equal to SIZE_MAX. A type has known constant
     size if it is complete and is not a variable length array type.
29   Array, function, and pointer types are collectively called derived declarator types. A declarator type
     derivation from a type T is the construction of a derived declarator type from T by the application of
     an array-type, a function-type, or a pointer-type derivation to T.
30   A type is characterized by its type category, which is either the outermost derivation of a derived
     type (as noted previously in this subclause in the construction of derived types), or the type itself if
     the type consists of no derived types.
31   Any type so far mentioned is an unqualified type. Each unqualified type has several qualified versions
     of its type,40) corresponding to the combinations of one, two, or all three of the const, volatile, and
     restrict qualifiers. The qualified or unqualified versions of a type are distinct types that belong to
     the same type category and have the same representation and alignment requirements.41) An array
     and its element type are always considered to be identically qualified.42) Any other derived type is
     not qualified by the qualifiers (if any) of the type from which it is derived.
32   Further, there is the _Atomic qualifier. The presence of the _Atomic qualifier designates an atomic
     type. The size, representation, and alignment of an atomic type may not be the same as those of
     the corresponding unqualified type. Therefore, this document explicitly uses the phrase "atomic,
     qualified, or unqualified type" whenever the atomic version of a type is permitted along with the
     other qualified versions of a type. The phrase "qualified or unqualified type", without specific
     mention of atomic, does not include the atomic types.
33   A pointer to void shall have the same representation and alignment requirements as a pointer to a
     character type.41) Similarly, pointers to qualified or unqualified versions of compatible types shall
     have the same representation and alignment requirements. All pointers to structure types shall have
     the same representation and alignment requirements as each other. All pointers to union types shall
     have the same representation and alignment requirements as each other. Pointers to other types may
     not have the same representation or alignment requirements.
34   EXAMPLE 1 The type designated as "float *" has type "pointer to float". Its type category is pointer, not
     a floating type. The const-qualified version of this type is designated as "float * const" whereas the type
     designated as "const float *" is not a qualified type — its type is "pointer to const-qualified float" and is a
     pointer to a qualified type.
       39) Note that aggregate type does not include union type because an object with union type can only contain one member at

     a time.
       40) See 6.7.4 regarding qualified array and function types.
       41) The same representation and alignment requirements are meant to imply interchangeability as arguments to functions,

     return values from functions, and members of unions.
       42) This does not apply to the _Atomic qualifier. Note that qualifiers do not have any direct effect on the array type itself, but

     affect conversion rules for pointer types that reference an array type.

     § 6.2.5                                   © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                            Language — 41

35   EXAMPLE 2 The type designated as "struct tag (*[5])(float)" has type "array of pointer to function
     returning struct tag". The array has length five and the function has a single parameter of type float. Its
     type category is array.
     Forward references: compatible type and composite type (6.2.7), declarations (6.7).

     6.2.6     Representations of types
     6.2.6.1 General
1    The representations of all types are unspecified except as stated in this subclause.
2    Except for bit-fields, objects are composed of contiguous sequences of one or more bytes, the number,
     order, and encoding of which are either explicitly specified or implementation-defined.
3    Values stored in unsigned bit-fields and objects of type unsigned char shall be represented using a
     pure binary notation.
4    Values stored in non-bit-field objects of any other object type are represented using n× CHAR_BIT bits,
     where n is the size of an object of that type, in bytes. An object that has the value may be copied into
     an object of type unsigned char [n] (e.g. by memcpy); the resulting set of bytes is called the object
     representation of the value. Values stored in bit-fields consist of m bits, where m is the size specified
     for the bit-field. The object representation is the set of m bits the bit-field comprises in the addressable
     storage unit holding it. Two values (other than NaNs) with the same object representation compare
     equal, but values that compare equal may have different object representations.
5    Certain object representations do not represent a value of the object type. If such a representation is
     read by an lvalue expression that does not have character type, the behavior is undefined. If such a
     representation is produced by a side effect that modifies all or any part of the object by an lvalue
     expression that does not have character type, the behavior is undefined.43) Such a representation is
     called a non-value representation.
6    When a value is stored in an object of structure or union type, including in a member object, the
     bytes of the object representation that correspond to any padding bytes take unspecified values (e.g.
     structure and union assignment may or may not copy any padding bits). The object representation
     of a structure or union object is never a non-value representation, even though the byte range
     corresponding to a member of the structure or union object may be a non-value representation for
     that member.
7    When a value is stored in a member of an object of union type, the bytes of the object representation
     that do not correspond to that member but do correspond to other members take unspecified values.
8    Where an operator is applied to a value that has more than one object representation, which object
     representation is used shall not affect the value of the result.44) Where a value is stored in an object
     using a type that has more than one object representation for that value, it is unspecified which
     representation is used, but a non-value representation shall not be generated.
9    Loads and stores of objects with atomic types are done with memory_order_seq_cst semantics.
     Forward references: declarations (6.7), expressions (6.5.1), lvalues, arrays, and function designators
     (6.3.2.1), order and consistency (7.17.3).

     6.2.6.2 Integer types
1    For unsigned integer types the bits of the object representation shall be divided into two groups:
     value bits and padding bits. If there are N value bits, each bit shall represent a different power of
     2 between 1 and 2N −1 , so that objects of that type shall be capable of representing values from 0
     to 2N − 1 using a pure binary representation; this shall be known as the value representation. The
     values of any padding bits are unspecified. The number of value bits N is called the width of the
     unsigned integer type. The type bool shall have one value bit and (sizeof(bool)*CHAR_BIT)- 1
       43) Thus, an automatic variable can be initialized to a non-value representation without causing undefined behavior, but the

     value of the variable cannot be used until a proper value is stored in it.
       44) It is possible for objects x and y with the same effective type T to have the same value when they are accessed as objects

     of type T, but to have different values in other contexts. In particular, if == is defined for type T, then x == y does not imply
     that memcmp(&x, &y, sizeof(T))== 0. Furthermore, x == y does not necessarily imply that x and y have the same value;
     other operations on values of type T can distinguish between them.

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                           § 6.2.6.2
                                                            Language — 42

    padding bits. Otherwise, there is no requirement to have any padding bits; unsigned char shall
    not have any padding bits.
2   For signed integer types, the bits of the object representation shall be divided into three groups:
    value bits, padding bits, and the sign bit. If the corresponding unsigned type has width N , the
    signed type uses the same number of N bits, its width, as value bits and sign bit. N − 1 are value
    bits and the remaining bit is the sign bit. Each bit that is a value bit shall have the same value as the
    same bit in the object representation of the corresponding unsigned type. If the sign bit is zero, it
    shall not affect the resulting value. If the sign bit is one, it has value −(2N −1 ). There may or may not
    be any padding bits; signed char shall not have any padding bits.
3   The values of any padding bits are unspecified. A valid object representation of a signed integer
    type where the sign bit is zero is a valid object representation of the corresponding unsigned type,
    and shall represent the same value. For any integer type, the object representation where all the bits
    are zero shall be a representation of the value zero in that type.
4   The precision of an integer type is the number of value bits.
5   NOTE 1 Some combinations of padding bits may generate non-value representations, for example, if one
    padding bit is a parity bit. Regardless, no arithmetic operation on valid values can generate a non-value
    representation other than as part of an exceptional condition such as an integer overflow. All other combinations
    of padding bits are alternative object representations of the value specified by the value bits.
6   NOTE 2 The sign representation defined in this document is called two’s complement. Previous editions of this
    document (specifically ISO/IEC 9899:2018 and prior editions) additionally allowed other sign representations.
7   NOTE 3 For unsigned integer types the width and precision are the same, while for signed integer types the
    width is one greater than the precision.

    6.2.7     Compatible type and composite type
1   Two types are compatible types if they are the same. Additional rules for determining whether two
    types are compatible are described in 6.7.3 for type specifiers, in 6.7.4 for type qualifiers, and in 6.7.7
    for declarators.45) Moreover, two complete structure, union, or enumerated types declared with the
    same tag are compatible if members satisfy the following requirements:

      — there shall be a one-to-one correspondence between their members such that each pair of
        corresponding members are declared with compatible types;

      — if one member of the pair is declared with an alignment specifier, the other is declared with an
        equivalent alignment specifier;

      — and, if one member of the pair is declared with a name, the other is declared with the same
        name.

    For two structures, corresponding members shall be declared in the same order. For two unions
    declared in the same translation unit, corresponding members shall be declared in the same order. For
    two structures or unions, corresponding bit-fields shall have the same widths. For two enumerations,
    corresponding members shall have the same values; if one has a fixed underlying type, then the
    other shall have a compatible fixed underlying type. For determining type compatibility, anonymous
    structures and unions are considered a regular member of the containing structure or union type,
    and the type of an anonymous structure or union is considered compatible to the type of another
    anonymous structure or union, respectively, if their members fulfill the preceding requirements.
    Furthermore, two structure, union, or enumerated types declared in separate translation units are
    compatible in the following cases:

      — both are declared without tags and they fulfill the preceding requirements;

      — both have the same tag and are completed somewhere in their respective translation units and
        they fulfill the preceding requirements;
     45) Two types need not be identical to be compatible.

    § 6.2.7                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 43

      — both have the same tag and at least one of the two types is not completed in its translation unit.

    Otherwise, the structure, union, or enumerated types are incompatible.46)
2   All declarations that refer to the same object or function shall have compatible type; otherwise, the
    behavior is undefined.
3   A composite type can be constructed from two types that are compatible. If both types are the same
    type, the composite type is this type. Otherwise, it is a type that is compatible with both and satisfies
    the following conditions:

      — If both types are structure types or both types are union types, the composite type is determined
        recursively by forming the composite types of their members.
      — If both types are array types, the following rules are applied:
              • If one type is an array of known constant size, the composite type is an array of that size.
              • Otherwise, if one type is a variable length array whose size is specified by an expression
                that is not evaluated, the behavior is undefined.
              • Otherwise, if one type is a variable length array whose size is specified, the composite
                type is a variable length array of that size.
              • Otherwise, if one type is a variable length array of unspecified size, the composite type is
                a variable length array of unspecified size.
              • Otherwise, both types are arrays of unknown size and the composite type is an array of
                unknown size.
          The element type of the composite type is the composite type of the two element types.
      — If both types are function types, the type of each parameter in the composite parameter type
        list is the composite type of the corresponding parameters.
      — If one of the types has a standard attribute, the composite type also has that attribute.
      — If both types are enumerated types, the composite type is an enumerated type.
      — If one type is an enumerated type and the other is an integer type other than an enumerated
        type, it is implementation-defined whether or not the composite type is an enumerated type.

    These rules apply recursively to the types from which the two types are derived.
4   If any of the original types satisfies all requirements of the composite type, it is unspecified whether
    the composite type is one of these types or a different type that satisfies the requirements.47)
5   For an identifier with internal or external linkage declared in a scope in which a prior declaration of
    that identifier is visible,48) if the prior declaration specifies internal or external linkage, the type of
    the identifier at the later declaration becomes the composite type.
6   EXAMPLE Given the following two file scope declarations:

             int f(int (*)(char *), double (*)[3]);
             int f(int (*)(char *), double (*)[]);

    The resulting composite type for the function is:

             int f(int (*)(char *), double (*)[3]);

    Forward references: array declarators (6.7.7.3).
      46) A structure, union, or enumerated type without a tag or an incomplete structure, union or enumerated type is not

    compatible with any other structure, union or enum type declared in the same translation unit.
      47) The notion of "same type" affects redeclarations of typedef names and tags in the same scope.
      48) As specified in 6.2.1, the later declaration can hide the prior declaration.

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                       § 6.2.7
                                                      Language — 44

    6.2.8     Alignment of objects
1   Complete object types have alignment requirements which place restrictions on the addresses at
    which objects of that type may be allocated. An alignment is an implementation-defined integer
    value representing the number of bytes between successive addresses at which a given object can be
    allocated. An object type imposes an alignment requirement on every object of that type: stricter
    alignment can be requested using the alignas keyword.
2   A fundamental alignment is a valid alignment less than or equal to alignof(max_align_t). Funda-
    mental alignments shall be supported by the implementation for objects of all storage durations.
    The alignment requirements of the following types shall be fundamental alignments:

      — all atomic, qualified, or unqualified basic types;
      — all atomic, qualified, or unqualified enumerated types;
      — all atomic, qualified, or unqualified pointer types;
      — all array types whose element type has a fundamental alignment requirement;
      — all types specified in Clause 7 as complete object types;
      — all structure or union types whose elements have types with fundamental alignment require-
        ments and none of whose elements have an alignment specifier specifying an alignment that is
        not a fundamental alignment.

3   An extended alignment is represented by an alignment greater than alignof(max_align_t). It is
    implementation-defined whether any extended alignments are supported and the storage durations
    for which they are supported. A type having an extended alignment requirement is an over-aligned
    type.49)
4   Alignments are represented as values of the type size_t. Valid alignments include only fundamental
    alignments, plus an additional implementation-defined set of values, which may be empty. Every
    valid alignment value shall be a nonnegative integral power of two.
5   Alignments have an order from weaker to stronger or stricter alignments. Stricter alignments have
    larger alignment values. An address that satisfies an alignment requirement also satisfies any weaker
    valid alignment requirement.
6   The alignment requirement of a complete type can be queried using an alignof expression. The
    types char, signed char, and unsigned char shall have the weakest alignment requirement.
7   Comparing alignments is meaningful and provides the obvious results:

      — Two alignments are equal when their numeric values are equal.
      — Two alignments are different when their numeric values are not equal.
      — When an alignment is larger than another it represents a stricter alignment.

    6.2.9     Encodings
1   The literal encoding is an implementation-defined mapping of the characters of the execution character
    set to the values in a character constant (6.4.4.5) or string literal (6.4.5). It shall support a mapping
    from all the basic execution character set values into the implementation-defined encoding. It may
    contain multibyte character sequences (5.2.2).
2   The wide literal encoding is an implementation-defined mapping of the characters of the execution
    character set to the values in a wchar_t character constant (6.4.4.5) or a wchar_t string literal (6.4.5).
    It shall support a mapping from all the basic execution character set values into the implementation-
    defined encoding. The mapping shall produce values identical to the literal encoding for all the basic
    execution character set values if an implementation does not define __STDC_MB_MIGHT_NEQ_WC__.
    One or more values may map to one or more values of the extended execution character set.
     49) Every over-aligned type is, or contains, a structure or union type with a member to which an extended alignment has

    been applied.

    § 6.2.9                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                      Language — 45

    6.3     Conversions
1   Several operators convert operand values from one type to another automatically. This subclause
    specifies the result required from such an implicit conversion, as well as those that result from a cast
    operation (an explicit conversion). The list in 6.3.1.8 summarizes the conversions performed by most
    ordinary operators; it is supplemented as required by the discussion of each operator in 6.5.1.
2   Unless explicitly stated otherwise, conversion of an operand value to a compatible type causes no
    change to the value or the representation.
    Forward references: cast operators (6.5.5).

    6.3.1    Arithmetic operands
    6.3.1.1 Boolean, characters, and integers
1   Every integer type has an integer conversion rank defined as follows:

      — No two signed integer types shall have the same rank, even if they have the same representa-
        tion.

      — The rank of a signed integer type shall be greater than the rank of any signed integer type with
        less precision.

      — The rank of long long int shall be greater than the rank of long int, which shall be greater
        than the rank of int, which shall be greater than the rank of short int, which shall be greater
        than the rank of signed char.

      — The rank of a bit-precise signed integer type shall be greater than the rank of any standard
        integer type with less width or any bit-precise integer type with less width.

      — The rank of any unsigned integer type shall equal the rank of the corresponding signed integer
        type, if any.

      — The rank of any standard integer type shall be greater than the rank of any extended integer
        type with the same width or bit-precise integer type with the same width.

      — The rank of any bit-precise integer type relative to an extended integer type of the same width
        is implementation-defined.

      — The rank of char shall equal the rank of signed char and unsigned char.

      — The rank of bool shall be less than the rank of all other standard integer types.

      — The rank of any enumerated type shall equal the rank of the compatible integer type (see
        6.7.3.3).

      — The rank of any extended signed integer type relative to another extended signed integer
        type with the same precision is implementation-defined, but still subject to the other rules for
        determining the integer conversion rank.

      — For all integer types T1, T2, and T3, if T1 has greater rank than T2 and T2 has greater rank than
        T3, then T1 has greater rank than T3.

2   The following may be used in an expression wherever an int or unsigned int may be used:

      — An object or expression with an integer type (other than int or unsigned int) whose integer
        conversion rank is less than or equal to the rank of int and unsigned int.

      — A bit-field of type bool, int, signed int, or unsigned int.

                                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                             § 6.3.1.1
                                                Language — 46

    The value from a bit-field of a bit-precise integer type is converted to the corresponding bit-precise
    integer type. If the original type is not a bit-precise integer type (6.2.5): if an int can represent all
    values of the original type (as restricted by the width, for a bit-field), the value is converted to an
    int;50) otherwise, it is converted to an unsigned int. These are called the integer promotions. All
    other types are unchanged by the integer promotions.
3   NOTE The integer promotions are applied only:

        1. as part of the usual arithmetic conversions,
        2. to certain argument expressions,
        3. to the operands of the unary +, -, and ~ operators,
        4. and to both operands of the shift operators,

    as specified by their respective subclauses.
4   The integer promotions preserve value including sign. As discussed earlier, whether a "plain" char
    can hold negative values is implementation-defined.
    Forward references: enumeration specifiers (6.7.3.3), structure and union specifiers (6.7.3.2).

    6.3.1.2 Boolean type
1   When any scalar value is converted to bool, the result is false if the value is a zero (for arithmetic
    types), null (for pointer types), or the scalar has type nullptr_t; otherwise, the result is true.

    6.3.1.3 Signed and unsigned integers
1   When a value with integer type is converted to another integer type other than bool, if the value
    can be represented by the new type, it is unchanged.
2   Otherwise, if the new type is unsigned, the value is converted by repeatedly adding or subtracting
    one more than the maximum value that can be represented in the new type until the value is in the
    range of the new type.51)
3   Otherwise, the new type is signed and the value cannot be represented in it; either the result is
    implementation-defined or an implementation-defined signal is raised.

    6.3.1.4 Real floating and integer
1   When a finite value of standard floating type is converted to an integer type other than bool, the
    fractional part is discarded (i.e. the value is truncated toward zero). If the value of the integral part
    cannot be represented by the integer type, the behavior is undefined.52)
2   When a finite value of decimal floating type is converted to an integer type other than bool, the
    fractional part is discarded (i.e. the value is truncated toward zero). If the value of the integral part
    cannot be represented by the integer type, the "invalid" floating-point exception shall be raised and
    the result of the conversion is unspecified.
3   When a value of integer type is converted to a standard floating type, if the value being converted
    can be represented exactly in the new type, it is unchanged. If the value being converted is in the
    range of values that can be represented but cannot be represented exactly, the result is either the
    nearest higher or nearest lower representable value, chosen in an implementation-defined manner.
    If the value being converted is outside the range of values that can be represented, the behavior is
    undefined. Results of some implicit conversions may be represented in greater range and precision
    than that required by the new type (see 6.3.1.8 and 6.8.7.5).
4   When a value of integer type is converted to a decimal floating type, if the value being converted
    can be represented exactly in the new type, it is unchanged. If the value being converted cannot
    be represented exactly, the result shall be correctly rounded with exceptions raised as specified in
      50) E.g. unsigned _BitInt(7): 2 is a bit-field that can hold the values 0, 1, 2, 3, and converts to unsigned _BitInt(7).
      51) The rules describe arithmetic on the mathematical value, not the value of a given type of expression.
      52) The remaindering operation performed when a value of integer type is converted to unsigned type need not be

    performed when a value of real floating type is converted to unsigned type. Thus, the range of portable real floating values is
    (−1, Utype_MAX + 1).

    § 6.3.1.4                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 47

    6.3.1.5 Real floating types
1   When a value of real floating type is converted to a real floating type, if the value being converted
    can be represented exactly in the new type, it is unchanged.
2   When a value of real floating type is converted to a standard floating type, if the value being
    converted is in the range of values that can be represented but cannot be represented exactly, the
    result is either the nearest higher or nearest lower representable value, chosen in an implementation-
    defined manner. If the value being converted is outside the range of values that can be represented,
    the behavior is undefined.
3   When a value of real floating type is converted to a decimal floating type, if the value being converted
    cannot be represented exactly, the result is correctly rounded with exceptions raised as specified in
4   Results of some implicit conversions may be represented in greater range and precision than that
    required by the new type (see 6.3.1.8 and 6.8.7.5).

    6.3.1.6 Complex types
1   When a value of complex type is converted to another complex type, both the real and imaginary
    parts follow the conversion rules for the corresponding real types.

    6.3.1.7 Real and complex
1   When a value of real type is converted to a complex type, the real part of the complex result value is
    determined by the rules of conversion to the corresponding real type and the imaginary part of the
    complex result value is a positive zero or an unsigned zero.
2   When a value of complex type is converted to a real type other than bool,53) the imaginary part of
    the complex value is discarded and the value of the real part is converted according to the conversion
    rules for the corresponding real type.

    6.3.1.8 Usual arithmetic conversions
1   Many operators that expect operands of arithmetic type cause conversions and yield result types in
    a similar way. The purpose is to determine a common real type for the operands and result. For the
    specified operands, each operand is converted, without change of type domain, to a type whose
    corresponding real type is the common real type. Unless explicitly stated otherwise, the common
    real type is also the corresponding real type of the result, whose type domain is the type domain of
    the operands if they are the same, and complex otherwise. This pattern is called the usual arithmetic
    conversions:

           If one operand has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have standard floating,
           complex, or imaginary type.

           First, if the type of either operand is _Decimal128, the other operand is converted to
           _Decimal128.

           Otherwise, if the type of either operand is _Decimal64, the other operand is converted to
           _Decimal64.

           Otherwise, if the type of either operand is _Decimal32, the other operand is converted to
           _Decimal32.

           Otherwise, if the corresponding real type of either operand is long double, the other operand
           is converted, without change of type domain, to a type whose corresponding real type is
           long double.

           Otherwise, if the corresponding real type of either operand is double, the other operand is
           converted, without change of type domain, to a type whose corresponding real type is double.
     53) See 6.3.1.2.

                                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                             § 6.3.1.8
                                                Language — 48

            Otherwise, if the corresponding real type of either operand is float, the other operand is
            converted, without change of type domain, to a type whose corresponding real type is float.54)

            Otherwise, if any of the two types is an enumeration, it is converted to its underlying type.
            Then, the integer promotions are performed on both operands. Next, the following rules are
            applied to the promoted operands:

                  If both operands have the same type, then no further conversion is needed.
                  Otherwise, if both operands have signed integer types or both have unsigned integer
                  types, the operand with the type of lesser integer conversion rank is converted to the type
                  of the operand with greater rank.
                  Otherwise, if the operand that has unsigned integer type has rank greater or equal to
                  the rank of the type of the other operand, then the operand with signed integer type is
                  converted to the type of the operand with unsigned integer type.
                  Otherwise, if the type of the operand with signed integer type can represent all the values
                  of the type of the operand with unsigned integer type, then the operand with unsigned
                  integer type is converted to the type of the operand with signed integer type.
                  Otherwise, both operands are converted to the unsigned integer type corresponding to
                  the type of the operand with signed integer type.

2   The values of floating operands and of the results of floating expressions may be represented in
    greater range and precision than that required by the type; the types are not changed thereby.
    See 5.2.5.3.3 regarding evaluation formats.
3   EXAMPLE One consequence of _BitInt being exempt from the integer promotion rules (6.3.1) is that a
    _BitInt operand of a binary operator is not always promoted to an int or unsigned int as part of the usual
    arithmetic conversions. Instead, a lower-ranked operand is converted to the higher-rank operand type and the
    result of the operation is the higher-ranked type.

                _BitInt(2) a2 = 1;
                _BitInt(3) a3 = 2;
                _BitInt(33) a33 = 1;
                signed char c = 3;

                a2 * a3; /* As part of the multiplication, a2 is converted to
                            _BitInt(3) and the result type is _BitInt(3). */
                a2 * c; /* As part of the multiplication, c is promoted to int,
                            a2 is converted to int and the result type is int. */
                a33 * c; /* As part of the multiplication, c is promoted to int.
                            Then, provided int has a width of at most 32,
                            it is converted to _BitInt(33) and the result type
                            is _BitInt(33). */

                void func(_BitInt(8) a8, _BitInt(24) a24) {
                      /* Cast one of the operands to 32-bits to guarantee the
                         result of the multiplication can contain all possible values. */
                      _BitInt(32) a32 = a8 * (_BitInt(32))a24;
                }

    6.3.2       Other operands
    6.3.2.1 Lvalues, arrays, and function designators
1   An lvalue is an expression (with an object type other than void) that potentially designates an
    object;55) if an lvalue does not designate an object when it is evaluated, the behavior is undefined.
      54) For example, addition of a double _Complex and a float entails just the conversion of the float operand to double

    (and yields a double _Complex result).
      55) The name "lvalue" comes originally from the assignment expression E1 = E2, in which the left operand E1 is required to

    be a (modifiable) lvalue. It is perhaps better considered as representing an object "locator value". What is sometimes called

    § 6.3.2.1                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 49

    When an object is said to have a particular type, the type is specified by the lvalue used to designate
    the object. A modifiable lvalue is an lvalue that does not have array type, does not have an incomplete
    type, does not have a const-qualified type, and if it is a structure or union, does not have any
    member (including, recursively, any member or element of all contained aggregates or unions) with
    a const-qualified type.
2   Except when it is the operand of the sizeof operator, or the typeof operators, the unary & operator,
    the ++ operator, the -- operator, or the left operand of the . operator or an assignment operator, an
    lvalue that does not have array type is converted to the value stored in the designated object (and is
    no longer an lvalue); this is called lvalue conversion. If the lvalue has qualified type, the value has the
    unqualified version of the type of the lvalue; additionally, if the lvalue has atomic type, the value has
    the non-atomic version of the type of the lvalue; otherwise, the value has the type of the lvalue. If the
    lvalue has an incomplete type and does not have array type, the behavior is undefined. If the lvalue
    designates an object of automatic storage duration that could have been declared with the register
    storage class (never had its address taken), and that object is uninitialized (not declared with an
    initializer and no assignment to it has been performed prior to use), the behavior is undefined.
3   Except when it is the operand of the sizeof operator, or typeof operators, or the unary & operator,
    or is a string literal used to initialize an array, an expression that has type "array of type" is converted
    to an expression with type "pointer to type" that points to the initial element of the array object and
    is not an lvalue. If the array object has register storage class, the behavior is undefined.
4   A function designator is an expression that has function type. Except when it is the operand of the
    sizeof operator,56) a typeof operator, or the unary & operator, a function designator with type
    "function returning type" is converted to an expression that has type "pointer to function returning
    type".
    Forward references: address and indirection operators (6.5.4.2), assignment operators (6.5.17),
    common definitions <stddef.h> (7.21), initialization (6.7.11), postfix increment and decrement
    operators (6.5.3.5), prefix increment and decrement operators (6.5.4.1), the sizeof and alignof
    operators (6.5.4.4), structure and union members (6.5.3.4).

    6.3.2.2 void
1   The (nonexistent) value of a void expression (an expression that has type void) shall not be used in any
    way, and implicit or explicit conversions (except to void) shall not be applied to such an expression.
    If an expression of any other type is evaluated as a void expression, its value or designator is
    discarded. (A void expression is evaluated for its side effects.)

    6.3.2.3 Pointers
1   A pointer to void may be converted to or from a pointer to any object type. A pointer to any object
    type may be converted to a pointer to void and back again; the result shall compare equal to the
    original pointer.
2   For any qualifier q, a pointer to a non-q-qualified type may be converted to a pointer to the q-qualified
    version of the type; the values stored in the original and converted pointers shall compare equal.
3   An integer constant expression with the value 0, such an expression cast to type void *, or the
    predefined constant nullptr is called a null pointer constant.57) If a null pointer constant or a value
    of the type nullptr_t (which is necessarily the value nullptr) is converted to a pointer type, the
    resulting pointer, called a null pointer, is guaranteed to compare unequal to a pointer to any object or
    function.
4   Conversion of a null pointer to another pointer type yields a null pointer of that type. Any two null
    pointers shall compare equal.
5   An integer may be converted to any pointer type. Except as previously specified, the result is
    "rvalue" is in this document described as the "value of an expression".
       An obvious example of an lvalue is an identifier of an object. As a further example, if E is a unary expression that is a
    pointer to an object, *E is an lvalue that designates the object to which E points.
      56) Because this conversion does not occur, the operand of the sizeof operator remains a function designator and violates

    the constraints in 6.5.4.4
      57) The macro NULL is defined in <stddef.h> (and other headers) as a null pointer constant; see 7.21.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 6.3.2.3
                                                         Language — 50

    implementation-defined, may not be correctly aligned, may not point to an entity of the referenced
    type, and can produce an indeterminate representation when stored into an object.58)
6   Any pointer type may be converted to an integer type. Except as previously specified, the result
    is implementation-defined. If the result cannot be represented in the integer type, the behavior is
    undefined. The result is not required to be in the range of values of any integer type.
7   A pointer to an object type may be converted to a pointer to a different object type. If the resulting
    pointer is not correctly aligned59) for the referenced type, the behavior is undefined. Otherwise,
    when converted back again, the result shall compare equal to the original pointer. When a pointer to
    an object is converted to a pointer to a character type, the result points to the lowest addressed byte
    of the object. Successive increments of the result, up to the size of the object, yield pointers to the
    remaining bytes of the object.
8   A pointer to a function of one type may be converted to a pointer to a function of another type and
    back again; the result shall compare equal to the original pointer. If a converted pointer is used to
    call a function whose type is not compatible with the referenced type, the behavior is undefined.

    6.3.2.4 nullptr_t
1   The type nullptr_t may be converted to void, bool or to a pointer type; the result is a void
    expression, false, or a null pointer value, respectively.
2   A null pointer constant or value of type nullptr_t may be converted to nullptr_t.
    Forward references: cast operators (6.5.5), equality operators (6.5.10), integer types capable of
    holding object pointers (7.22.1.4), simple assignment (6.5.17.2), the nullptr_t type (7.21.2).

      58) The mapping functions for converting a pointer to an integer or an integer to a pointer are intended to be consistent with

    the addressing structure of the execution environment.
      59) In general, the concept "correctly aligned" is transitive: if a pointer to type A is correctly aligned for a pointer to type B,

    which in turn is correctly aligned for a pointer to type C, then a pointer to type A is correctly aligned for a pointer to type C.

    § 6.3.2.4                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                           Language — 51

    6.4    Lexical elements
    Syntax
1    token:
                            keyword
                            identifier
                            constant
                            string-literal
                            punctuator

      preprocessing-token:
                        header-name
                        identifier
                        pp-number
                        character-constant
                        string-literal
                        punctuator
                       each universal character name that cannot be one of the above
                       each non-white-space character that cannot be one of the above

    Constraints
2   Each preprocessing token that is converted to a token shall have the lexical form of a keyword, an
    identifier, a constant, a string literal, or a punctuator. A single universal character name shall match
    one of the other preprocessing token categories.

    Semantics
3   A token is the minimal lexical element of the language in translation phases 7 and 8 (5.1.1.2).
    The categories of tokens are: keywords, identifiers, constants, string literals, and punctuators.
    A preprocessing token is the minimal lexical element of the language in translation phases 3
    through 6. The categories of preprocessing tokens are: header names, identifiers, preprocessing
    numbers, character constants, string literals, punctuators, and both single universal character names
    as well as single non-white-space characters that do not lexically match the other preprocessing
    token categories.60) If a ’ or a " character matches the last category, the behavior is undefined.
    Preprocessing tokens can be separated by white space; this consists of comments (described later),
    or white-space characters (space, horizontal tab, new-line, vertical tab, and form-feed), or both. As
    described in 6.10, in certain circumstances during translation phase 4, white space (or the absence
    thereof) serves as more than preprocessing token separation. White space may appear within a
    preprocessing token only as part of a header name or between the quotation characters in a character
    constant or string literal.
4   If the input stream has been parsed into preprocessing tokens up to a given character, the next
    preprocessing token is the longest sequence of characters that could constitute a preprocessing token.
    There is one exception to this rule: header name preprocessing tokens are recognized only within #
    include and #embed preprocessing directives, in __has_include and __has_embed expressions, as
    well as in implementation-defined locations within #pragma directives. In such contexts, a sequence
    of characters that could be either a header name or a string literal is recognized as the former.
5   EXAMPLE 1 The program fragment 1Ex is parsed as a preprocessing number token (one that is not a valid
    floating or integer constant token), even though a parse as the pair of preprocessing tokens 1 and Ex can
    produce a valid expression (for example, if Ex were a macro defined as +1). Similarly, the program fragment
    1E1 is parsed as a preprocessing number (one that is a valid floating constant token), whether or not E is a
    macro name.
6   EXAMPLE 2 The program fragment x+++++y is parsed as x ++ ++ + y, which violates a constraint on incre-
    ment operators, even though the parse x ++ + ++ y can yield a correct expression.

     60) An additional category, placemarkers, is used internally in translation phase 4 (see 6.10.5.3); it cannot occur in source files.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                                   § 6.4
                                                            Language — 52

    Forward references: character constants (6.4.4.5), comments (6.4.9), expressions (6.5.1), floating
    constants (6.4.4.3), header names (6.4.7), macro replacement (6.10.5), postfix increment and decrement
    operators (6.5.3.5), prefix increment and decrement operators (6.5.4.1), preprocessing directives (6.10),
    preprocessing numbers (6.4.8), string literals (6.4.5).

    6.4.1     Keywords
    Syntax
1    keyword: one of
                  alignas                    do                    int                  struct                    while
                  alignof                 double                  long                  switch                   _Atomic
                   auto                    else                 nullptr             thread_local                 _BitInt
                   bool                    enum                register                  true                   _Complex
                   break                  extern               restrict                typedef               _Decimal128
                   case                    false                 return                 typeof                _Decimal32
                   char                    float                 short              typeof_unqual             _Decimal64
                   const                    for                  signed                 union                  _Generic
                constexpr                  goto                  sizeof               unsigned                _Imaginary
                 continue                    if                  static                  void                  _Noreturn
                  default                 inline             static_assert            volatile

    Semantics
2   The previously listed tokens (case sensitive) are reserved (in translation phases 7 and 8) for use as
    keywords except in an attribute token, and shall not be used otherwise. The keyword _Imaginary
    is reserved for specifying imaginary types.61)
3   The following table provides alternate spellings for certain keywords. These can be used wherever
    the keyword can.62)

                                              Keyword            Alternative Spelling
                                             alignas                   _Alignas
                                             alignof                   _Alignof
                                              bool                      _Bool
                                         static_assert             _Static_assert
                                          thread_local              _Thread_local

    The spelling of these keywords, their alternate forms, and of false and true inside expressions that
    are subject to the # and ## preprocessing operators is unspecified.63)

     61) One possible specification for imaginary types appears in Annex G.
     62) These alternative keywords are obsolescent features and should not be used for new code and development.
     63) The intent of this specification is to allow but not force the implementation of the corresponding feature by means of a

    predefined macro.

    § 6.4.1                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 53

    6.4.2     Identifiers
    6.4.2.1 General
    Syntax
1    identifier:
                           identifier-start
                           identifier identifier-continue

    identifier-start:
                           nondigit
                           XID_Start character
                           universal character name of class XID_Start

    identifier-continue:
                           digit
                           nondigit
                           XID_Continue character
                           universal character name of class XID_Continue

    nondigit: one of
                           _ a b c d e f g h i j k l m
                              n o p q r s t u v w x y z
                              A B C D E F G H I J K L M
                              N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

    digit: one of
                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

    Semantics
2   An XID_Start character is an implementation-defined character whose corresponding code point
    in ISO/IEC 10646 has the XID_Start property. An XID_Continue character is an implementation-
    defined character whose corresponding code point in ISO/IEC 10646 has the XID_Continue property.
    An identifier is a sequence of one identifier start character followed by 0 or more identifier continue
    characters, which designates one or more entities as described in 6.2.1. It is implementation-defined
    if a $ (U+0024, DOLLAR SIGN) may be used as a nondigit character. Lowercase and uppercase
    letters are distinct. There is no specific limit on the maximum length of an identifier.
3   The character classes XID_Start and XID_Continue are Derived Core Properties as described by
    UAX #44.64) Each character and universal character name in an identifier shall designate a character
    whose encoding in ISO/IEC 10646 has the XID_Continue property. The initial character (which
    may be a universal character name) shall designate a character whose encoding in ISO/IEC 10646
    has the XID_Start property. An identifier shall conform to Normalization Form C as specified in
4   NOTE 1 Uppercase and lowercase letters are considered different for all identifiers.
5   NOTE 2 In translation phase 4, the term identifier also includes those preprocessing tokens (6.4.8) differentiated
    as keywords (6.4.1) in the later translation phase 7 (5.1.1.2).

     64) On systems that cannot accept extended characters in external identifiers, an encoding of the universal character name

    may be used in forming such identifiers. For example, some otherwise unused character or sequence of characters may be
    used to encode the u in a universal character name.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                        § 6.4.2.1
                                                        Language — 54

6    When preprocessing tokens are converted to tokens during translation phase 7, if a preprocessing
     token could be converted to either a keyword or an identifier, it is converted to a keyword except in
     an attribute token.
7    Some identifiers are reserved.

       — All identifiers that begin with a double underscore (__) or begin with an underscore (_)
         followed by an uppercase letter are reserved for any use, except those identifiers which are
         lexically identical to keywords.65)
       — All identifiers that begin with an underscore are reserved for use as identifiers with file scope
         in both the ordinary and tag name spaces.

     Other identifiers may be reserved, see 7.1.3.
8    If the program declares or defines an identifier in a context in which it is reserved (other than as
     allowed by 7.1.4), the behavior is undefined.
9    If the program defines a reserved identifier or standard attribute token described in 6.7.13.2 as a
     macro name, or removes (with #undef) any macro definition of an identifier in the first group listed
     previously or standard attribute token described in 6.7.13.2, the behavior is undefined.
10   Some identifiers may be potentially reserved. A potentially reserved identifier is an identifier which is
     not reserved unless made so by an implementation providing the identifier (7.1.3) but is anticipated
     to become reserved by an implementation or a future version of this document. An identifier that
     this document describes as optional:

       — If it is defined as a macro it is reserved.
       — Otherwise, if the definition is given in clauses 1 to 6 it is reserved.
       — Otherwise, it is potentially reserved.

     Recommended practice
11   Implementations are encouraged to issue a diagnostic message when a potentially reserved identifier
     is declared or defined for any use that is not implementation-compatible (see subsequent description
     in this subclause) in a context where the potentially reserved identifier may be reserved under a
     conforming implementation. This brings attention to a potential conflict when porting a program to
     a future revision of this document.
12   An implementation-compatible use of a potentially reserved identifier is a declaration of an external
     name where the name is provided by the implementation as an external name and where the
     declaration declares an object or function with a type that is compatible with the type of the object
     or function provided by the implementation under that name.

     Implementation limits
13   As discussed in 5.2.5.2, an implementation may limit the number of significant initial characters
     in an identifier; the limit for an external name (an identifier that has external linkage) may be more
     restrictive than that for an internal name (a macro name or an identifier that does not have external
     linkage). The number of significant characters in an identifier is implementation-defined.
14   Any identifiers that differ in a significant character are different identifiers. If two identifiers differ
     only in nonsignificant characters, the behavior is undefined.
     Forward references: universal character names (6.4.3), macro replacement (6.10.5), reserved library
     identifiers (7.1.3), use of library functions (7.1.4), attributes (6.7.13.2).

     6.4.2.2 Predefined identifiers
     Semantics
1    The identifier __func__ shall be implicitly declared by the translator as if, immediately following
     the opening brace of each function definition, the declaration
      65) This allows a reserved identifier that matches the spelling of a keyword to be used as a macro name by the program.

     § 6.4.2.2                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 55

              static const char __func__[] = "function-name";

    appeared, where function-name is the name of the lexically-enclosing function.66)
2   This name is encoded as if the implicit declaration had been written in the source character set and
    then translated into the execution character set as indicated in translation phase 5.
3   EXAMPLE The following code fragment can be used as an example:

              #include <stdio.h>
              void myfunc(void)
              {
                    printf("%s\n", __func__);
                    /* ... */
              }

    Each time the function is called, it will print to the standard output stream:

              myfunc

    Forward references: function definitions (6.9.2).

    6.4.3     Universal character names
    Syntax
1    universal-character-name:
                        \u hex-quad
                        \U hex-quad hex-quad

       hex-quad:
                            hexadecimal-digit hexadecimal-digit hexadecimal-digit hexadecimal-digit

    Constraints
2   A universal character name shall not designate a code point where the hexadecimal value is:

       — in the range D800 through DFFF inclusive; or

       — greater than 10FFFF.67)

    A universal character name outside the c-char sequence of a character constant, or the s-char
    sequence of a string literal shall not designate a control character or a character in the basic character
    set.

    Description
3   Universal character names may be used in identifiers, character constants, and string literals to
    designate characters that are not in the basic character set.

    Semantics
4   A universal character name designates the character in ISO/IEC 10646 whose code point is the
    hexadecimal value represented by the sequence of hexadecimal digits in the universal character
    name.
      66) Since the name __func__ is reserved for any use by the implementation (7.1.3), if any other identifier is explicitly declared

    using the name __func__, the behavior is undefined.
      67) The disallowed characters are the characters in the basic character set and the code positions reserved by ISO/IEC 10646

    for control characters, the character DELETE, the S-zone (reserved for use by UTF-16), and characters too large to be encoded
    by ISO/IEC 10646. Disallowed universal character escape sequences can still be specified with hexadecimal and octal escape
    sequences (6.4.4.5).

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                               § 6.4.3
                                                            Language — 56

    6.4.4       Constants
    6.4.4.1 General
    Syntax
1    constant:
                        integer-constant
                        floating-constant
                        enumeration-constant
                        character-constant
                        predefined-constant

    Constraints
2   Each constant shall have a type and the value of a constant shall be in the range of representable
    values for its type.

    Semantics
3   Each constant has a type, determined by its form and value, as detailed later.

    6.4.4.2 Integer constants
    Syntax
1    integer-constant:
                       decimal-constant integer-suffixopt
                       octal-constant integer-suffixopt
                       hexadecimal-constant integer-suffixopt
                       binary-constant integer-suffixopt

    decimal-constant:
                        nonzero-digit
                        decimal-constant ’opt digit

    octal-constant:
                        octal-constant ’opt octal-digit

    hexadecimal-constant:
                      hexadecimal-prefix hexadecimal-digit-sequence

    binary-constant:
                        binary-prefix binary-digit
                        binary-constant ’opt binary-digit

    hexadecimal-prefix: one of
                        0x 0X

    binary-prefix: one of
                        0b 0B

    § 6.4.4.2                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 57

    nonzero-digit: one of
                          1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

    octal-digit: one of
                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

    hexadecimal-digit-sequence:
                       hexadecimal-digit
                       hexadecimal-digit-sequence ’opt hexadecimal-digit

    hexadecimal-digit: one of
                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
                          a b c d e f
                          A B C D E F

    binary-digit: one of
                          0 1

    integer-suffix:
                          unsigned-suffix long-suffixopt
                          unsigned-suffix long-long-suffix
                          unsigned-suffix bit-precise-int-suffix
                          long-suffix unsigned-suffixopt
                          long-long-suffix unsigned-suffixopt
                          bit-precise-int-suffix unsigned-suffixopt

    bit-precise-int-suffix: one of
                           wb WB

    unsigned-suffix: one of
                          u U

    long-suffix: one of
                          l L

    long-long-suffix: one of
                          ll LL

    Description
2   An integer constant begins with a digit, but has no period or exponent part. It may have a prefix that
    specifies its base and a suffix that specifies its type. An optional separating single quote character

                                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                        § 6.4.4.2
                                                    Language — 58

    (’) in an integer or floating constant is called a digit separator. Digit separators are ignored when
    determining the value of the constant.
3   EXAMPLE 1 The following integer constants use digit separators; the comment associated with each constant
    shows the equivalent constant without digit separators.

                0b11’10’11’01 /* 0b11101101 */
                ’1’2 /* character constant ’1’ followed by integer constant 2,
                      not the integer constant 12 */
                11’22 /* 1122 */
                0x’FFFF’FFFF /* invalid hexadecimal constant (’ cannot appear after 0x) */
                0x1’2’3’4AB’C’D /* 0x1234ABCD */

4   A decimal constant begins with a nonzero digit and consists of a sequence of decimal digits. An
    octal constant consists of the prefix 0 optionally followed by a sequence of the digits 0 through 7
    only. A hexadecimal constant consists of the prefix 0x or 0X followed by a sequence of the decimal
    digits and the letters a (or A) through f (or F) with values 10 through 15 respectively. A binary
    constant consists of the prefix 0b or 0B followed by a sequence of the digits 0 or 1.

    Semantics
5   The value of a decimal constant is computed base 10; that of an octal constant, base 8; that of a
    hexadecimal constant, base 16; that of a binary constant, base 2. The lexically first digit is the most
    significant.
6   The type of an integer constant is the first of the corresponding list in which its value can be
    represented.
                                                                   Octal, Hexadecimal or Binary
          Suffix             Decimal Constant                      Constant
          none               int                                   int
                             long int                              unsigned int
                             long long int                         long int
                                                                   unsigned long int
                                                                   long long int
                                                                   unsigned long long int
           u or U            unsigned int                          unsigned int
                             unsigned long int                     unsigned long int
                             unsigned long long int                unsigned long long int
           l or L            long int                              long int
                             long long int                         unsigned long int
                                                                   long long int
                                                                   unsigned long long int
          Both u or U        unsigned long int                     unsigned long int
          and l or L         unsigned long long int                unsigned long long int
          ll or LL           long long int                         long long int
                                                                   unsigned long long int
          Both u or U        unsigned long long int                unsigned long long int
          and ll or LL
          wb or WB           _BitInt(N) where the width N          _BitInt(N) where the width N
                             is the smallest N greater than        is the smallest N greater than
                             1 which can accommodate               1 which can accommodate
                             the value and the sign bit.           the value and the sign bit.
          Both u or U        unsigned _BitInt(N) where the         unsigned _BitInt(N) where the
          and wb or WB       width N is the smallest N             width N is the smallest N
                             greater than 0 which can              greater than 0 which can
                             accommodate the value.                accommodate the value.
7   If an integer constant that does not have suffixes wb, WB, uwb, or UWB cannot be represented by
    any type in its list, it may have an extended integer type, if the extended integer type can represent

    § 6.4.4.2                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 59

    its value. If all the types in the list for the constant are signed, the extended integer type shall be
    signed. If all the types in the list for the constant are unsigned, the extended integer type shall be
    unsigned. If the list contains both signed and unsigned types, the extended integer type may be
    signed or unsigned. If an integer constant cannot be represented by any type in its list and has no
    extended integer type, then the integer constant has no type.
8   EXAMPLE 2 The wb suffix results in an _BitInt that includes space for the sign bit even if the value of the
    constant is positive or was specified in binary, octal, or hexadecimal notation.

     -3wb   /* Yields a _BitInt(3) that is then arithmetically negated;
                 two value bits, one sign bit */
     -0x3wb /* Yields a _BitInt(3) that is then arithmetically negated;
                 two value bits, one sign bit */
     3wb    /* Yields a _BitInt(3); two value bits, one sign bit */
     3uwb   /* Yields an unsigned _BitInt(2) */
     -3uwb /* Yields an unsigned _BitInt(2) that is then arithmetically
                  negated, resulting in wraparound */

    Forward references: preprocessing numbers (6.4.8), numeric conversion functions (7.24.1).

    6.4.4.3 Floating constants
    Syntax
1    floating-constant:
                        decimal-floating-constant
                        hexadecimal-floating-constant

    decimal-floating-constant:
                        fractional-constant exponent-partopt floating-suffixopt
                        digit-sequence exponent-part floating-suffixopt

    hexadecimal-floating-constant:
                       hexadecimal-prefix hexadecimal-fractional-constant
                                          binary-exponent-part floating-suffixopt
                       hexadecimal-prefix hexadecimal-digit-sequence
                                          binary-exponent-part floating-suffixopt

    fractional-constant:
                           digit-sequenceopt . digit-sequence
                           digit-sequence .

    exponent-part:
                           e signopt digit-sequence
                           E signopt digit-sequence

    sign: one of
                           + -

    digit-sequence:
                           digit

                                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                             § 6.4.4.3
                                                      Language — 60

                        digit-sequence ’opt digit

    hexadecimal-fractional-constant:
                       hexadecimal-digit-sequenceopt . hexadecimal-digit-sequence
                       hexadecimal-digit-sequence .

    binary-exponent-part:
                        p signopt digit-sequence
                        P signopt digit-sequence

    floating-suffix: one of
                        f l F L df dd dl DF DD DL

    Constraints
2   A floating suffix df, dd, dl, DF, DD, or DL shall not be used in a hexadecimal floating constant.

    Description
3   A floating constant has a significand part that may be followed by an exponent part and a suffix that
    specifies its type. The components of the significand part may include a digit sequence representing
    the whole-number part, followed by a period ( .), followed by a digit sequence representing the
    fraction part. Digit separators (6.4.4.2) are ignored when determining the value of the constant. The
    components of the exponent part are an e, E, p, or P followed by an exponent consisting of an
    optionally signed digit sequence. Either the whole-number part or the fraction part has to be present;
    for decimal floating constants, either the period or the exponent part has to be present.

    Semantics
4   The significand part is interpreted as a (decimal or hexadecimal) rational number; the digit sequence
    in the exponent part is interpreted as a decimal integer. For decimal floating constants, the exponent
    indicates the power of 10 by which the significand part is to be scaled. For hexadecimal floating
    constants, the exponent indicates the power of 2 by which the significand part is to be scaled. For
    decimal floating constants, and also for hexadecimal floating constants when FLT_RADIX is not a
    power of 2, the result is either the nearest representable value, or the larger or smaller representable
    value immediately adjacent to the nearest representable value, chosen in an implementation-defined
    manner. For hexadecimal floating constants when FLT_RADIX is a power of 2, the result is correctly
    rounded.
5   An unsuffixed floating constant has type double. If suffixed by a floating suffix it has a type
    according to Table 6.1.

                                   Table 6.1: Suffixes for floating constants

                                            Suffix    Type
                                            f, F      float
                                            l, L      long double
                                            df, DF    _Decimal32
                                            dd, DD    _Decimal64
                                            dl, DL    _Decimal128

6   The values of floating constants may be represented in greater range and precision than that required
    by the type (determined by the suffix); the types are not changed thereby. See 5.2.5.3.3 regarding

    § 6.4.4.3                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 61

    evaluation formats.68)
7   Floating constants of decimal floating type that have the same numerical value but different quantum
    exponents have distinguishable internal representations. The value shall be correctly rounded as
    specified in ISO/IEC 60559. The coefficient c and the quantum exponent q of a finite converted
    decimal floating-point number (see 5.2.5.3.4) are determined as follows:

      — q is set to the value of signopt digit-sequence in the exponent part, if any, or to 0, otherwise.
      — If there is a fractional constant, q is decreased by the number of digits to the right of the period
        and the period is removed to form a digit sequence.

      — c is set to the value of the digit sequence (after any period has been removed).
      — Rounding required because of insufficient precision or range in the type of the result will
        round c to the full precision available in the type, and will adjust q accordingly within the
        limits of the type, provided the rounding does not yield an infinity (in which case the result
        is an appropriately signed internal representation of infinity). If the full precision of the type
        would require q to be smaller than the minimum for the type, then q is pinned at the minimum
        and c is adjusted through the subnormal range accordingly, perhaps to zero.

8   Floating constants are converted to internal format as if at translation-time. The conversion of a
    floating constant shall not raise an exceptional condition or a floating-point exception at execution
    time. All floating constants of the same source form69) shall convert to the same internal format and,
    provided they are subject to the same translation-time rounding direction (either the default or a
    constant rounding mode set by an FENV_ROUND or FENV_DEC_ROUND pragma), to the same value.
9   EXAMPLE Following are floating constants of type _Decimal64 and their values as triples (s, c, q). Note
    that for _Decimal64, the precision (maximum coefficient length) is 16 and the quantum exponent range is
    −398 ≤ q ≤ 369.

     0.dd                               (+1, 0, 0)
     0.00dd                             (+1, 0, −2)
     123.dd                             (+1, 123, 0)
     1.23E3dd                           (+1, 123, 1)
     1.23E+3dd                          (+1, 123, 1)
     12.3E+7dd                          (+1, 123, 6)
     12.0dd                             (+1, 120, −1)
     12.3dd                             (+1, 123, −1)
     0.00123dd                          (+1, 123, −5)
     1.23E-12dd                         (+1, 123, −14)
     1234.5E-4dd                        (+1, 12345, −5)
     0E+7dd                             (+1, 0, 7)
     12345678901234567890.dd            (+1, 1234567890123457, 4)    assuming     default  rounding     and
                                        DEC_EVAL_METHOD is 0 or 170)
     1234E-400dd                        (+1, 12, −398) assuming default rounding and DEC_EVAL_METHOD is 0 or 1
     1234E-402dd                        (+1, 0, −398) assuming default rounding and DEC_EVAL_METHOD is 0 or 1
     1000.dd                            (+1, 1000, 0)
     .0001dd                            (+1, 1, −4)
     1000.e0dd                          (+1, 1000, 0)
     .0001e0dd                          (+1, 1, −4)
     1000.0dd                           (+1, 10000, −1)
     0.0001dd                           (+1, 1, −4)
     1000.00dd                          (+1, 100 000, −2)
     00.0001dd                          (+1, 1, −4)
     001000.dd                          (+1, 1000, 0)

      68) Hexadecimal floating constants can be used to obtain exact values in the semantic type that are independent of the

    evaluation format. Casts produce values in the semantic type, though depend on the rounding mode and may raise the
    inexact floating-point exception.
      69) 1.23, 1.230, 123e-2, 123e-02, and 1.23L are all different source forms and thus need not convert to the same internal

    format and value.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                        § 6.4.4.3
                                                        Language — 62

      001000.0dd                         (+1, 10000, −1)
      001000.00dd                        (+1, 100 000, −2)
      00.00dd                            (+1, 0, −2)
      00.dd                              (+1, 0, 0)
      .00dd                              (+1, 0, −2)
      00.00e-5dd                         (+1, 0, −7)
      00.e-5dd                           (+1, 0, −5)
      .00e-5dd                           (+1, 0, −7)

     Recommended practice
10   The implementation should produce a diagnostic message if a hexadecimal constant cannot be
     represented exactly in its evaluation format; the implementation should then proceed with the
     translation of the program.
11   The translation-time conversion of floating constants should match the execution-time conversion
     of character strings by library functions, such as strtod, given matching inputs suitable for both
     conversions, the same result format, and default execution-time rounding.71)
12   NOTE Floating constants do not include a sign and are arithmetically negated by the unary - operator (6.5.4.3)
     which arithmetically negates the rounded value of the constant. In contrast, the numeric conversion functions
     in the strto family (7.24.1.5, 7.24.1.6) can include the sign as part of the input value and convert and round the
     arithmetically negated input. Implementations conforming to Annex F have this behavior. Negating before
     rounding and negating after rounding may yield different results, depending on the rounding direction and
     whether the results are correctly rounded. For example, the results are the same when both are correctly
     rounded using rounding to nearest or rounding toward zero, but the results are different when they are inexact
     and correctly rounded using rounding toward positive infinity or rounding toward negative infinity.
     Conversions yielding exact results are not affected by the order of negating and rounding. For types with radix
     10, decimal floating constants expressed within the precision and range of the evaluation format convert exactly.
     For types whose radix is a power of 2, hexadecimal floating constants expressed within the precision and range
     of the evaluation format convert exactly.
     Forward references: preprocessing numbers (6.4.8), numeric conversion functions (7.24.1), the
     strto function family (7.24.1.5, 7.24.1.6).

     6.4.4.4 Enumeration constants
     Syntax
1     enumeration-constant:
                       identifier

     Semantics
2    An identifier declared as an enumeration constant for an enumeration without a fixed underlying
     type has either type int or the enumerated type, as defined in 6.7.3.3. An identifier declared
     as an enumeration constant for an enumeration with a fixed underlying type has the associated
     enumerated type.
3    An enumeration constant may be used in an expression (or constant expression) wherever a value
     of an integer type may be used.
     Forward references: enumeration specifiers (6.7.3.3).

     6.4.4.5 Character constants
     Syntax
1     character-constant:
                          encoding-prefixopt ’ c-char-sequence ’

      70) That is, assuming the default translation rounding-direction mode is not changed by an FENV_DEC_ROUND pragma (7.6.3).
       71) The specification for the library functions recommends more accurate conversion than required for floating constants

     (see 7.24.1.5).

     § 6.4.4.5                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 63

    encoding-prefix: one of
                       u8                     u                   U                 L

    c-char-sequence:
                        c-char
                        c-char-sequence c-char

    c-char:
                       any member of the source character set except
                                        the single-quote ’, backslash \, or new-line character
                        escape-sequence

    escape-sequence:
                        simple-escape-sequence
                        octal-escape-sequence
                        hexadecimal-escape-sequence
                        universal-character-name

    simple-escape-sequence: one of
                       \’ \" \? \\
                       \a \b \f \n \r \t \v

    octal-escape-sequence:
                       \ octal-digit
                       \ octal-digit octal-digit
                       \ octal-digit octal-digit octal-digit

    hexadecimal-escape-sequence:
                      \x hexadecimal-digit
                       hexadecimal-escape-sequence hexadecimal-digit

    Description
2   An integer character constant is a sequence of one or more multibyte characters enclosed in single-
    quotes, as in ’x’. A UTF-8 character constant is the same, except prefixed by u8. A wchar_t character
    constant is prefixed by the letter L. A UTF-16 character constant is prefixed by the letter u. A UTF-32
    character constant is prefixed by the letter U. Collectively, wchar_t, UTF-16, and UTF-32 character
    constants are called wide character constants. With a few exceptions detailed later, the elements of
    the sequence are any members of the source character set; they are mapped in an implementation-
    defined manner to members of the execution character set.
3   The single-quote ’, the double-quote ", the question-mark ?, the backslash \, and arbitrary integer
    values are representable according to the following table of escape sequences:

                                       © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                           § 6.4.4.5
                                                  Language — 64

            single quote ’                  \’
            double quote "                  \"
            question mark ?                 \?
            backslash \                     \\
            octal character                 \ octal digits
            hexadecimal character           \x hexadecimal digits
4    The double-quote " and question-mark ? are representable either by themselves or by the escape
     sequences \" and \?, respectively, but the single-quote ’ and the backslash \ shall be represented,
     respectively, by the escape sequences \’ and \\.
5    The octal digits that follow the backslash in an octal escape sequence are taken to be part of the
     construction of a single character for an integer character constant or of a single wide character for a
     wide character constant. The numerical value of the octal integer so formed specifies the value of
     the desired character or wide character.
6    The hexadecimal digits that follow the backslash and the letter x in a hexadecimal escape sequence
     are taken to be part of the construction of a single character for an integer character constant or of a
     single wide character for a wide character constant. The numerical value of the hexadecimal integer
     so formed specifies the value of the desired character or wide character.
7    Each octal or hexadecimal escape sequence is the longest sequence of characters that can constitute
     the escape sequence.
8    In addition, characters not in the basic character set are representable by universal character names
     and certain non-graphic characters are representable by escape sequences consisting of the back-
     slash \ followed by a lowercase letter: \a, \b, \f, \n, \r, \t, and \v.72)

     Constraints
9    The value of an octal or hexadecimal escape sequence shall be in the range of representable values
     for the corresponding type:
            Prefix     Corresponding Type
            none       unsigned char
            u8         char8_t
            L          the unsigned type corresponding to wchar_t
            u          char16_t
            U          char32_t

10   A UTF-8, UTF-16, or UTF-32 character constant shall not contain more than one character.73) The
     value shall be representable with a single UTF-8, UTF-16, or UTF-32 code unit, respectively.

     Semantics
11   An integer character constant has type int. The value of an integer character constant containing
     a single character that maps to a single value in the literal encoding (6.2.9) is the numerical value
     of the representation of the mapped character in the literal encoding interpreted as an integer.
     The value of an integer character constant containing more than one character (e.g. ’ab’), or
     containing a character or escape sequence that does not map to a single value in the literal encoding,
     is implementation-defined. If an integer character constant contains a single character or escape
     sequence, its value is the one that results when an object with type char whose value is that of the
     single character or escape sequence is converted to type int.
12   A UTF-8 character constant has type char8_t. If the UTF-8 character constant is not produced
     through a hexadecimal or octal escape sequence, the value of a UTF-8 character constant is equal to
     its ISO/IEC 10646 code point value, provided that the code point value can be encoded as a single
     UTF-8 code unit. Otherwise, the value of the UTF-8 character constant is the numeric value specified
     in the hexadecimal or octal escape sequence.
13   A UTF-16 character constant has type char16_t which is an unsigned integer type defined in the
      72) The semantics of these characters were discussed in 5.2.3. If any other character follows a backslash, the result is not a

     token and a diagnostic is required. See "future language directions" (6.11.4).
       73) For example u8’ab’ violates this constraint.

     § 6.4.4.5                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                          Language — 65

     <uchar.h> header. If the UTF-16 character constant is not produced through a hexadecimal or octal
     escape sequence, the value of a UTF-16 character constant is equal to its ISO/IEC 10646 code point
     value, provided that the code point value can be encoded as a single UTF-16 code unit. Otherwise,
     the value of the UTF-16 character constant is the numeric value specified in the hexadecimal or octal
     escape sequence.
14   A UTF-32 character constant has type char32_t which is an unsigned integer type defined in the
     <uchar.h> header. If the UTF-32 character constant is not produced through a hexadecimal or octal
     escape sequence, the value of a UTF-32 character constant is equal to its ISO/IEC 10646 code point
     value, provided that the code point value can be encoded as a single UTF-32 code unit. Otherwise,
     the value of the UTF-32 character constant is the numeric value specified in the hexadecimal or octal
     escape sequence.
15   A wchar_t character constant has type wchar_t, an integer type defined in the <stddef.h> header.
     The value of a wchar_t character constant containing a single multibyte character that maps to a
     single member of the extended execution character set is the wide character corresponding to that
     multibyte character in the implementation-defined wide literal encoding (6.2.9). The value of a
     wchar_t character constant containing more than one multibyte character or a single multibyte
     character that maps to multiple members of the extended execution character set, or containing a
     multibyte character or escape sequence not represented in the extended execution character set, is
     implementation-defined.
16   EXAMPLE 1 The construction ’\0’ is commonly used to represent the null character.
17   EXAMPLE 2 Implementations that use eight bits for objects that have type char can furnish certain values
     in an variety of ways. In an implementation in which type char has the same range of values as signed
     char, the integer character constant ’\xFF’ has the value −1; if type char has the same range of values as
     unsigned char, the character constant ’\xFF’ has the value +255.
18   EXAMPLE 3 Even if eight bits are used for objects that have type char, the construction ’\x123’ specifies an
     integer character constant containing only one character, since a hexadecimal escape sequence is terminated only
     by a non-hexadecimal character. To specify an integer character constant containing the two characters whose
     values are ’\x12’ and ’3’, the construction ’\0223’ can be used, since an octal escape sequence is terminated
     after three octal digits. (The value of this two-character integer character constant is implementation-defined.)
19   EXAMPLE 4 Even if 12 or more bits are used for objects that have type wchar_t, the construction L’\1234’
     specifies the implementation-defined value that results from the combination of the values 0123 and ’4’.
     Forward references: common definitions <stddef.h> (7.21), the mbtowc function (7.24.7.2), Uni-
     code utilities <uchar.h> (7.30).

     6.4.4.6 Predefined constants
     Syntax
1     predefined-constant:
                             false
                             true
                             nullptr

     Description
2    Some keywords represent constants of a specific value and type.
3    The keywords false and true are constants of type bool with a value of 0 for false and 1 for
     true.74)
4    The keyword nullptr represents a null pointer constant. Details of its type are described in 7.21.2.

       74) The constants false and true promote to type int, see 6.3.1.1. When used for arithmetic, in translation phase 4 (5.1.1.2),

     they are signed values and the result of such arithmetic is consistent with the results of later translation phases.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                           § 6.4.4.6
                                                           Language — 66

    6.4.5     String literals
    Syntax
1    string-literal:
                           encoding-prefixopt " s-char-sequenceopt "

    s-char-sequence:
                           s-char
                           s-char-sequence s-char

    s-char:
                          any member of the source character set except
                                           the double-quote ", backslash \, or new-line character
                           escape-sequence

    Constraints
2   If a sequence of adjacent string literal tokens includes prefixed string literal tokens, the prefixed
    tokens shall all have the same prefix.

    Description
3   A character string literal is a sequence of zero or more multibyte characters enclosed in double-quotes,
    as in "xyz". A UTF-8 string literal is the same, except prefixed by u8. A wchar_t string literal is the
    same, except prefixed by L. A UTF-16 string literal is the same, except prefixed by u. A UTF-32 string
    literal is the same, except prefixed by U. Collectively, wchar_t, UTF-16, and UTF-32 string literals are
    called wide string literals.
4   The same considerations apply to each element of the sequence in a string literal as if it were in an
    integer character constant (for a character or UTF-8 string literal) or a wide character constant (for a
    wide string literal), except that the single-quote ’ is representable either by itself or by the escape
    sequence \’, but the double-quote " shall be represented by the escape sequence \".

    Semantics
5   In translation phase 6 (5.1.1.2), the multibyte character sequences specified by any sequence of
    adjacent character and identically-prefixed string literal tokens are concatenated into a single
    multibyte character sequence. If any of the tokens has an encoding prefix, the resulting multibyte
    character sequence is treated as having the same prefix; otherwise, it is treated as a character string
    literal.
6   In translation phase 7 (5.1.1.2), a byte or code of value zero is appended to each multibyte character
    sequence that results from a string literal or literals.75) The multibyte character sequence is then used
    to initialize an array of static storage duration and length just sufficient to contain the sequence. For
    character string literals, the array elements have type char, and are initialized with the individual
    bytes of the multibyte character sequence corresponding to the literal encoding (6.2.9). For UTF-8
    string literals, the array elements have type char8_t, and are initialized with the characters of the
    multibyte character sequence, as encoded in UTF-8. For wide string literals prefixed by the letter
    L, the array elements have type wchar_t and are initialized with the sequence of wide characters
    corresponding to the wide literal encoding. For wide string literals prefixed by the letter u or U,
    the array elements have type char16_t or char32_t, respectively, and are initialized sequence of
    wide characters corresponding to UTF-16 and UTF-32 encoded text, respectively. The value of a
    string literal containing a multibyte character or escape sequence not represented in the execution
    character set is implementation-defined. Any hexadecimal escape sequence or octal escape sequence
    specified in a u8, u, or U string specifies a single char8_t, char16_t, or char32_t value and may
    result in the full character sequence not being valid UTF-8, UTF-16, or UTF-32.
     75) A string literal may not be a string (see 7.1.1), because a null character can be embedded in it by a \0 escape sequence.

    § 6.4.5                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 67

7   It is unspecified whether these arrays are distinct provided their elements have the appropriate
    values. If the program attempts to modify such an array, the behavior is undefined.
8   EXAMPLE 1 This pair of adjacent character string literals

              "\x12" "3"

    produces a single character string literal containing the two characters whose values are ’\x12’ and ’3’,
    because escape sequences are converted into single members of the execution character set just prior to adjacent
    string literal concatenation.
9   EXAMPLE 2 Each of the sequences of adjacent string literal tokens

              "a" "b" L"c"
              "a" L"b" "c"
              L"a" "b" L"c"
              L"a" L"b" L"c"

    is equivalent to the string literal

              L"abc"

    Likewise, each of the sequences

              "a" "b" u"c"
              "a" u"b" "c"
              u"a" "b" u"c"
              u"a" u"b" u"c"

    is equivalent to

              u"abc"

    Forward references: common definitions <stddef.h> (7.21), the mbstowcs function (7.24.8.1),
    Unicode utilities <uchar.h> (7.30).

    6.4.6    Punctuators
    Syntax
1    punctuator: one of
                         [ ] ( ) { } .   ->
                         ++ -- & * + - ~ !
                         / % << >> < > <= >=                     ==      !=    ^    |   &&   ||
                         ?  :   :: ; ...
                         = *= /= %= += -= <<=                    >>=      &=       ^=   |=
                         , # ##
                         <:  :> <% %> %:  %:%:

    Semantics
2   A punctuator is a symbol that has independent syntactic and semantic significance. Depending on
    context, it may specify an operation to be performed (which in turn may yield a value or a function
    designator, produce a side effect, or some combination thereof) in which case it is known as an
    operator (other forms of operator also exist in some contexts). An operand is an entity on which an
    operator acts.
3   In all aspects of the language, the six tokens76)
               <:      :>   <%    %>      %:      %:%:
     76) These tokens are sometimes called "digraphs".

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                             § 6.4.6
                                                         Language — 68

    behave, respectively, the same as the six tokens
               [     ]     {     }      #     ##
    except for their spelling.77)
    Forward references: expressions (6.5.1), declarations (6.7), preprocessing directives (6.10), state-
    ments (6.8).

    6.4.7     Header names
    Syntax
1    header-name:
                           < h-char-sequence >
                           " q-char-sequence "

    h-char-sequence:
                           h-char
                           h-char-sequence h-char

    h-char:
                          any member of the source character set except
                                          the new-line character and >

    q-char-sequence:
                           q-char
                           q-char-sequence q-char

    q-char:
                          any member of the source character set except
                                          the new-line character and "

    Semantics
2   The sequences in both forms of header names are mapped in an implementation-defined manner to
    headers or external source file names as specified in 6.10.3.
3   If the characters ’, \, ", //, or /* occur in the sequence between the < and > delimiters, the behavior
    is undefined. Similarly, if the characters ’, \, //, or /* occur in the sequence between the " delimiters,
    the behavior is undefined.78)
    Header name preprocessing tokens are recognized only within #include and #embed preprocessing
    directives, in __has_include and __has_embed expressions, as well as in implementation-defined
    locations within #pragma directives.79)
4   EXAMPLE The following sequence of characters:

              0x3<1/a.h>1e2
              #include <1/a.h>
              #define const.member@$

     77) Thus [ and <: behave differently when "stringized" (see 6.10.5.2), but can otherwise be freely interchanged.
     78) Thus, sequences of characters that resemble escape sequences cause undefined behavior.
     79) For an example of a header name preprocessing token used in a #pragma directive, see 6.10.11.

    § 6.4.7                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                       Language — 69

    forms the following sequence of preprocessing tokens (with each individual preprocessing token delimited by
    a { on the left and a } on the right).

              {0x3}{<}{1}{/}{a}{.}{h}{>}{1e2}
              {#}{include} {<1/a.h>}
              {#}{define} {const}{.}{member}{@}{$}

    Forward references: source file inclusion (6.10.3).

    6.4.8     Preprocessing numbers
    Syntax
1    pp-number:
                               digit
                               . digit
                               pp-number identifier-continue
                               pp-number ’ digit
                               pp-number ’ nondigit
                               pp-number e sign
                               pp-number E sign
                               pp-number p sign
                               pp-number P sign
                               pp-number .

    Description
2   A preprocessing number begins with a digit optionally preceded by a period (.) and may be followed
    by valid identifier characters and the character sequences e+, e-, E+, E-, p+, p-, P+, or P-.
3   Preprocessing number tokens lexically include all floating and integer constant tokens.

    Semantics
4   A preprocessing number does not have type or a value; it acquires both after a successful conversion
    (as part of translation phase 7 (5.1.1.2)) to a floating constant token or an integer constant token.

    6.4.9     Comments
1   Except within a character constant, a string literal, or a comment, the characters /* introduce a
    comment. The contents of such a comment are examined only to identify multibyte characters and
    to find the characters */ that terminate it.80)
2   Except within a character constant, a string literal, or a comment, the characters // introduce a
    comment that includes all multibyte characters up to, but not including, the next new-line character.
    The contents of such a comment are examined only to identify multibyte characters and to find the
    terminating new-line character.
3   EXAMPLE

              "a//b"                                  // four-character string literal
              #include "//e"                          // undefined behavior
              // */                                   // comment, not syntax error
              f = g/**//h;                            // equivalent to f = g / h;
              //\
              i();                                    // part of a two-line comment
              /\
              / j();                                  // part of a two-line comment
              #define glue(x,y) x##y
              glue(/,/) k();                          // syntax error, not comment
              /*//*/ l();                             // equivalent to l();

     80) Thus, /
                   * . . . */ comments do not nest.

                                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                      § 6.4.9
                                                           Language — 70

          m = n//**/o
            + p;                  // equivalent to m = n + p;

§ 6.4.9                       © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                       Language — 71

    6.5 Expressions
    6.5.1 General
1   An expression is a sequence of operators and operands that specifies computation of a value, or that
    designates an object or a function, or that generates side effects, or that performs a combination
    thereof. The value computations of the operands of an operator are sequenced before the value
    computation of the result of the operator.
2   If a side effect on a scalar object is unsequenced relative to either a different side effect on the
    same scalar object or a value computation using the value of the same scalar object, the behavior
    is undefined. If there are multiple allowable orderings of the subexpressions of an expression, the
    behavior is undefined if such an unsequenced side effect occurs in any of the orderings.81)
3   The grouping of operators and operands is indicated by the syntax.82) Except as specified later, side
    effects and value computations of subexpressions are unsequenced.83)
4   Some operators (the unary operator ~, and the binary operators <<, >>, &, ^, and |, collectively
    described as bitwise operators) are required to have operands that have integer type. These operators
    yield values that depend on the internal representations of integers, and have implementation-
    defined and undefined aspects for signed types.
5   If an exceptional condition occurs during the evaluation of an expression (that is, if the result is not
    mathematically defined or not in the range of representable values for its type), the behavior is
    undefined.
6   The effective type of an object for an access to its stored value is the declared type of the object, if
    any.84) If a value is stored into an object having no declared type through an lvalue having a type
    that is not a non-atomic character type, then the type of the lvalue becomes the effective type of the
    object for that access and for subsequent accesses that do not modify the stored value. If a value
    is copied into an object having no declared type using memcpy or memmove, or is copied as an array
    of character type, then the effective type of the modified object for that access and for subsequent
    accesses that do not modify the value is the effective type of the object from which the value is
    copied, if it has one. For all other accesses to an object having no declared type, the effective type of
    the object is simply the type of the lvalue used for the access.
7   An object shall have its stored value accessed only by an lvalue expression that has one of the
    following types:85)

       — a type compatible with the effective type of the object,

       — a qualified version of a type compatible with the effective type of the object,
     81) This paragraph renders undefined statement expressions such as

              i = ++i + 1;
              a[i++] = i;

    while allowing

              i = i + 1;
              a[i] = i;

      82) The syntax specifies the precedence of operators in the evaluation of an expression, which is the same as the order of the

    major subclauses of this subclause, highest precedence first. Thus, for example, the expressions allowed as the operands
    of the binary + operator (6.5.7) are those expressions defined in 6.5.2 through 6.5.7. The exceptions are cast expressions
    (6.5.5) as operands of unary operators (6.5.4), and an operand contained between any of the following pairs of operators:
    grouping parentheses () (6.5.2), generic selection parentheses () (6.5.2.1), subscripting brackets code[] (6.5.3.2), function-call
    parentheses () (6.5.3.3), and the conditional operator ?: (6.5.16).
       Within each major subclause, the operators have the same precedence. Left- or right-associativity is indicated in each
    subclause by the syntax for the expressions discussed therein.
      83) In an expression that is evaluated more than once during the execution of a program, unsequenced and indeterminately

    sequenced evaluations of its subexpressions can be performed inconsistently in different evaluations.
      84) Allocated objects have no declared type.
      85) The intent of this list is to specify those circumstances in which an object can or cannot be aliased.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                              § 6.5.1
                                                           Language — 72

      — the signed or unsigned type compatible with the underlying type of the effective type of the
        object,

      — the signed or unsigned type compatible with a qualified version of the underlying type of the
        effective type of the object,

      — an aggregate or union type that includes one of the aforementioned types among its members
        (including, recursively, a member of a subaggregate or contained union), or

      — a character type.

8   A floating expression may be contracted, that is, evaluated as though it were a single opera-
    tion, thereby omitting rounding errors implied by the source code and the expression evalua-
    tion method.86) The FP_CONTRACT pragma in <math.h> provides a way to disallow contracted
    expressions. Otherwise, whether and how expressions are contracted is implementation-defined.87)
9   Operators involving decimal floating types are evaluated according to the semantics of
    in ISO/IEC 60559.
    Forward references: the FP_CONTRACT pragma (7.12.2), copying functions (7.26.2).

    6.5.2     Primary expressions
    Syntax
1    primary-expression:
                       identifier
                       constant
                       string-literal
                       ( expression )
                       generic-selection

    Constraints
2   The identifier in an identifier primary expression shall have a visible declaration as an ordinary
    identifier that declares an object or a function.88)

    Semantics
3   An identifier primary expression designating an object is an lvalue. An identifier primary expression
    designating a function is a function designator.
4   A constant is a primary expression. Its type depends on its form and value, as detailed in 6.4.4.
5   A string literal is a primary expression. It is an lvalue with type as detailed in 6.4.5.
6   A parenthesized expression is a primary expression. Its type, value, and semantics are identical to
    those of the unparenthesized expression.
7   A generic selection is a primary expression. Its type, value, and semantics depend on the selected
    generic association, as detailed in the following subclause.
    Forward references: declarations (6.7).

      86) The intermediate operations in the contracted expression are evaluated as if to infinite range and precision, while the

    final operation is rounded to the format determined by the expression evaluation method. A contracted expression may also
    omit the raising of floating-point exceptions.
      87) This license is specifically intended to allow implementations to exploit fast machine instructions that combine multiple

    C operators. As contractions potentially undermine predictability, and can even decrease accuracy for containing expressions,
    their use needs to be well-defined and clearly documented.
      88) An identifier designating an enumeration constant is a primary expression through the constant production, not the

    identifier production.

    § 6.5.2                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 73

    6.5.2.1 Generic selection
    Syntax
1    generic-selection:
                            _Generic ( assignment-expression , generic-assoc-list )
      generic-assoc-list:
                        generic-association
                        generic-assoc-list , generic-association
      generic-association:
                        type-name : assignment-expression
                        default : assignment-expression

    Constraints
2   A generic selection shall have no more than one default generic association. The type name in a
    generic association shall specify a complete object type other than a variably modified type. No two
    generic associations in the same generic selection shall specify compatible types. The type of the
    controlling expression is the type of the expression as if it had undergone an lvalue conversion,89)
    array to pointer conversion, or function to pointer conversion. That type shall be compatible with at
    most one of the types named in the generic association list. If a generic selection has no default
    generic association, its controlling expression shall have type compatible with exactly one of the
    types named in its generic association list.

    Semantics
3   The controlling expression of a generic selection is not evaluated. If a generic selection has a generic
    association with a type name that is compatible with the type of the controlling expression, then the
    result expression of the generic selection is the expression in that generic association. Otherwise, the
    result expression of the generic selection is the expression in the default generic association. None
    of the expressions from any other generic association of the generic selection is evaluated.
4   The type and value of a generic selection are identical to those of its result expression. It is an
    lvalue, a function designator, or a void expression if its result expression is, respectively, an lvalue, a
    function designator, or a void expression.
5   EXAMPLE A cbrt type-generic macro could be implemented as follows:

             #define cbrt(X) _Generic((X),                               \
                                     long double: cbrtl,                 \
                                     default: cbrt,                      \
                                     float: cbrtf                        \
                                     )(X)

    7.27 shows how such a macro could be implemented with the required rounding properties.

    6.5.3    Postfix operators
    6.5.3.1 General
    Syntax
1    postfix-expression:
                            primary-expression
                            postfix-expression [ expression ]
                            postfix-expression ( argument-expression-listopt )
                            postfix-expression . identifier
                            postfix-expression -> identifier
                            postfix-expression ++
                            postfix-expression --
                            compound-literal

     89) An lvalue conversion drops type qualifiers.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                         § 6.5.3.1
                                                       Language — 74

      argument-expression-list:
                      assignment-expression
                      argument-expression-list , assignment-expression

    6.5.3.2 Array subscripting
    Constraints
1   One of the expressions shall have type "pointer to complete object type", the other expression shall
    have integer type, and the result has type "type".

    Semantics
2   A postfix expression followed by an expression in square brackets [] is a subscripted designation of
    an element of an array object. The definition of the subscript operator [] is that E1[E2] is identical
    to (*((E1)+(E2))). Because of the conversion rules that apply to the binary + operator, if E1 is an
    array object (equivalently, a pointer to the initial element of an array object) and E2 is an integer,
    E1[E2] designates the E2-th element of E1 (counting from zero).
3   Successive subscript operators designate an element of a multidimensional array object. If E is an
    n-dimensional array (n ≥ 2) with dimensions i × j × · · · × k, then E (used as other than an lvalue) is
    converted to a pointer to an (n − 1)-dimensional array with dimensions j × · · · × k. If the unary *
    operator is applied to this pointer explicitly, or implicitly as a result of subscripting, the result is the
    referenced (n − 1)-dimensional array, which itself is converted into a pointer if used as other than an
    lvalue. It follows from this that arrays are stored in row-major order (last subscript varies fastest).
4   EXAMPLE The following snippet has an array object defined by the declaration:

                int x[3][5];

    Here x is a 3 × 5 array of objects of type int; more precisely, x is an array of three element objects, each of which
    is an array of five objects of type int. In the expression x[i], which is equivalent to (*((x)+(i))), x is first
    converted to a pointer to the initial array of five objects of type int. Then i is adjusted according to the type of
    x, which conceptually entails multiplying i by the size of the object to which the pointer points, namely an
    array of five int objects. The results are added and indirection is applied to yield an array of five objects of
    type int. When used in the expression x[i][j], that array is in turn converted to a pointer to the first of the
    objects of type int, so x[i][j] yields an int.
    Forward references: additive operators (6.5.7), address and indirection operators (6.5.4.2), array
    declarators (6.7.7.3).

    6.5.3.3 Function calls
    Constraints
1   The expression that denotes the called function90) shall have type pointer to function returning void
    or returning a complete object type other than an array type.
2   The number of arguments shall agree with the number of parameters. Each argument shall have a
    type such that its value may be assigned to an object with the unqualified version of the type of its
    corresponding parameter

    Semantics
3   A postfix expression followed by parentheses () containing a possibly empty, comma-separated
    list of expressions is a function call. The postfix expression denotes the called function. The list of
    expressions specifies the arguments to the function.
4   An argument may be an expression of any complete object type. In preparing for the call to a
    function, the arguments are evaluated, and each parameter is assigned the value of the corresponding
    argument.91)
     90) Most often, this is the result of converting an identifier that is a function designator.
      91) A function can change the values of its parameters, but these changes cannot affect the values of the arguments. On the

    other hand, it is possible to pass a pointer to an object, and the function can then change the value of the object pointed to. A

    § 6.5.3.3                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                           Language — 75

5    If the expression that denotes the called function has type pointer to function returning an object
     type, the function call expression has the same type as that object type, and has the value determined
     as specified in 6.8.7.5. Otherwise, the function call has type void.
6    The arguments are implicitly converted, as if by assignment, to the types of the corresponding
     parameters, taking the type of each parameter to be the unqualified version of its declared type. The
     ellipsis notation in a function prototype declarator causes argument type conversion to stop after the
     last declared parameter, if present. The integer promotions are performed on each trailing argument,
     and trailing arguments that have type float are promoted to double. These are called the default
     argument promotions. No other conversions are performed implicitly.
7    If the function is defined with a type that is not compatible with the type (of the expression) pointed
     to by the expression that denotes the called function, the behavior is undefined.
8    There is a sequence point after the evaluations of the function designator and the actual arguments
     but before the actual call. Every evaluation in the calling function (including other function calls)
     that is not otherwise specifically sequenced before or after the execution of the body of the called
     function is indeterminately sequenced with respect to the execution of the called function.92)
9    Recursive function calls shall be permitted, both directly and indirectly through any chain of other
     functions.
10   EXAMPLE In the function call

               (*pf[f1()]) (f2(), f3() + f4())

     the functions f1, f2, f3, and f4 can be called in any order. All side effects are completed before the function
     pointed to by pf[f1()] is called.
     Forward references: function declarators (6.7.7.4), function definitions (6.9.2), the return statement
     (6.8.7.5), simple assignment (6.5.17.2).

     6.5.3.4 Structure and union members
     Constraints
1    The first operand of the . operator shall have an atomic, qualified, or unqualified structure or union
     type, and the second operand shall name a member of that type.
2    The first operand of the -> operator shall have type "pointer to atomic, qualified, or unqualified
     structure" or "pointer to atomic, qualified, or unqualified union", and the second operand shall
     name a member of the type pointed to.

     Semantics
3    A postfix expression followed by the . operator and an identifier designates a member of a structure
     or union object. The value is that of the named member,93) and is an lvalue if the first expression is
     an lvalue. If the first expression has qualified type, the result has the so-qualified version of the type
     of the designated member.
4    A postfix expression followed by the -> operator and an identifier designates a member of a structure
     or union object. The value is that of the named member of the object to which the first expression
     points, and is an lvalue.94) If the first expression is a pointer to a qualified type, the result has the
     so-qualified version of the type of the designated member.
5    Accessing a member of an atomic structure or union object results in undefined behavior.95)

     parameter declared to have array or function type is adjusted to have a pointer type as described in 6.7.7.4.
       92) In other words, function executions do not interleave with each other.
       93) If the member used to read the contents of a union object is not the same as the member last used to store a value in the

     object the appropriate part of the object representation of the value is reinterpreted as an object representation in the new
     type as described in 6.2.6 (a process sometimes called type punning). This may be a non-value representation.
       94) If &E is a valid pointer expression (where & is the address of operator, which generates a pointer to its operand), the

     expression (&E)->MOS is the same as E.MOS.
       95) For example, a data race would occur if access to the entire structure or union in one thread conflicts with access to a

     member from another thread, where at least one access is a modification. Members can be safely accessed using a non-atomic
     object which is assigned to or from the atomic object.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.5.3.4
                                                           Language — 76

6   One special guarantee is made to simplify the use of unions: if a union contains several structures
    that share a common initial sequence (see following sentence), and if the union object currently
    contains one of these structures, it is permitted to inspect the common initial part of any of them
    anywhere that a declaration of the completed type of the union is visible. Two structures share a
    common initial sequence if corresponding members have compatible types (and, for bit-fields, the
    same widths) for a sequence of one or more initial members.
7   EXAMPLE 1 If f is a function returning a structure or union, and x is a member of that structure or union,
    f().x is a valid postfix expression but is not an lvalue.
8   EXAMPLE 2 In:

                struct s { int i; const int ci; };
                struct s s;
                const struct s cs;
                volatile struct s vs;

    the various members have the types:
          s.i       int
          s.ci      const int
          cs.i      const int
          cs.ci     const int
          vs.i      volatile int
          vs.ci     volatile const int
9   EXAMPLE 3 The following is a valid fragment:

                union {
                      struct {
                            int    alltypes;
                      } n;
                      struct {
                            int    type;
                            int    intnode;
                      } ni;
                      struct {
                            int    type;
                            double doublenode;
                      } nf;
                } u;
                u.nf.type = 1;
                u.nf.doublenode = 3.14;
                /* ... */
                if (u.n.alltypes == 1)
                      if (sin(u.nf.doublenode) == 0.0)
                            /* ... */

    The following is not a valid fragment (because the union type is not visible within function f):

                struct t1 { int m; };
                struct t2 { int m; };
                int f(struct t1 *p1, struct t2 *p2)
                {
                      if (p1->m < 0)
                            p2->m = -p2->m;
                      return p1->m;
                }
                int g()
                {
                      union {
                            struct t1 s1;
                            struct t2 s2;

    § 6.5.3.4                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Language — 77

                        } u;
                        /* ... */
                        return f(&u.s1, &u.s2);
               }

    Forward references: address and indirection operators (6.5.4.2), structure and union specifiers
    (6.7.3.2).

    6.5.3.5 Postfix increment and decrement operators
    Constraints
1   The operand of the postfix increment or decrement operator shall have atomic, qualified, or unquali-
    fied real or pointer type, and shall be a modifiable lvalue.

    Semantics
2   The result of the postfix ++ operator is the value of the operand. As a side effect, the value of the
    operand object is incremented (that is, the value 1 of the appropriate type is added to it). See the
    discussions of additive operators and compound assignment for information on constraints, types,
    and conversions and the effects of operations on pointers. The value computation of the result is
    sequenced before the side effect of updating the stored value of the operand. With respect to an
    indeterminately sequenced function call, the operation of postfix ++ is a single evaluation. Postfix
    ++ on an object with atomic type is a read-modify-write operation with memory_order_seq_cst
    memory order semantics.96)
3   The postfix -- operator is analogous to the postfix ++ operator, except that the value of the operand
    is decremented (that is, the value 1 of the appropriate type is subtracted from it).
    Forward references: additive operators (6.5.7), compound assignment (6.5.17.3).

    6.5.3.6 Compound literals
    Syntax
1            compound-literal:
                    ( storage-class-specifiersopt type-name ) braced-initializer

                   storage-class-specifiers:
                             storage-class-specifier
                             storage-class-specifiers storage-class-specifier

    Constraints
2   The type name shall specify a complete object type or an array of unknown size, but not a variable
    length array type.
3   All the constraints for initializer lists in 6.7.11 also apply to compound literals.
4   If the compound literal is associated with file scope or block scope (see 6.2.1) the storage-class
    specifiers SC (possibly empty),97) type name T, and initializer list, if any, shall be such that they are
      96) Where a pointer to an atomic object can be formed and E has integer type, E++ is equivalent to the following code

    sequence where T is the type of E:

               T *addr = &E;
               T old = *addr;
               T new;
               do {
                     new = old + 1;
               } while (!atomic_compare_exchange_strong(addr, &old, new));

    with old being the result of the operation.
      Special care is necessary if E has floating type; see 6.5.17.3.
     97) If the storage-class specifiers contain the same storage-class specifier more than once, the following constraint is violated.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                             § 6.5.3.6
                                                            Language — 78

     valid specifiers for an object definition in file scope or block scope, respectively, of the following
     form,

                 SC typeof(T) ID = { IL };

     where ID is an identifier that is unique for the whole program and where IL is a (possibly empty)
     initializer list with nested structure, designators, values and types as the initializer list of the
     compound literal. All the constraints for storage-class specifiers in 6.7.2 also apply correspondingly
     to compound literals. If the compound literal is associated with function prototype scope, constraints
     as if in block scope apply.

     Semantics
5    For a compound literal associated with function prototype scope:

       — the type is determined as if in block scope and no object is created;

       — if it is a compound literal constant it is evaluated at translation time;

       — if it is not a compound literal constant, neither the compound literal as a whole nor any of the
         initializers are evaluated.

     Otherwise, a compound literal provides access to an unnamed object whose value, type, storage
     duration, initializer, and other properties are as if given by the definition syntax in the constraints.
6    If the storage duration is automatic, the lifetime of the instance of the unnamed object is the current
     execution of the enclosing block.98)
7    If the storage-class specifiers are absent or contain constexpr, static, register, or thread_local
     the behavior is as if the object were declared and initialized in the corresponding scope with these
     storage-class specifiers; if another storage-class specifier is present, the behavior is undefined. If
     the storage-class specifier constexpr is present, the initializer is evaluated at translation time.
     Otherwise, if the storage duration is automatic, the initializer is evaluated at each evaluation of the
     compound literal; if the storage duration is static or thread the initializer is (as if) evaluated once
     prior to program startup.
8    The value of the compound literal is that of an lvalue corresponding to the unnamed object.
9    All the semantic rules for initializer lists in 6.7.11 also apply to compound literals.99)
10   String literals, and compound literals with const-qualified types, including those specified with
     constexpr, are not required to designate distinct objects.100)
11   EXAMPLE 1 The following 2 functions can be used as an example:

                 int f(int*);
                 int g(char * para[f((int[27]){ 0, })]) {
                       /* ... */
                       return 0;
                 }

     Here, each call to g creates an unnamed object of type int[27] to determine the variably-modified type of
     para for the duration of the call. During that determination, a pointer to the object is passed into a call to the
     function f. If a pointer to the object is kept by f, access to that object is possible during the whole execution of
     the call to g. The lifetime of the object ends with the end of the call to g; for any access after that, the behavior is
     undefined.
12   EXAMPLE 2 The file scope definition
       98) Note that this differs from a cast expression. For example, a cast specifies a conversion to scalar types or void only, and

     the result of a cast expression is not an lvalue.
       99) For example, subobjects without explicit initializers are initialized to zero.
      100) This allows implementations to share storage for string literals and constant compound literals with the same or

     overlapping representations.

     § 6.5.3.6                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                           Language — 79

              int *p = (int []){2, 4};

     initializes p to point to the first element of an array of two int s, the first having the value two and the second,
     four. The expressions in this compound literal are required to be constant. The unnamed object has static
     storage duration.
13   EXAMPLE 3 In contrast, in

              void f(void)
              {
                    int *p;
                    /*...*/
                    p = (int [2]){*p};
                    /*...*/
              }

     p is assigned the address of the first element of an array of two int s, the first having the value previously
     pointed to by p and the second, zero. The initializer expression in this compound literal is not required to be
     constant. The unnamed object has automatic storage duration.
14   EXAMPLE 4 Initializers with designations can be combined with compound literals. Structure objects created
     using compound literals can be passed to functions without depending on member order:

              drawline((struct point){.x=1, .y=1},
                    (struct point){.x=3, .y=4});

     Or, if drawline instead expected pointers to struct point:

              drawline(&(struct point){.x=1, .y=1},
                    &(struct point){.x=3, .y=4});

15   EXAMPLE 5 A read-only compound literal can be specified through constructions like:

              (const float []){1e0, 1e1, 1e2, 1e3, 1e4, 1e5, 1e6}

16   EXAMPLE 6 The following three expressions have different meanings:

              "/tmp/fileXXXXXX"
              (char []){"/tmp/fileXXXXXX"}
              (const char []){"/tmp/fileXXXXXX"}

     The first always has static storage duration and has type array of char, but could or could not be modifiable;
     the last two have automatic storage duration when they occur within the body of a function, and the first of
     these two is modifiable.
17   EXAMPLE 7 Like string literals, const-qualified compound literals can be placed into read-only memory and
     can even be shared. For example,

              (const char []){"abc"} == "abc"

     may yield 1 if the literals’ storage is shared.
18   EXAMPLE 8 Since compound literals are unnamed, a single compound literal cannot specify a circularly linked
     object. For example, there is no way to write a self-referential compound literal that could be used as the
     function argument in place of the named object endless_zeros in the following snippet:

                      struct int_list { int car; struct int_list *cdr; };
                      struct int_list endless_zeros = {0, &endless_zeros};
                      eval(endless_zeros);

19   EXAMPLE 9 Each compound literal creates only a single object in a given scope:

                                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                   § 6.5.3.6
                                                       Language — 80

                      struct s { int i; };

                      int f (void)
                      {
                            struct s *p = 0, *q;
                            int j = 0;

                      again:
                            q = p, p = &((struct s){ j++ });
                            if (j < 2) goto again;

                              return p == q && q->i == 1;
                      }

     The function f() always returns the value 1.
20   Note that if an iteration statement were used instead of an explicit goto and a label, the lifetime of the unnamed
     object would be the body of the loop only, and on entry next time around p would have indeterminate
     representation, which would result in undefined behavior.
     Forward references: type names (6.7.8), initialization (6.7.11).

     6.5.4       Unary operators
     Syntax
1     unary-expression:
                          postfix-expression
                          ++ unary-expression
                          -- unary-expression
                          unary-operator cast-expression
                          sizeof unary-expression
                          sizeof ( type-name )
                          alignof ( type-name )

       unary-operator: one of
                          &   *   +   -   ~   !

     6.5.4.1 Prefix increment and decrement operators
     Constraints
1    The operand of the prefix increment or decrement operator shall have atomic, qualified, or unquali-
     fied real or pointer type, and shall be a modifiable lvalue.

     Semantics
2    The value of the operand of the prefix ++ operator is incremented. The result is the new value of
     the operand after incrementation. The expression ++E is equivalent to (E+=1), where the value 1
     is of the appropriate type. See the discussions of additive operators and compound assignment
     for information on constraints, types, side effects, and conversions and the effects of operations on
     pointers.
3    The prefix -- operator is analogous to the prefix ++ operator, except that the value of the operand is
     decremented.
     Forward references: additive operators (6.5.7), compound assignment (6.5.17.3).

     6.5.4.2 Address and indirection operators
     Constraints
1    The operand of the unary & operator shall be either a function designator, the result of a [] or unary
     * operator, or an lvalue that designates an object that is not a bit-field and is not declared with the

     § 6.5.4.2                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                     Language — 81

    register storage-class specifier.
2   The operand of the unary * operator shall have pointer type.

    Semantics
3   The unary & operator yields the address of its operand. If the operand has type "type", the result has
    type "pointer to type". If the operand is the result of a unary * operator, neither that operator nor
    the & operator is evaluated and the result is as if both were omitted, except that the constraints on
    the operators still apply and the result is not an lvalue. Similarly, if the operand is the result of a []
    operator, neither the & operator nor the unary * that is implied by the [] is evaluated and the result
    is as if the & operator were removed and the [] operator were changed to a + operator. Otherwise,
    the result is a pointer to the object or function designated by its operand.
4   The unary * operator denotes indirection. If the operand points to a function, the result is a function
    designator; if it points to an object, the result is an lvalue designating the object. If the operand has
    type "pointer to type", the result has type "type". If an invalid value has been assigned to the pointer,
    the behavior of the unary * operator is undefined.101)
    Forward references: storage-class specifiers (6.7.2), structure and union specifiers (6.7.3.2).

    6.5.4.3 Unary arithmetic operators
    Constraints
1   The operand of the unary + or - operator shall have arithmetic type; of the ~ operator, integer type;
    of the ! operator, scalar type.

    Semantics
2   The result of the unary + operator is the value of its (promoted) operand. The integer promotions
    are performed on the operand, and the result has the promoted type.
3   The result of the unary - operator is the negative of its (promoted) operand. The integer promotions
    are performed on the operand, and the result has the promoted type.
4   The result of the ~ operator is the bitwise complement of its (promoted) operand (that is, each bit in
    the result is set if and only if the corresponding bit in the converted operand is not set). The integer
    promotions are performed on the operand, and the result has the promoted type. If the promoted
    type is an unsigned type, the expression ~E is equivalent to the maximum value representable in
    that type minus E.
5   The result of the logical negation operator ! is 0 if the value of its operand compares unequal to
    0, 1 if the value of its operand compares equal to 0. The result has type int. The expression !E is
    equivalent to (0==E).

    6.5.4.4 The sizeof and alignof operators
    Constraints
1   The sizeof operator shall not be applied to an expression that has function type or an incomplete
    type, to the parenthesized name of such a type, or to an expression that designates a bit-field member.
    The alignof operator shall not be applied to a function type or an incomplete type.

    Semantics
2   The sizeof operator yields the size (in bytes) of its operand, which may be an expression or the
    parenthesized name of a type. The size is determined from the type of the operand. The result
    is an integer. If the type of the operand is a variable length array type, the operand is evaluated;
    otherwise, the operand is not evaluated and the result is an integer constant.
3   The alignof operator yields the alignment requirement of its operand type. The operand is not
    101) Thus, & E is equivalent to E (even if E is a null pointer), and &(E1[E2]) to ((E1)+(E2)). It is always true that if E is a
                *
    function designator or an lvalue that is a valid operand of the unary & operator, *&E is a function designator or an lvalue
    equal to E. If *P is an lvalue and T is the name of an object pointer type, *(T)P is an lvalue that has a type compatible with
    that to which T points.
       Among the invalid values for dereferencing a pointer by the unary * operator are a null pointer, an address inappropriately
    aligned for the type of object pointed to, and the address of an object after the end of its lifetime.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.5.4.4
                                                          Language — 82

    evaluated and the result is an integer constant expression. When applied to an array type, the result
    is the alignment requirement of the element type.
4   When sizeof is applied to an operand that has type char, unsigned char, or signed char, (or
    a qualified version thereof) the result is 1. When applied to an operand that has array type, the
    result is the total number of bytes in the array.102) When applied to an operand that has structure or
    union type, the result is the total number of bytes in such an object, including internal and trailing
    padding.
5   The value of the result of both operators is implementation-defined, and its type (an unsigned
    integer type) is size_t, defined in <stddef.h> (and other headers).
6   EXAMPLE 1 A principal use of the sizeof operator is in communication with routines such as storage
    allocators and I/O systems. A storage-allocation function can accept a size (in bytes) of an object to allocate and
    return a pointer to void. For example:

              extern void *alloc(size_t);
              double *dp = alloc(sizeof *dp);

    The implementation of the alloc function presumably ensures that its return value is aligned suitably for
    conversion to a pointer to double.
7   EXAMPLE 2 Another use of the sizeof operator is to compute the number of elements in an array:

              sizeof array / sizeof array[0]

8   EXAMPLE 3 In this example, the size of a variable length array is computed and returned from a function:

              #include <stddef.h>

              size_t fsize3(int n)
              {
                    char b[n+3];                 // variable length array
                    return sizeof b;             // execution time sizeof
              }

              int main(void)
              {
                    size_t size;
                    size = fsize3(10); // fsize3 returns 13
                    return 0;
              }

    Forward references: common definitions <stddef.h> (7.21), declarations (6.7), structure and union
    specifiers (6.7.3.2), type names (6.7.8), array declarators (6.7.7.3).

    6.5.5     Cast operators
    Syntax
1    cast-expression:
                           unary-expression
                           ( type-name ) cast-expression

    Constraints
2   Unless the type name specifies a void type, the type name shall specify atomic, qualified, or
    unqualified scalar type, and the operand shall have scalar type.
3   Conversions that involve pointers, other than where permitted by the constraints of 6.5.17.2, shall be
     102)When applied to a parameter declared to have array or function type, the sizeof operator yields the size of the adjusted

    (pointer) type (see 6.9.2).

    § 6.5.5                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 83

    specified by means of an explicit cast.
4   A pointer type shall not be converted to any floating type. A floating type shall not be converted to
    any pointer type. The type nullptr_t shall not be converted to any type other than void, bool or a
    pointer type. If the target type is nullptr_t, the cast expression shall be a null pointer constant or
    have type nullptr_t.

    Semantics
5   Size expressions and typeof operators contained in a type name used with a cast operator are
    evaluated whenever the cast expression is evaluated.
6   Preceding an expression by a parenthesized type name converts the value of the expression to the
    unqualified, non-atomic version of the named type. This construction is called a cast.103) A cast that
    specifies no conversion has no effect on the type or value of an expression.
7   If the value of the expression is represented with greater range or precision than required by the type
    named by the cast (6.3.1.8), then the cast specifies a conversion even if the type of the expression is
    the same as the named type and removes any extra range and precision.
    Forward references: equality operators (6.5.10), function declarators (6.7.7.4), simple assignment
    (6.5.17.2), type names (6.7.8).

    6.5.6     Multiplicative operators
    Syntax
1    multiplicative-expression:
                        cast-expression
                        multiplicative-expression * cast-expression
                        multiplicative-expression / cast-expression
                        multiplicative-expression % cast-expression

    Constraints
2   Each of the operands shall have arithmetic type. The operands of the % operator shall have integer
    type.
3   If either operand has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have standard floating type,
    complex type, or imaginary type.

    Semantics
4   The usual arithmetic conversions are performed on the operands.
5   The result of the binary * operator is the product of the operands.
6   The result of the / operator is the quotient from the division of the first operand by the second; the
    result of the % operator is the remainder. In both operations, if the value of the second operand is
    zero, the behavior is undefined.
7   When integers are divided, the result of the / operator is the algebraic quotient with any fractional
    part discarded.104) If the quotient a/b is representable, the expression (a/b)*b + a%b shall equal a;
    otherwise, the behavior of both a/b and a%b is undefined.

    6.5.7     Additive operators
    Syntax
1    additive-expression:
                        multiplicative-expression
                        additive-expression + multiplicative-expression
                        additive-expression - multiplicative-expression
    103) A cast does not yield an lvalue.
    104) This is often called "truncation toward zero".

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                      § 6.5.7
                                                          Language — 84

     Constraints
2    For addition, either both operands shall have arithmetic type, or one operand shall be a pointer to a
     complete object type and the other shall have integer type. (Incrementing is equivalent to adding 1.)
3    For subtraction, one of the following shall hold:

       — both operands have arithmetic type;
       — both operands are pointers to qualified or unqualified versions of compatible complete object
         types; or
       — the left operand is a pointer to a complete object type and the right operand has integer type.

     (Decrementing is equivalent to subtracting 1.)
4    If either operand has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have standard floating type,
     complex type, or imaginary type.

     Semantics
5    If both operands have arithmetic type, the usual arithmetic conversions are performed on them.
6    The result of the binary + operator is the sum of the operands.
7    The result of the binary - operator is the difference resulting from the subtraction of the second
     operand from the first.
8    For the purposes of these operators, a pointer to an object that is not an element of an array behaves
     the same as a pointer to the first element of an array of length one with the type of the object as its
     element type.
9    When an expression that has integer type is added to or subtracted from a pointer, the result has the
     type of the pointer operand. If the pointer operand points to an element of an array object, and the
     array is large enough, the result points to an element offset from the original element such that the
     difference of the subscripts of the resulting and original array elements equals the integer expression.
     In other words, if the expression P points to the i-th element of an array object, the expressions
     (P)+N (equivalently, N+(P)) and (P)-N (where N has the value n) point to, respectively, the i + n-th
     and i − n-th elements of the array object, provided they exist. Moreover, if the expression P points to
     the last element of an array object, the expression (P)+1 points one past the last element of the array
     object, and if the expression Q points one past the last element of an array object, the expression
     (Q)-1 points to the last element of the array object. If the pointer operand and the result do not point
     to elements of the same array object or one past the last element of the array object, the behavior is
     undefined. If the addition or subtraction produces an overflow, the behavior is undefined. If the
     result points one past the last element of the array object, it shall not be used as the operand of a
     unary * operator that is evaluated.
10   When two pointers are subtracted, both shall point to elements of the same array object, or one past
     the last element of the array object; the result is the difference of the subscripts of the two array
     elements. The size of the result is implementation-defined, and its type (a signed integer type) is
     ptrdiff_t defined in the <stddef.h> header. If the result is not representable in an object of that
     type, the behavior is undefined. In other words, if the expressions P and Q point to, respectively, the
     i-th and j-th elements of an array object, the expression (P)-(Q) has the value i − j provided the
     value fits in an object of type ptrdiff_t. Moreover, if the expression P points either to an element of
     an array object or one past the last element of an array object, and the expression Q points to the last
     element of the same array object, the expression ((Q)+1)-(P) has the same value as ((Q)-(P))+1
     and as -((P)-((Q)+1)), and has the value zero if the expression P points one past the last element
     of the array object, even though the expression (Q)+1 does not point to an element of the array
     object.105)
     105) Another way to approach pointer arithmetic is first to convert the pointer(s) to character pointer(s): In this scheme the

     § 6.5.7                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 85

11   EXAMPLE Pointer arithmetic is well defined with pointers to variable length array types.

               {
                        int n = 4, m = 3;
                        int a[n][m];
                        int (*p)[m] = a; // p == &a[0]
                        p += 1;           // p == &a[1]
                        (*p)[2] = 99;     // a[1][2] == 99
                        n = p - a;        // n == 1
               }

12   If array a in the preceding example were declared to be an array of known constant size, and pointer p were
     declared to be a pointer to an array of the same known constant size (pointing to a), the results would be the
     same.
     Forward references: array declarators (6.7.7.3), common definitions <stddef.h> (7.21).

     6.5.8     Bitwise shift operators
     Syntax
1     shift-expression:
                             additive-expression
                             shift-expression << additive-expression
                             shift-expression >> additive-expression

     Constraints
2    Each of the operands shall have integer type.

     Semantics
3    The integer promotions are performed on each of the operands. The type of the result is that of the
     promoted left operand. If the value of the right operand is negative or is greater than or equal to the
     width of the promoted left operand, the behavior is undefined.
4    The result of E1 << E2 is E1 left-shifted E2 bit positions; vacated bits are filled with zeros. If E1 has
     an unsigned type, the value of the result is E1 × 2E2 , wrapped around. If E1 has a signed type and
     nonnegative value, and E1 × 2E2 is representable in the result type, then that is the resulting value;
     otherwise, the behavior is undefined.
5    The result of E1 >> E2 is E1 right-shifted E2 bit positions. If E1 has an unsigned type or if E1 has a
     signed type and a nonnegative value, the value of the result is the integral part of the quotient of
     E1/2E2 . If E1 has a signed type and a negative value, the resulting value is implementation-defined.

     6.5.9     Relational operators
     Syntax
1     relational-expression:
                          shift-expression
                          relational-expression < shift-expression
                          relational-expression > shift-expression
                          relational-expression <= shift-expression
                          relational-expression >= shift-expression

     Constraints
2    One of the following shall hold:
     integer expression added to or subtracted from the converted pointer is first multiplied by the size of the object originally
     pointed to, and the resulting pointer is converted back to the original type. For pointer subtraction, the result of the difference
     between the character pointers is similarly divided by the size of the object originally pointed to.
       When viewed in this way, an implementation need only provide one extra byte (which can overlap another object in the
     program) just after the end of the object to satisfy the "one past the last element" requirements.

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                               § 6.5.9
                                                             Language — 86

      — both operands have real type; or

      — both operands are pointers to qualified or unqualified versions of compatible object types.

3   If either operand has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have standard floating type.

    Semantics
4   If both of the operands have arithmetic type, the usual arithmetic conversions are performed.
    Positive zeros compare equal to negative zeros.
5   For the purposes of these operators, a pointer to an object that is not an element of an array behaves
    the same as a pointer to the first element of an array of length one with the type of the object as its
    element type.
6   When two pointers are compared, the result depends on the relative locations in the address space
    of the objects pointed to. If two pointers to object types both point to the same object, or both point
    one past the last element of the same array object, they compare equal. If the objects pointed to
    are members of the same aggregate object, pointers to structure members declared later compare
    greater than pointers to members declared earlier in the structure, and pointers to array elements
    with larger subscript values compare greater than pointers to elements of the same array with lower
    subscript values. All pointers to members of the same union object compare equal. If the expression
    P points to an element of an array object and the expression Q points to the last element of the same
    array object, the pointer expression Q+1 compares greater than P. In all other cases, the behavior is
    undefined.
7   Each of the operators < (less than), > (greater than), <= (less than or equal to), and >= (greater than or
    equal to) shall yield 1 if the specified relation is true and 0 if it is false.106) The result has type int.

    6.5.10      Equality operators
    Syntax
1    equality-expression:
                        relational-expression
                        equality-expression == relational-expression
                        equality-expression != relational-expression

    Constraints
2   One of the following shall hold:

      — both operands have arithmetic type;

      — both operands are pointers to qualified or unqualified versions of compatible types;

      — one operand is a pointer to an object type and the other is a pointer to a qualified or unqualified
        version of void;

      — both operands have type nullptr_t;

      — one operand has type nullptr_t and the other is a null pointer constant; or,

      — one operand is a pointer and the other is a null pointer constant or has type nullptr_t.

3   If either operand has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have standard floating type,
    complex type, or imaginary type.
    106) The expression a<b<c is not interpreted as in ordinary mathematics. As the syntax indicates, it means (a<b)<c; in other

    words, "if a is less than b, compare 1 to c; otherwise, compare 0 to c".

    § 6.5.10                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 87

    Semantics
4   The == (equal to) and != (not equal to) operators are analogous to the relational operators except for
    their lower precedence.107) Each of the operators yields 1 if the specified relation is true and 0 if it is
    false. The result has type int. For any pair of operands, exactly one of the relations is true.
5   If both of the operands have arithmetic type, the usual arithmetic conversions are performed.
    Positive zeros compare equal to negative zeros. Values of complex types are equal if and only if both
    their real parts are equal and also their imaginary parts are equal. Any two values of arithmetic
    types from different type domains are equal if and only if the results of their conversions to the
    (complex) result type determined by the usual arithmetic conversions are equal. If both operands
    have type nullptr_t or one operand has type nullptr_t and the other is a null pointer constant,
    they compare equal.
6   Otherwise, at least one operand is a pointer. If one operand is a pointer and the other is a null
    pointer constant or has type nullptr_t, they compare equal if the former is a null pointer. If one
    operand is a pointer to an object type and the other is a pointer to a qualified or unqualified version
    of void, the former is converted to the type of the latter.
7   Two pointers compare equal if and only if both are null pointers, both are pointers to the same object
    (including a pointer to an object and a subobject at its beginning) or function, both are pointers to
    one past the last element of the same array object, or one is a pointer to one past the end of one array
    object and the other is a pointer to the start of a different array object that happens to immediately
    follow the first array object in the address space.108)
8   For the purposes of these operators, a pointer to an object that is not an element of an array behaves
    the same as a pointer to the first element of an array of length one with the type of the object as its
    element type.

    6.5.11     Bitwise AND operator
    Syntax
1    AND-expression:
                         equality-expression
                         AND-expression & equality-expression

    Constraints
2   Each of the operands shall have integer type.

    Semantics
3   The usual arithmetic conversions are performed on the operands.
4   The result of the binary & operator is the bitwise AND of the operands (that is, each bit in the result
    is set if and only if each of the corresponding bits in the converted operands is set).

    6.5.12     Bitwise exclusive OR operator
    Syntax
1    exclusive-OR-expression:
                      AND-expression
                      exclusive-OR-expression ^ AND-expression

    Constraints
2   Each of the operands shall have integer type.

    107) Because of the precedences, a<b == c<d is 1 whenever a<b and c<d have the same truth-value.
    108) Two objects can be adjacent in memory because they are adjacent elements of a larger array or adjacent members

    of a structure with no padding between them, or because the implementation chose to place them so, even though they
    are unrelated. If prior invalid pointer operations (such as accesses outside array bounds) produced undefined behavior,
    subsequent comparisons also produce undefined behavior.

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                      § 6.5.12
                                                       Language — 88

    Semantics
3   The usual arithmetic conversions are performed on the operands.
4   The result of the ^ operator is the bitwise exclusive OR of the operands (that is, each bit in the result
    is set if and only if exactly one of the corresponding bits in the converted operands is set).

    6.5.13     Bitwise inclusive OR operator
    Syntax
1    inclusive-OR-expression:
                       exclusive-OR-expression
                       inclusive-OR-expression | exclusive-OR-expression

    Constraints
2   Each of the operands shall have integer type.

    Semantics
3   The usual arithmetic conversions are performed on the operands.
4   The result of the | operator is the bitwise inclusive OR of the operands (that is, each bit in the result
    is set if and only if at least one of the corresponding bits in the converted operands is set).

    6.5.14     Logical AND operator
    Syntax
1    logical-AND-expression:
                      inclusive-OR-expression
                      logical-AND-expression && inclusive-OR-expression

    Constraints
2   Each of the operands shall have scalar type.

    Semantics
3   The && operator shall yield 1 if both of its operands compare unequal to 0; otherwise, it yields 0. The
    result has type int.
4   Unlike the bitwise binary & operator, the && operator guarantees left-to-right evaluation; if the
    second operand is evaluated, there is a sequence point between the evaluations of the first and
    second operands. If the first operand compares equal to 0, the second operand is not evaluated.

    6.5.15     Logical OR operator
    Syntax
1    logical-OR-expression:
                       logical-AND-expression
                       logical-OR-expression || logical-AND-expression

    Constraints
2   Each of the operands shall have scalar type.

    Semantics
3   The || operator shall yield 1 if either of its operands compare unequal to 0; otherwise, it yields 0.
    The result has type int.
4   Unlike the bitwise | operator, the || operator guarantees left-to-right evaluation; if the second
    operand is evaluated, there is a sequence point between the evaluations of the first and second
    operands. If the first operand compares unequal to 0, the second operand is not evaluated.

    § 6.5.15                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 89

     6.5.16      Conditional operator
     Syntax
1     conditional-expression:
                         logical-OR-expression
                         logical-OR-expression ? expression : conditional-expression

     Constraints
2    The first operand shall have scalar type.
3    One of the following shall hold for the second and third operands:109)

       — both operands have arithmetic type;
       — both operands have compatible structure or union type;
       — both operands have void type;
       — both operands are pointers to qualified or unqualified versions of compatible types;
       — both operands have nullptr_t type;
       — one operand is a pointer and the other is a null pointer constant or has type nullptr_t; or
       — one operand is a pointer to an object type and the other is a pointer to a qualified or unqualified
         version of void.

4    If either of the second or third operands has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have
     standard floating type, complex type, or imaginary type.

     Semantics
5    The first operand is evaluated; there is a sequence point between its evaluation and the evaluation
     of the second or third operand (whichever is evaluated). The second operand is evaluated only if
     the first compares unequal to 0; the third operand is evaluated only if the first compares equal to 0;
     the result is the value of the second or third operand (whichever is evaluated), converted to the type
     described subsequently in this subclause.110)
6    If the second and third operands have arithmetic type, the result type is the same as if the usual
     arithmetic conversions were applied to both operands. If both the operands have structure or union
     type, the result is the composite type. If both operands have void type, the result has void type.
7    If both the second and third operands are pointers, the result type is a pointer to a type qualified
     with all the type qualifiers of the types referenced by both operands; if one is a null pointer constant
     (other than a pointer) or has type nullptr_t and the other is a pointer, the result type is the pointer
     type; if both the second and third operands have nullptr_t type, the result also has that type.
     Furthermore, if both operands are pointers to compatible types or to differently qualified versions of
     compatible types, the result type is a pointer to an appropriately qualified version of the composite
     type; if one operand is a null pointer constant, the result has the type of the other operand; otherwise,
     one operand is a pointer to void or a qualified version of void, in which case the result type is a
     pointer to an appropriately qualified version of void.
8    If one operand is a pointer to a variably modified type and the other operand is a null pointer
     constant or has type nullptr_t, the behavior is undefined if the type depends on an array size
     expression that is not evaluated.
9    EXAMPLE The common type that results when the second and third operands are pointers is determined in
     two independent stages. The appropriate qualifiers, for example, do not depend on whether the two pointers
     have compatible types.
10   Given the declarations
     109) If a second or third operand of type nullptr_t is used and the other operand is not a pointer and does not have type

     nullptr_t itself, a constraint is violated even if that other operand is a null pointer constant such as 0.
     110) A conditional expression does not yield an lvalue.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                      § 6.5.16
                                                            Language — 90

              const void *c_vp;
              void *vp;
              const int *c_ip;
              volatile int *v_ip;
              int *ip;
              const char *c_cp;

    the third column in the following table is the common type that is the result of a conditional expression in
    which the first two columns are the second and third operands (in either order):
          c_vp     c_ip       const void *
          v_ip     0          volatile int *
          c_ip     v_ip       const volatile int *
          vp       c_cp       const void *
          ip       c_ip       const int *
          vp       ip         void *

    6.5.17       Assignment operators
    6.5.17.1 General
    Syntax
1    assignment-expression:
                       conditional-expression
                       unary-expression assignment-operator assignment-expression

      assignment-operator: one of
                          =    *=    /=    %=    +=    -=    <<=     >>=     &=    ^=    |=

    Constraints
2   An assignment operator shall have a modifiable lvalue as its left operand.

    Semantics
3   An assignment operator stores a value in the object designated by the left operand. An assignment
    expression has the value of the left operand after the assignment,111) but is not an lvalue. The type of
    an assignment expression is the type the left operand would have after lvalue conversion. The side
    effect of updating the stored value of the left operand is sequenced after the value computations of
    the left and right operands. The evaluations of the operands are unsequenced.

    6.5.17.2 Simple assignment
    Constraints
1   One of the following shall hold:112)

      — the left operand has atomic, qualified, or unqualified arithmetic type, and the right operand
        has arithmetic type;

      — the left operand has an atomic, qualified, or unqualified version of a structure or union type
        compatible with the type of the right operand;

      — the left operand has atomic, qualified, or unqualified pointer type, and (considering the type
        the left operand would have after lvalue conversion) both operands are pointers to qualified
        or unqualified versions of compatible types, and the type pointed to by the left operand has all
        the qualifiers of the type pointed to by the right operand;
     111) The implementation is permitted to read the object to determine the value but is not required to, even when the object

    has volatile-qualified type.
     112) The asymmetric appearance of these constraints with respect to type qualifiers is due to the conversion (specified in

    6.3.2.1) that changes lvalues to "the value of the expression" and thus removes any type qualifiers that were applied to the
    type category of the expression (for example, it removes const but not volatile from the type int volatile * const).

    § 6.5.17.2                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 91

      — the left operand has atomic, qualified, or unqualified pointer type, and (considering the type
        the left operand would have after lvalue conversion) one operand is a pointer to an object type,
        and the other is a pointer to a qualified or unqualified version of void, and the type pointed to
        by the left operand has all the qualifiers of the type pointed to by the right operand;

      — the left operand has an atomic, qualified, or unqualified version of the nullptr_t type and
        the right operand is a null pointer constant or its type is nullptr_t;

      — the left operand is an atomic, qualified, or unqualified pointer, and the right operand is a null
        pointer constant or its type is nullptr_t; or

      — the left operand has type atomic, qualified, or unqualified bool, and the right operand is a
        pointer or its type is nullptr_t.

    Semantics
2   In simple assignment (=), the value of the right operand is converted to the type of the assignment
    expression and replaces the value stored in the object designated by the left operand.113)
3   If the value being stored in an object is read from another object that overlaps in any way the storage
    of the first object, then the two objects shall occupy exactly the same storage and shall have qualified
    or unqualified versions of a compatible type; otherwise, the behavior is undefined.
4   EXAMPLE 1 In the program fragment

             int f(void);
             char c;
             /* ... */
             if ((c = f()) == -1)
                   /* ... */

    the int value returned by the function could be truncated when stored in the char, and then converted back to
    int width prior to the comparison. In an implementation in which "plain" char has the same range of values
    as unsigned char (and char is narrower than int), the result of the conversion cannot be negative, so the
    operands of the comparison can never compare equal. Therefore, for full portability, the variable c would be
    declared as int.
5   EXAMPLE 2 In the fragment:

             char c;
             int i;
             long l;

             l = (c = i);

    the value of i is converted to the type of the assignment expression c = i, that is, char type. The value of the
    expression enclosed in parentheses is then converted to the type of the outer assignment expression, that is,
    long int type.
6   EXAMPLE 3 The following fragment can be used as an example:

             const char **cpp;
             char *p;
             const char c = ’A’;

             cpp = &p;             // constraint violation
             *cpp = &c;            // valid
             *p = 0;               // valid

    The first assignment is unsafe because it would allow the following valid code to attempt to change the value
    of the const object c.
    113) As described in 6.2.6.1, a store to an object with atomic type is done with memory_order_seq_cst semantics.

                                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                      § 6.5.17.2
                                                        Language — 92

    6.5.17.3 Compound assignment
    Constraints
1   For the operators += and -= only, either the left operand shall be an atomic, qualified, or unqualified
    pointer to a complete object type, and the right shall have integer type; or the left operand shall have
    atomic, qualified, or unqualified arithmetic type, and the right shall have arithmetic type.
2   For the other operators, the left operand shall have atomic, qualified, or unqualified arithmetic type,
    and (considering the type the left operand would have after lvalue conversion) each operand shall
    have arithmetic type consistent with those allowed by the corresponding binary operator.
3   If either operand has decimal floating type, the other operand shall not have standard floating type,
    complex type, or imaginary type.

    Semantics
4   A compound assignment of the form E1 op= E2 is equivalent to the simple assignment expression E1 =
     E1 op (E2), except that the lvalue E1 is evaluated only once, and with respect to an indeterminately
    sequenced function call, the operation of a compound assignment is a single evaluation. If E1 has an
    atomic type, compound assignment is a read-modify-write operation with memory_order_seq_cst
    memory order semantics.
5   NOTE Where a pointer to an atomic object can be formed and E1 and E2 have integer type, this is equivalent
    to the following code sequence where T1 is the type of E1 and T2 is the type of E2:

             T1 *addr = &E1;
             T2 val = (E2);
             T1 old = *addr;
             T1 new;
             do {
                   new = old op val;
             } while (!atomic_compare_exchange_strong(addr, &old, new));

    with new being the result of the operation.
    If E1 or E2 has floating type, then exceptional conditions or floating-point exceptions encountered during
    discarded evaluations of new would also be discarded to satisfy the equivalence of E1 op= E2 and E1 = E1 op
    (E2). For example, if Annex F is in effect, the floating types involved have ISO/IEC 60559 binary formats, and
    FLT_EVAL_METHOD is 0, the equivalent code would be:

             #include <fenv.h>
             #pragma STDC FENV_ACCESS ON
             /* ... */
                   fenv_t fenv;
                   T1 *addr = &E1;
                   T2 val = E2;
                   T1 old = *addr;
                   T1 new;
                   feholdexcept(&fenv);
                   for (;;) {
                         new = old op val;
                         if (atomic_compare_exchange_strong(addr, &old, new))
                                     break;
                         feclearexcept(FE_ALL_EXCEPT);
                   }
                   feupdateenv(&fenv);

    If FLT_EVAL_METHOD is not 0, then T2 is expected to be a type with the range and precision to which E2 is
    evaluated to satisfy the equivalence.

    § 6.5.17.3                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                  Language — 93

    6.5.18     Comma operator
    Syntax
1    expression:
                          assignment-expression
                          expression , assignment-expression

    Semantics
2   The left operand of a comma operator is evaluated as a void expression; there is a sequence point
    between its evaluation and that of the right operand. Then the right operand is evaluated; the result
    has its type and value.114)
3   EXAMPLE As indicated by the syntax, the comma operator (as described in this subclause) cannot appear in
    contexts where a comma is used to separate items in a list (such as arguments to functions or lists of initializers).
    On the other hand, it can be used within a parenthesized expression or within the second expression of a
    conditional operator in such contexts. In the function call

             f(a, (t=3, t+2), c)

    the function has three arguments, the second of which has the value 5.
    Forward references: initialization (6.7.11).

    114) A comma operator does not yield an lvalue.

                                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                   § 6.5.18
                                                      Language — 94

    6.6     Constant expressions
    Syntax
1    constant-expression:
                        conditional-expression

    Description
2   A constant expression can be evaluated during translation rather than runtime, and accordingly
    may be used in any place that a constant may be.

    Constraints
3   Constant expressions shall not contain assignment, increment, decrement, function-call, or comma
    operators, except when they are contained within a subexpression that is not evaluated.115)
4   Each constant expression shall evaluate to a constant that is in the range of representable values for
    its type.

    Semantics
5   An expression that evaluates to a constant is required in several contexts. If a floating expression
    is evaluated in the translation environment, the arithmetic range and precision shall be at least as
    great as if the expression were being evaluated in the execution environment.116)
6   A compound literal with storage-class specifier constexpr is a compound literal constant, as is a
    postfix expression that applies the . member access operator to a compound literal constant of
    structure or union type, even recursively. A compound literal constant is a constant expression with
    the type and value of the unnamed object.
7   An identifier that is:

      — an enumeration constant,

      — a predefined constant, or

      — declared with storage-class specifier constexpr and has an object type,

    is a named constant, as is a postfix expression that applies the . member access operator to a named
    constant of structure or union type, even recursively. For enumeration and predefined constants,
    their value and type are defined in the respective clauses; for constexpr objects, such a named
    constant is a constant expression with the type and value of the declared object.
8   An integer constant expression117) shall have integer type and shall only have operands that are
    integer constants, named and compound literal constants of integer type, character constants,
    sizeof expressions whose results are integer constants, alignof expressions, and floating, named,
    or compound literal constants of arithmetic type that are the immediate operands of casts. Cast
    operators in an integer constant expression shall only convert arithmetic types to integer types,
    except as part of an operand to the typeof operators, sizeof operator, or alignof operator.
9   More latitude is permitted for constant expressions in initializers. Such a constant expression shall
    be, or evaluate to, one of the following:

      — a named constant,

      — a compound literal constant,
    115) The operand of a typeof (6.7.3.6), sizeof, or alignof operator is usually not evaluated (6.5.4.4).
     116) The use of evaluation formats as characterized by FLT_EVAL_METHOD and DEC_EVAL_METHOD also applies to evaluation in

    the translation environment.
     117) An integer constant expression is required in contexts such as the size of a bit-field member of a structure, the value of

    an enumeration constant, and the size of a non-variable length array. Further constraints that apply to the integer constant
    expressions used in conditional-inclusion preprocessing directives are discussed in 6.10.2.

    § 6.6                                    © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 95

        — an arithmetic constant expression,
        — a null pointer constant,
        — an address constant, or

        — an address constant for a complete object type plus or minus an integer constant expression.

10   An arithmetic constant expression shall have arithmetic type and shall only have operands that are
     integer constants, floating constants, named or compound literal constants of arithmetic type, char-
     acter constants, sizeof expressions whose results are integer constants, and alignof expressions.
     Cast operators in an arithmetic constant expression shall only convert arithmetic types to arithmetic
     types, except as part of an operand to the typeof operators, sizeof operator, or alignof operator.
11   An address constant is a null pointer,118) a pointer to an lvalue designating an object of static storage
     duration, or a pointer to a function designator; it shall be created explicitly using the unary &
     operator or an integer constant cast to pointer type, or implicitly using an expression of array or
     function type.
12   The array-subscript [] and member-access -> operator, the address & and indirection * unary
     operators, and pointer casts may be used in the creation of an address constant, but the value of an
     object shall not be accessed by use of these operators.119)
13   A structure or union constant is a named constant or compound literal constant with structure or
     union type, respectively.
14   An implementation may accept other forms of constant expressions; however, it is implementation-
     defined whether they are an integer constant expression.120)
15   Starting from a structure or union constant, the member-access . operator may be used to form a
     named constant or compound literal constant as described previously in this subclause.
16   If the member-access operator . accesses a member of a union constant, the accessed member shall
     be the same as the member that is initialized by the union constant’s initializer.
17   The semantic rules for the evaluation of a constant expression are the same as for nonconstant
     expressions.121)
     Forward references: array declarators (6.7.7.3), initialization (6.7.11).

      118) A named constant or compound literal constant of integer type and value zero is a null pointer constant. A named

     constant or compound literal constant with a pointer type and a value null is a null pointer but not a null pointer constant; it
     may only be used to initialize a pointer object if its type implicitly converts to the target type.
      119) Named constants or compound literal constants with arithmetic type, including names of constexpr objects, are valid in

     offset computations such as array subscripts or in pointer casts, as long as the expressions in which they occur form integer
     constant expressions. In contrast, names of other objects, even if const-qualified and with static storage duration, are not
     valid.
      120) For example, in the declaration int arr_or_vla[(int)+1.0];, while possible to be computed by some implementations

     as an array with a size of one, it is implementation-defined whether this results in a variable length array declaration or a
     declaration of an array of known constant size of automatic storage duration. The choice depends on whether (int)+1.0 is
     an extended integer constant expression.
      121) Thus, in the following initialization,

               static int i = 2 || 1 / 0;

     the expression is a valid integer constant expression with value one.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                                § 6.6
                                                            Language — 96

    6.7 Declarations
    6.7.1 General
    Syntax
1    declaration:
                          declaration-specifiers init-declarator-listopt ;
                          attribute-specifier-sequence declaration-specifiers init-declarator-list ;
                          static_assert-declaration
                          attribute-declaration
      declaration-specifiers:
                          declaration-specifier attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                          declaration-specifier declaration-specifiers
      declaration-specifier:
                          storage-class-specifier
                          type-specifier-qualifier
                          function-specifier
      init-declarator-list:
                          init-declarator
                          init-declarator-list , init-declarator
      init-declarator:
                          declarator
                          declarator = initializer
      attribute-declaration:
                          attribute-specifier-sequence ;

    Constraints
2   If a declaration other than a static_assert or attribute declaration does not include an init declarator
    list, its declaration specifiers shall include one of the following:

      — a struct or union specifier or enum specifier that includes a tag, with the declaration being of a
        form specified in 6.7.3.4 to declare that tag;

      — an enum specifier that includes an enumerator list.

3   EXAMPLE 1 The following are invalid, because the declared tag or enumeration constants are in a nested
    construct, rather than a declaration specifier of the declaration being of one of the given forms:

                    struct { struct s2 { int x2a; } x2b; };
                    typeof (struct s3 { int x3; });
                    alignas (struct s4 { int x4; }) int;
                    typeof (struct s5 *);
                    typeof (enum { E6 });
                    struct { void (*p)(struct s7 *); };

4   If an identifier has no linkage, there shall be no more than one declaration of the identifier (in a
    declarator or type specifier) with the same scope and in the same name space, except that:

      — a typedef name may be redefined to denote the same type as it currently does, provided that
        type is not a variably modified type;

      — enumeration constants and tags may be redeclared as specified in 6.7.3.3 and 6.7.3.4, respec-
        tively.

5   All declarations in the same scope that refer to the same object or function shall specify compatible
    types.

    § 6.7.1                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Language — 97

     Semantics
6    A declaration specifies the interpretation and properties of a set of identifiers. A definition of an
     identifier is a declaration for that identifier that for:

       — an object, causes storage to be reserved for that object,
       — a function, includes the function body,122)
       — an enumeration constant, is the first (or only) declaration of the identifier, or
       — a typedef name, is the first (or only) declaration of the identifier.

7    The declaration specifiers consist of a sequence of specifiers, followed by an optional attribute
     specifier sequence. The declaration specifiers indicate the linkage, storage duration, and part of
     the type of the entities that the declarators denote. The init declarator list is a comma-separated
     sequence of declarators, each of which may have additional type information, or an initializer, or
     both. The declarators contain the identifiers (if any) being declared. The optional attribute specifier
     sequence in a declaration appertains to each of the entities declared by the declarators of the init
     declarator list.
8    If an identifier for an object is declared with no linkage, the type for the object shall be complete
     by the end of its declarator, or by the end of its init-declarator if it has an initializer. In the case of
     function parameters, it is the adjusted type (see 6.7.7.4) that is required to be complete.
9    The optional attribute specifier sequence terminating a sequence of declaration specifiers appertains
     to the type determined by the preceding sequence of declaration specifiers. The attribute specifier
     sequence affects the type only for the declaration it appears in, not other declarations involving the
     same type.
10   Except where specified otherwise, the meaning of an attribute declaration is implementation-defined.
11   EXAMPLE 2 In the declaration for an entity, attributes appertaining to that entity may appear at the start of the
     declaration and after the identifier for that declaration.

               [[deprecated]] void f [[deprecated]] (void); // valid

12   A declaration such that the declaration specifiers contain no type specifier or that is declared with
     constexpr is said to be underspecified. If such a declaration is not a definition, if it declares no or more
     than one ordinary identifier, if the declared identifier already has a declaration in the same scope,
     if the declared entity is not an object, or if anywhere within the sequence of tokens making up the
     declaration identifiers that are not ordinary are declared, the behavior is implementation-defined.123)
13   EXAMPLE 3 As declarations using constexpr are underspecified, the following has implementation-defined
     behavior because tokens within the declaration declare s which is not an ordinary identifier:

               constexpr typeof(struct s *) x = 0;

     Forward references: declarators (6.7.7), enumeration specifiers (6.7.3.3), initialization (6.7.11),
     storage-class specifiers (6.7.2), type inference (6.7.10), type names (6.7.8), type qualifiers (6.7.4).

     6.7.2     Storage-class specifiers
     Syntax
1     storage-class-specifier:
                            auto
                            constexpr
                            extern
                            register
     122) Function definitions have a different syntax, described in 6.9.2.
      123) It is recommended that implementations that accept such declarations follow the semantics of the corresponding feature

     in ISO/IEC 14882.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.7.2
                                                            Language — 98

                            static
                            thread_local
                            typedef

    Constraints
2   At most, one storage-class specifier may be given in the declaration specifiers in a declaration, except
    that:

      — thread_local may appear with static or extern,

      — auto may appear with all the others except typedef,124) and

      — constexpr may appear with auto, register, or static.

3   In the declaration of an object with block scope, if the declaration specifiers include thread_local,
    they shall also include either static or extern. If thread_local appears in any declaration of an
    object, it shall be present in every declaration of that object.
4   thread_local shall not appear in the declaration specifiers of a function declaration. auto shall only
    appear in the declaration specifiers of an identifier with file scope or along with other storage-class
    specifiers if the type is to be inferred from an initializer.
5   An object declared with storage-class specifier constexpr or any of its members, even recursively,
    shall not have an atomic type, or a variably modified type, or a type that is volatile or restrict
    qualified. An initializer of floating type shall be evaluated with the translation-time floating-point
    environment. The declaration shall be a definition and shall have an initializer.125) The value of
    any constant expressions or of any character in a string literal of the initializer shall be exactly
    representable in the corresponding target type; no change of value shall be applied.126)
6   If an object or subobject declared with storage-class specifier constexpr has pointer, integer, or
    arithmetic type, any explicit initializer value for it shall be null,127) an integer constant expression,
    or an arithmetic constant expression, respectively. If the object declared has real floating type, the
    initializer shall have integer or real floating type. If the object declared has imaginary type, the
    initializer shall have imaginary type. If the initializer has decimal floating type, the object declared
    shall have decimal floating type and the conversion shall preserve the quantum of the initializer. If
    the initializer has real type and a signaling NaN value, the unqualified versions of the type of the
    initializer and the corresponding real type of the object declared shall be compatible.
7   EXAMPLE 1 Although in the following the expression A.p is not a null pointer constant, only a constant
    expression with pointer type and a null pointer value, the member-wise initialization of B with A is valid.

              struct s { void *p; };
              constexpr struct s A = { nullptr };
              constexpr struct s B = A;

8   EXAMPLE 2 Pointers may be initialized to eligible constant expressions, such as a null pointer constant:

              constexpr int *p = {}; // Default initialization with a null pointer

9   EXAMPLE 3
    124) See "future language directions" (6.11.5).
    125) All assignment expressions of such an initializer, if any, are constant expressions or string literals, see 6.7.11.
    126) In the context of arithmetic conversions, 6.3.1 describes the details of changes of value that occur if values of arithmetic

    expressions are stored in the objects that for example have a different signedness, excess precision or quantum exponent.
    Whenever such a change of value is necessary, the constraint is violated.
     127) The named constant or compound literal constant corresponding to an object declared with storage-class specifier

    constexpr and pointer type is a constant expression with a value null, and thus a null pointer and an address constant. Thus,
    such a named constant is a valid initializer for other constexpr declarations, provided the pointer types match accordingly.
    However, even if it has type void* it is not a null pointer constant.

    § 6.7.2                                   © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                           Language — 99

               void f (void) {
                     constexpr float f = 1.0f;
                     constexpr float g = 3.0f;
                     fesetround(FE_TOWARDSZERO); // does not affect
                                                 // the following initialization
                                                 // of "h"
                     constexpr float h = f / g;
                     // ...
               }

     Semantics
10   Storage-class specifiers specify various properties of identifiers and declared features:

       — storage duration (static in block scope, thread_local, auto, register),

       — linkage (extern, static and constexpr in file scope, typedef),

       — value (constexpr), and

       — type (typedef).

11   The meanings of the various linkages and storage durations were discussed in 6.2.2 and 6.2.4,
     typedef is discussed in 6.7.9, and type inference using auto is discussed in 6.7.10.
12   A declaration of an identifier for an object with storage-class specifier register suggests that
     access to the object be as fast as possible. The extent to which such suggestions are effective is
     implementation-defined.128)
13   The declaration of an identifier for a function that has block scope shall have no explicit storage-class
     specifier other than extern.
14   If an aggregate or union object is declared with a storage-class specifier other than typedef, the
     properties resulting from the storage-class specifier, except with respect to linkage, also apply to the
     members of the object, including recursively for any aggregate or union member objects.
15   If auto appears with another storage-class specifier, or if it appears in a declaration at file scope, it is
     ignored for the purposes of determining a storage duration or linkage. In this case, it indicates only
     that the declared type may be inferred.
16   An object declared with a storage-class specifier constexpr has its value permanently fixed at
     translation-time; if not yet present, a const-qualification is implicitly added to the object’s type. The
     declared identifier is considered a constant expression of the respective kind, see 6.6.
17   NOTE 1 An object declared in block scope with a storage-class specifier constexpr and without static has
     automatic storage duration, the identifier has no linkage, and each instance of the object has a unique address
     obtainable with & (if it is not declared with the register specifier), if any. Such an object in file scope has static
     storage duration, the corresponding identifier has internal linkage, and each translation unit that sees the same
     textual definition implements a separate object with a distinct address.
18   NOTE 2 The constraints for constexpr objects are intended to enforce checks for portability at translation
     time.

               constexpr unsigned int minusOne = -1;      // constraint violation
               constexpr unsigned int uint_max = -1U;     // ok
               constexpr double onethird       = 1.0/3.0; // possible constraint violation
               constexpr double onethirdtrunc = (double)(1.0/3.0); // ok
               constexpr _Decimal32 small      = DEC64_TRUE_MIN * 0; // constraint violation

      128) The implementation can treat any register declaration simply as an auto declaration. However, whether or not

     addressable storage is used, the address of any part of an object declared with storage-class specifier register cannot be
     computed, either explicitly (by use of the unary & operator as discussed in 6.5.4.2) or implicitly (by converting an array name
     to a pointer as discussed in 6.3.2.1). Thus, the only operator that can be applied to an array declared with storage-class
     specifier register is sizeof and the typeof operators.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                            § 6.7.2
                                                           Language — 100

     If a truncation of excess precision changes the value in the initializer of onethird, a constraint is violated and a
     diagnostic is required. In contrast to that, the explicit conversion in the initializer for onethirdtrunc ensures
     that the definition is valid. Similarly, the initializer of small has a quantum exponent that is larger than the
     largest possible quantum exponent for _Decimal32.
19   NOTE 3 Similarly, implementation-defined behavior related to the char type of the elements of the string
     literal "\xFF" may cause constraint violations at translation time:

               constexpr char string[]            = {   "\xFF", }; // ok
               constexpr char8_t u8string[]       = { u8"\xFF", }; // ok
               constexpr unsigned char ucstring[] = {   "\xFF", }; // possible constraint
                                                                             // violation

     In both the string and ucstring initializers, the initializer is a (brace-enclosed) string literal of type char. If the
     type char is capable of representing negative values and its width is 8, then the preceding code is equivalent to:

               constexpr char string[]            = { -1, 0, }; // ok
               constexpr char8_t u8string[]       = { 255, 0, }; // ok
               constexpr unsigned char ucstring[] = { -1, 0, }; // constraint violation

     The hexadecimal escape sequence results in a value of 255. For an initializer of type char, it is converted to
     a signed 8-bit integer, making a value of -1. A negative value does not fit within the range of values for
     unsigned char, and therefore the initialization of ucstring is a constraint violation under the previously
     stated implementation conditions. In the case where char is not capable of representing negative values, the
     original snippet is equivalent to the following and there is no constraint violation.

               constexpr char string[]            = { 255, 0, }; // ok
               constexpr char8_t u8string[]       = { 255, 0, }; // ok
               constexpr unsigned char ucstring[] = { 255, 0, }; // ok

20   EXAMPLE 4 An identifier declared with the constexpr specifier may have its value used in constant expres-
     sions:

               constexpr int K = 47;
               enum {
                     A = K,              // valid, constant initialization
               };
               constexpr int L = K;     // valid, constexpr initialization
               static int b    = K + 1; // valid, static initialization
               int array[K];            // not a VLA

21   EXAMPLE 5 This example illustrates constexpr initializations involving different type domains, decimal and
     non-decimal floating types, NaNs and infinities, and quanta in decimal floating types.

               #include <float.h>
               #include <complex.h>

               constexpr float _Complex fc1 = 1.0; // ok
               constexpr float _Complex fc2 = 0.1; // constraint violation, unless double
                                                   // has the same precision as float
                                                   // and is evaluated with the same
                                                   // precision
               constexpr float _Complex fc3 = 3*I; // ok

               constexpr double d1 = (double _Complex)1.0; // constraint violation
               constexpr float f1 = (long double)INFINITY; // ok
               constexpr float f2 = (long double)NAN;      // ok, quiet NaNs in real floating
                                                           // types are considered the same
                                                           // value, regardless of payloads
               constexpr double d2 = DBL_SNAN; // ok
               constexpr double d3 = FLT_SNAN; // constraint violation, even if float
                                               // and double have the same format

     § 6.7.2                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                      Language — 101

              constexpr double _Complex dc1 = DBL_SNAN;            // ok
              constexpr double _Complex dc2 = CMPLX(DBL_SNAN, 0.); // ok
              constexpr double _Complex dc3 = CMPLX(0., DBL_SNAN); // ok

              constexpr _Decimal32 d321 = 1.0;        // ok
              constexpr _Decimal32 d322 = 1;          // ok
              constexpr _Decimal32 d323 = INFINITY;   // ok
              constexpr _Decimal32 d324 = NAN;        // ok
              constexpr _Decimal64 d641 = DEC64_SNAN; // ok
              constexpr _Decimal64 d642 = DEC32_SNAN; // constraint violation
              constexpr float f3 = 1.DF;              // constraint violation
              constexpr float f4 = DEC_INFINITY;      // constraint violation
              constexpr double d4 = DEC_NAN;          // constraint violation
              constexpr _Decimal32 d325 = DEC64_TRUE_MIN * 0; // constraint violation,
                                                               // quantum not preserved
              #ifdef __STDC_IEC_60559_COMPLEX__
              constexpr double d5 = (double _Imaginary)0.0; // constraint violation
              constexpr double d6 = (double _Imaginary)0.0; // constraint violation
              constexpr double _Imaginary di1 = 0.0*I;      // ok
              constexpr double _Imaginary di2 = 0.0;        // constraint violation
              #endif

22   EXAMPLE 6 An object declared with the constexpr specifier stores the exact value of its initializer, no implicit
     value change is applied:

              #include <float.h>

              constexpr int A          = 42LL;                      // valid, 42 always fits in an int
              constexpr signed short B = ULLONG_MAX;                // constraint violation, value never
                                                                    // fits
              constexpr float C              = 47u;                 // valid, exactly representable
                                                                    // in float

              #if FLT_MANT_DIG > 24
              constexpr float D = 536900000;                        // constraint violation if float is
                                                                    // ISO/IEC 60559 binary32
              #endif

              #if (FLT_MANT_DIG == DBL_MANT_DIG) \
                    && (0 <= FLT_EVAL_METHOD) \
                    && (FLT_EVAL_METHOD <= 1)
              constexpr float E = 1.0 / 3.0;                        // only valid if double expressions
                                                                    // and float objects have the same
                                                                    // precision
              #endif

              #if FLT_EVAL_METHOD == 0
              constexpr float F = 1.0f / 3.0f;                      // valid, same type and precision
              #else
              constexpr float F = (float)(1.0f / 3.0f);             // needs cast to truncate the
                                                                    // excess precision
              #endif

23   EXAMPLE 7 This recursively applies to initializers for all elements of an aggregate object declared with the
     constexpr specifier:

              constexpr static unsigned short array[] = {
                    3000,    // valid, fits in unsigned short range
                    300000, // constraint violation if short is 16-bit
                    -1       // constraint violation, target type is unsigned

                                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                   § 6.7.2
                                                    Language — 102

                };

                struct S {
                      int x, y;
                };
                constexpr struct S s = {
                      .x = INT_MAX,            // valid
                      .y = UINT_MAX,           // constraint violation
                };

    Forward references: type definitions (6.7.9), type inference (6.7.10).

    6.7.3       Type specifiers
    6.7.3.1 General
    Syntax
1    type-specifier:
                         void
                         char
                         short
                         int
                         long
                         float
                         double
                         signed
                         unsigned
                         _BitInt ( constant-expression )
                         bool
                         _Complex
                         _Decimal32
                         _Decimal64
                         _Decimal128
                         atomic-type-specifier
                         struct-or-union-specifier
                         enum-specifier
                         typedef-name
                         typeof-specifier

    Constraints
2   Except where the type is inferred (6.7.10), at least one type specifier shall be given in the declaration
    specifiers in each declaration, and in the specifier-qualifier list in each member declaration and type
    name. Each list of type specifiers shall be one of the following multisets (delimited by commas,
    when there is more than one multiset per item); the type specifiers may occur in any order, possibly
    intermixed with the other declaration specifiers.

      — void
      — char
      — signed char
      — unsigned char
      — short, signed short, short int, or signed short int
      — unsigned short, or unsigned short int
      — int, signed, or signed int
      — unsigned, or unsigned int

    § 6.7.3.1                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                 Language — 103

      — long, signed long, long int, or signed long int
      — unsigned long, or unsigned long int
      — long long, signed long long, long long int, or signed long long int
      — unsigned long long, or unsigned long long int
      — _BitInt( constant-expression), or signed _BitInt( constant-expression)
      — unsigned _BitInt( constant-expression)
      — float
      — double
      — long double
      — _Decimal32
      — _Decimal64
      — _Decimal128
      — bool
      — float _Complex
      — double _Complex
      — long double _Complex
      — atomic type specifier
      — struct or union specifier
      — enum specifier
      — typedef name
      — typeof specifier

3   The type specifier _Complex shall not be used if the implementation does not support complex
    types, and the type specifiers _Decimal32, _Decimal64, and _Decimal128 shall not be used if the
    implementation does not support decimal floating types (see 6.10.10.4).
4   The parenthesized constant expression that follows the _BitInt keyword shall be an integer constant
    expression N that specifies the width (6.2.6.2) of the type. The value of N for unsigned _BitInt
    shall be greater than or equal to 1. The value of N for _BitInt shall be greater than or equal to 2.
    The value of N shall be less than or equal to the value of BITINT_MAXWIDTH (see 5.2.5.3.2).

    Semantics
5   Specifiers for structures, unions, enumerations, atomic types, and typeof specifiers are discussed in
    6.7.3.2 through 6.7.3.6. Declarations of typedef names are discussed in 6.7.9. The characteristics of
    the other types are discussed in 6.2.5.
6   For a declaration such that the declaration specifiers contain no type specifier a mechanism to infer
    the type from an initializer is discussed in 6.7.10. In such a declaration, optional elements, if any,
    of a sequence of declaration specifiers appertain to the inferred type (for qualifiers and attribute
    specifiers) or to the declared objects (for alignment specifiers).
7   Each of the comma-separated multisets designates the same type, except that for bit-fields, it is
    implementation-defined whether the specifier int designates the same type as signed int or the
    same type as unsigned int.
    Forward references: atomic type specifiers (6.7.3.5), enumeration specifiers (6.7.3.3), structure and
    union specifiers (6.7.3.2), tags (6.7.3.4), type definitions (6.7.9).

    6.7.3.2 Structure and union specifiers
    Syntax
1    struct-or-union-specifier:
                        struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifieropt { member-declaration-list }

                                       © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                              § 6.7.3.2
                                                 Language — 104

                           struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifier

    struct-or-union:
                           struct
                           union

    member-declaration-list:
                      member-declaration
                      member-declaration-list member-declaration

    member-declaration:
                      attribute-specifier-sequenceopt specifier-qualifier-list member-declarator-listopt ;
                      static_assert-declaration

    specifier-qualifier-list:
                          type-specifier-qualifier attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                          type-specifier-qualifier specifier-qualifier-list

    type-specifier-qualifier:
                         type-specifier
                         type-qualifier
                         alignment-specifier

    member-declarator-list:
                      member-declarator
                      member-declarator-list , member-declarator

    member-declarator:
                           declarator
                           declaratoropt : constant-expression

    Constraints
2   A member declaration that does not declare an anonymous structure or anonymous union shall
    contain a member declarator list.
3   A structure or union shall not contain a member with incomplete or function type (hence, a structure
    shall not contain an instance of itself, but may contain a pointer to an instance of itself), except that
    the last member of a structure with more than one named member may have incomplete array type;
    such a structure (and any union containing, possibly recursively, a member that is such a structure)
    shall not be a member of a structure or an element of an array.
4   The expression that specifies the width of a bit-field shall be an integer constant expression with a
    nonnegative value that does not exceed the width of an object of the type that would be specified
    were the colon and expression omitted.129) If the value is zero, the declaration shall have no
    declarator.
5   A bit-field shall have a type that is a qualified or unqualified bool, signed int, unsigned int, a
    bit-precise integer type, or other implementation-defined type. It is implementation-defined whether
    atomic types are permitted.
6   An attribute specifier sequence shall not appear in a struct-or-union specifier without a member

    129)While the number of bits in a bool object is at least CHAR_BIT, the width of a bool is just 1 bit.

    § 6.7.3.2                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 105

     declaration list, except in a declaration of the form:
                  struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequence identifier ;
     The attributes in the attribute specifier sequence, if any, are thereafter considered attributes of the
     struct or union whenever it is named.

     Semantics
7    As discussed in 6.2.5, a structure is a type consisting of a sequence of members, whose storage is
     allocated in an ordered sequence, and a union is a type consisting of a sequence of members whose
     storage overlap.
8    Structure and union specifiers have the same form. The keywords struct and union indicate that
     the type being specified is, respectively, a structure type or a union type.
9    The optional attribute specifier sequence in a struct-or-union specifier appertains to the structure
     or union type being declared. The optional attribute specifier sequence in a member declaration
     appertains to each of the members declared by the member declarator list; it shall not appear if the
     optional member declarator list is omitted. The optional attribute specifier sequence in a specifier
     qualifier list appertains to the type denoted by the preceding type specifier qualifiers. The attribute
     specifier sequence affects the type only for the member declaration or type name it appears in, not
     other types or declarations involving the same type.
10   The member declaration list is a sequence of declarations for the members of the structure or union.
     If the member declaration list does not contain any named members, either directly or via an
     anonymous structure or anonymous union, the behavior is undefined.130)
11   A member of a structure or union may have any complete object type other than a variably modified
     type.131) In addition, a member may be declared to consist of a specified number of bits (including a
     sign bit, if any). Such a member is called a bit-field;132) its width is preceded by a colon.
12   A bit-field is interpreted as having a signed or unsigned integer type consisting of the specified
     number of bits.133) If the value 0 or 1 is stored into a nonzero-width bit-field of type bool, the value
     of the bit-field shall compare equal to the value stored; a bool bit-field has the semantics of a bool.
13   An implementation may allocate any addressable storage unit large enough to hold a bit-field. If
     enough space remains, a bit-field that immediately follows another bit-field in a structure shall be
     packed into adjacent bits of the same unit. If insufficient space remains, whether a bit-field that
     does not fit is put into the next unit or overlaps adjacent units is implementation-defined. The
     order of allocation of bit-fields within a unit (high-order to low-order or low-order to high-order) is
     implementation-defined. The alignment of the addressable storage unit is unspecified.
14   A bit-field declaration with no declarator, but only a colon and a width, indicates an unnamed
     bit-field.134) As a special case, a bit-field structure member with a width of zero indicates that no
     further bit-field is to be packed into the unit in which the previous bit-field, if any, was placed.
15   An unnamed member whose type specifier is a structure specifier with no tag is called an anonymous
     structure; an unnamed member whose type specifier is a union specifier with no tag is called an
     anonymous union. The members of an anonymous structure or union are members of the containing
     structure or union, keeping their structure or union layout. This applies recursively if the containing
     structure or union is also anonymous.
16   Each non-bit-field member of a structure or union object is aligned in an implementation-defined
     manner appropriate to its type.

     130) For further rules affecting compatibility and completeness of structure or union types, see 6.2.7 and 6.7.3.4.
      131) A structure or union cannot contain a member with a variably modified type because member names are not ordinary

     identifiers as defined in 6.2.3.
      132) The unary & (address-of) operator cannot be applied to a bit-field object; thus, there are no pointers to or arrays of bit-field

     objects.
      133) As specified in 6.7.3, if the actual type specifier used is int or a typedef-name defined as int, then it is implementation-

     defined whether the bit-field is signed or unsigned. This includes an int type specifier produced using the typeof specifiers
     (6.7.3.6).
      134) An unnamed bit-field structure member is useful for padding to conform to externally imposed layouts.

                                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                              § 6.7.3.2
                                                             Language — 106

17   Within a structure object, the non-bit-field members and the units in which bit-fields reside have
     addresses that increase in the order in which they are declared. A pointer to a structure object,
     suitably converted, points to its initial member (or if that member is a bit-field, then to the unit in
     which it resides), and vice versa. There may be unnamed padding within a structure object, but not
     at its beginning.
18   The size of a union is sufficient to contain the largest of its members. The value of at most one of the
     members can be stored in a union object at any time. A pointer to a union object, suitably converted,
     points to each of its members (or if a member is a bit-field, then to the unit in which it resides),
     and vice versa. The members of a union object overlap in such a way that pointers to them when
     converted to pointers to character type point to the same byte. There may be unnamed padding at
     the end of a union object, but not at its beginning.
19   There may be unnamed padding at the end of a structure or union.
20   As a special case, the last member of a structure with more than one named member may have an
     incomplete array type; this is called a flexible array member. In most situations, the flexible array
     member is ignored. In particular, the size of the structure is as if the flexible array member were
     omitted except that it may have more trailing padding than the omission would imply. However,
     when a . (or ->) operator has a left operand that is (a pointer to) a structure with a flexible array
     member and the right operand names that member, it behaves as if that member were replaced with
     the longest array (with the same element type) that would not make the structure larger than the
     object being accessed; the offset of the array shall remain that of the flexible array member, even if
     this would differ from that of the replacement array. If this array would have no elements, it behaves
     as if it had one element but the behavior is undefined if any attempt is made to access that element
     or to generate a pointer one past it.
21   EXAMPLE 1 The following declarations illustrate the behavior when an attribute is written on a tag declaration:

                 struct [[deprecated]] S; // valid, [[deprecated]] appertains to struct S
                 void f(struct S *s);     // valid, the struct S type has the [[deprecated]]
                                          // attribute
                 struct S {               // valid, struct S inherits the [[deprecated]] attribute
                       int a;              // from the previous declaration
                 };
                 void g(struct [[deprecated]] S s); // invalid

22   EXAMPLE 2 The following illustrates anonymous structures and unions:

                 struct v {
                       union {     // anonymous union
                             struct { int i, j; };   // anonymous structure
                             struct { long k, l; } w;
                       };
                       int m;
                 } v1;

                 v1.i = 2;   // valid
                 v1.k = 3;   // invalid:     inner structure is not anonymous
                 v1.w.k = 5; // valid

23   EXAMPLE 3 After the declaration:

                 struct s { int n; double d[]; };

     the structure struct s has a flexible array member d. A typical way to use this is:

                 int m = /* some value */;
                 struct s *p = malloc(sizeof(struct s) + sizeof(double [m]));

     and assuming that the call to malloc succeeds, the object pointed to by p behaves, for most purposes, as if p
     had been declared as:

     § 6.7.3.2                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Language — 107

              struct { int n; double d[m]; } *p;

     (there are circumstances in which this equivalence is broken; in particular, the offsets of member d may not be
     the same).
24   Following the declaration of the previous example:

              struct s t1 = { 0 };                   // valid
              struct s t2 = { 1, { 4.2 }};           // invalid
              t1.n = 4;                              // valid
              t1.d[0] = 4.2;                         // may be undefined behavior

     The initialization of t2 is invalid (and violates a constraint) because struct s is treated as if it did not contain
     member d. The assignment to t1.d[0] is probably undefined behavior, but it is possible that

              sizeof(struct s) >= offsetof(struct s, d) + sizeof(double)

     in which case the assignment would be legitimate. Nevertheless, it cannot appear in strictly conforming code.
25   After the further declaration:

              struct ss { int n; };

     the expressions:

              sizeof(struct s) >= sizeof(struct ss)
              sizeof(struct s) >= offsetof(struct s, d)

     are always equal to 1.
26   If sizeof(double) is 8, then after the following code is executed:

              struct s *s1;
              struct s *s2;
              s1 = malloc(sizeof(struct s) + 64);
              s2 = malloc(sizeof(struct s) + 46);

     and assuming that the calls to malloc succeed, the objects pointed to by s1 and s2 behave, for most purposes,
     as if the identifiers had been declared as:

              struct { int n; double d[8]; } *s1;
              struct { int n; double d[5]; } *s2;

27   Following the further successful assignments:

              s1 = malloc(sizeof(struct s) + 10);
              s2 = malloc(sizeof(struct s) + 6);

     they then behave as if the declarations were:

              struct { int n; double d[1]; } *s1, *s2;

     and:

              double *dp;
              dp = &(s1->d[0]); // valid
              *dp = 42;         // valid
              dp = &(s2->d[0]); // valid
              *dp = 42;         // undefined behavior

28   The assignment:

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                    § 6.7.3.2
                                                      Language — 108

                 *s1 = *s2;

     only copies the member n; if any of the array elements are within the first sizeof(struct s) bytes of the
     structure, they are set to an indeterminate representation, that may or may not coincide with a copy of the
     representation of the elements of the source array.
29   EXAMPLE 4 Because members of anonymous structures and unions are considered to be members of the
     containing structure or union, struct s in the following example has more than one named member and thus
     the use of a flexible array member is valid:

                 struct s {
                       struct { int i; };
                       int a[];
                 };

     Forward references: declarators (6.7.7), tags (6.7.3.4).

     6.7.3.3 Enumeration specifiers
     Syntax
1      enum-specifier:
                         enum attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifieropt enum-type-specifieropt
                                              { enumerator-list }
                         enum attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifieropt enum-type-specifieropt
                                              { enumerator-list , }
                         enum identifier enum-type-specifieropt
        enumerator-list:
                         enumerator
                         enumerator-list , enumerator
        enumerator:
                         enumeration-constant attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                         enumeration-constant attribute-specifier-sequenceopt = constant-expression
      enum-type-specifier:
                         : specifier-qualifier-list

2    All enumerations have an underlying type. The underlying type can be explicitly specified using an
     enum type specifier and is its fixed underlying type. If it is not explicitly specified, the underlying
     type is the enumeration’s compatible type, which is either char or a standard or extended signed or
     unsigned integer type.

     Constraints
3    For an enumeration with a fixed underlying type, the integer constant expression defining the value
     of the enumeration constant shall be representable in that fixed underlying type. If the value of
     an enumeration constant without a defining constant expression for an enumeration with fixed
     underlying type is obtained by adding 1 to the previous enumeration constant, the value of that
     previous enumeration constant shall not be the maximum value of the underlying type.
4    For an enumeration without a fixed underlying type, the expression that defines the value of an
     enumeration constant shall be an integer constant expression. For all the integer constant expressions
     which make up the values of the enumeration constants, there shall be a type capable of representing
     all the values that is a standard or extended signed or unsigned integer type, or char.
5    If an enum type specifier is present, then the longest possible sequence of tokens that can be
     interpreted as a specifier qualifier list is interpreted as part of the enum type specifier. It shall name
     an integer type that is neither an enumeration nor a bit-precise integer type. The underlying type of
     the enumeration is the unqualified, non-atomic version of the type specified by the type specifiers in
     the specifier qualifier list.135)
      135) The specifier qualifier list is not a context listed in 6.7.6 as permitted for alignment specifiers, so the presence of an

     alignment specifier in the list violates a constraint.

     § 6.7.3.3                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                          Language — 109

6    An enum specifier of the form
                             enum identifier enum-type-specifier

     may not appear except in a declaration of the form
                             enum identifier enum-type-specifier ;

     unless it is immediately followed by an opening brace, an enumerator list (with an optional ending
     comma), and a closing brace.
7    If two enum specifiers that include an enum type specifier declare the same type, the underlying
     types shall be compatible.
8    An enumeration with a fixed underlying type shall be defined with an enum type specifier. No
     enum specifier for an enumeration without a fixed underlying type shall include an enum type
     specifier.

     Semantics
9    The optional attribute specifier sequence in the enum specifier appertains to the enumeration; the
     attributes in that attribute specifier sequence are thereafter considered attributes of the enumeration
     whenever it is named. The optional attribute specifier sequence in the enumerator appertains to that
     enumerator.
10   The identifiers in an enumerator list are declared as constants of the types specified later in this
     subclause and may appear wherever such are permitted.136) An enumerator with = defines its
     enumeration constant as the value of the constant expression. If the first enumerator has no =,
     the value of its enumeration constant is zero. Each subsequent enumerator with no = defines its
     enumeration constant as the value of the constant expression obtained by adding 1 to the value
     of the previous enumeration constant. (The use of enumerators with = may produce enumeration
     constants with values that duplicate other values in the same enumeration.) The enumerators of an
     enumeration are also known as its members.
11   The type for the members of an enumeration is called the enumeration member type.
12   During the processing of each enumeration constant in the enumerator list, the type of the enumera-
     tion constant shall be:

       — the previously declared type, if it is a redeclaration of the same enumeration constant; or,

       — the enumerated type, for an enumeration with fixed underlying type; or,

       — int, if there are no previous enumeration constants in the enumerator list and no explicit =
         with a defining integer constant expression; or,

       — int, if given explicitly with = and the value of the integer constant expression is representable
         by an int; or,

       — the type of the integer constant expression, if given explicitly with = and if the value of the
         integer constant expression is not representable by int; or,

       — the type of the value from the previous enumeration constant with one added to it. If such
         an integer constant expression would overflow or wraparound the value of the previous
         enumeration constant from the addition of one, the type takes on either:

              — a suitably sized signed integer type, excluding the bit-precise signed integer types, capable
                of representing the value of the previous enumeration constant plus one; or,
              — a suitably sized unsigned integer type, excluding the bit-precise unsigned integer types,
                capable of representing the value of the previous enumeration constant plus one.
      136) Thus, the identifiers of enumeration constants declared in the same scope are all required to be distinct from each other

     and from other identifiers declared in ordinary declarators.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.7.3.3
                                                          Language — 110

            A signed integer type is chosen if the previous enumeration constant being added is of signed
            integer type. An unsigned integer type is chosen if the previous enumeration constant is of
            unsigned integer type. If there is no suitably sized integer type described previously which
            can represent the new value, then the enumeration has no type which can represent all its
            values.137)

13   For all enumerations without a fixed underlying type, each enumerated type shall be compatible
     with char or a signed or an unsigned integer type that is not bool or a bit-precise integer type. The
     choice of type is implementation-defined,138) but shall be capable of representing the values of all
     the members of the enumeration.139)
14   Enumeration constants can be redefined in the same scope with the same value as part of a redecla-
     ration of the same enumerated type.
15   The enumeration member type for an enumerated type without fixed underlying type upon comple-
     tion is:

       — int if all the values of the enumeration are representable as an int; or,
       — the enumerated type.140)

16   The enumeration member type for an enumerated type with fixed underlying type is the enumerated
     type. The enumerated type is compatible with the underlying type of the enumeration. After possible
     lvalue conversion a value of the enumerated type behaves the same as the value with the underlying
     type, in particular with all aspects of promotion, conversion, and arithmetic. Conversion to the
     enumerated type has the same semantics as conversion to the underlying type.141)
17   EXAMPLE 1 The following fragment:

                 enum hue { chartreuse, burgundy, claret=20, winedark };
                 enum hue col, *cp;
                 col = claret;
                 cp = &col;
                 if (*cp != burgundy)
                       /* ... */

     makes hue the tag of an enumeration, and then declares col as an object that has that type and cp as a pointer
     to an object that has that type. The enumerated values are in the set {0, 1, 20, 21}.
18   EXAMPLE 2 Even if the value of an enumeration constant is generated by the implicit addition of one, an
     enumeration with a fixed underlying type does not exhibit typical overflow behavior:

                 #include <limits.h>

                 enum us : unsigned short {
                       us_max = USHRT_MAX,
                       us_violation, /* Constraint violation:
                                        USHRT_MAX + 1 would wraparound. */
                       us_violation_2 = us_max + 1, /* Maybe constraint violation:
                                                       USHRT_MAX + 1 may be promoted to "int", and
                                                       result is too wide for the
                                                       underlying type. */
                       us_wraparound_to_zero = (unsigned short)(USHRT_MAX + 1) /* Okay:

     137) Therefore, a constraint has been violated.
     138) An implementation can delay the choice of which integer type until all enumeration constants have been seen.
     139) For further rules affecting compatibility and completeness of enumerated types see 6.2.7 and 6.7.3.4.
      140) The integer type selected during processing of the enumerator list (before completion) of the enumeration may not be the

     same as the compatible implementation-defined integer type selected for the completed enumeration.
      141) This means in particular that if the compatible type is bool, values of the enumerated type behave in all aspects the same

     as bool, conversion to the enumerated type behaves the same as bool (6.3.1.2), and the members only have values false
     and true. If it is a signed integer type and the constant expression of an enumeration constant overflows, a constraint for
     constant expressions (6.6) is violated.

     § 6.7.3.3                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                          Language — 111

                                                  conversion done in constant expression
                                                  before conversion to underlying type:
                                                  unsigned semantics okay. */
             };

             enum ui : unsigned int {
                   ui_max = UINT_MAX,
                   ui_violation, /* Constraint violation:
                                    UINT_MAX + 1 would wraparound. */
                   ui_no_violation = ui_max + 1, /* Okay: Arithmetic performed as typical
                                                    unsigned integer arithmetic: conversion
                                                    from a value that is already 0 to 0. */
                   ui_wraparound_to_zero = (unsigned int)(UINT_MAX + 1) /* Okay: conversion
                                            done in constant expression before conversion to
                                            underlying type: unsigned semantics okay. */
             };

             int main () {
                   // Same as return 0;
                   return ui_wraparound_to_zero + us_wraparound_to_zero;
             }

19   EXAMPLE 3 The following fragment:

             #include <limits.h>

             enum E1: short;
             enum E2: short;
             enum E3; /* Constraint violation: E3 forward declaration. */
             enum E4 : unsigned long long;

             enum E1 : short { m11, m12 };
             enum E1 x = m11;

             enum E2 : long { m21, m22 }; /* Constraint violation: different underlying types
                 */

             enum E3 {
                   m31,
                   m32,
                   m33 = sizeof(enum E3) /* Constraint violation: E3 is not complete here. */
             };
             enum E3 : int; /* Constraint violation: E3 previously had no underlying type */

             enum E4 : unsigned long long {
                   m40 = sizeof(enum E4),
                   m41 = ULLONG_MAX,
                   m42 /* Constraint violation: unrepresentable value (wraparound) */
             };

             enum E5 y; /* Constraint violation: incomplete type */
             enum E6 : long int z; /* Constraint violation: enum-type-specifier
                                      with identifier in declarator */
             enum E7 : long int = 0; /* Syntax violation:
                                        enum-type-specifier with initializer */

     demonstrates many of the properties of multiple declarations of enumerations with underlying types. Par-
     ticularly, enum E3 is declared and defined without an underlying type first, therefore a redeclaration with
     an underlying type second is a violation. Because it not complete at that time within its enumerator list,
     sizeof(enum E3) is a constraint violation within the enum E3 definition. enum E4 is complete as it is being
     defined, therefore sizeof(enum E4) is not a constraint violation.

                                        © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                               § 6.7.3.3
                                                  Language — 112

20   EXAMPLE 4 The following fragment:

                 enum no_underlying {
                       a0
                 };

                 int main (void) {
                       int a = _Generic(a0,
                             int: 2,
                             unsigned char: 1,
                             default: 0
                       );
                       int b = _Generic((enum no_underlying)a0,
                             int: 2,
                             unsigned char: 1,
                             default: 0
                       );
                       return a + b;
                 }

     demonstrates the implementation-defined nature of the underlying type of enumerations using generic selection
     (6.5.2.1). The value of a after its initialization is 2. The value of b after its initialization is implementation-defined:
     the enumeration is compatible with a type large enough to fit the values of its enumeration constants due to the
     constraints. Because the only value is 0 for a0, b may hold any of 2, 1, or 0.
     Now, consider a similar fragment, but using a fixed underlying type:

                 enum underlying : unsigned char {
                       b0
                 };

                 int main (void) {
                       int a = _Generic(b0,
                             int: 2,
                             unsigned char: 1,
                             default: 0
                       );
                       int b = _Generic((enum underlying)b0,
                             int: 2,
                             unsigned char: 1,
                             default: 0
                       );
                       return 0;
                 }

     Here, we are guaranteed that a and b are both initialized to 1. This makes enumerations with a fixed underlying
     type more portable.
21   EXAMPLE 5 Enumerations with a fixed underlying type have braces and the enumerator list specified as part
     of their declaration if they are not a standalone declaration:

                 void f1 (enum a : long b); /* Constraint violation */
                 void f2 (enum c : long { x } d);
                 enum e : int f3(); /* Constraint violation */

                 typedef enum t u; /* Constraint violation: forward declaration of t. */
                 typedef enum v : short W; /* Constraint violation */
                 typedef enum q : short { s } R;

                 struct s1 {
                       int x;
                       enum e : int : 1; /* Constraint violation */
                       int y;

     § 6.7.3.3                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 113

              };

              enum forward; /* Constraint violation */
              extern enum forward fwd_val0; /* Constraint violation: incomplete type */
              extern enum forward* fwd_ptr0; /* Constraint violation: enums cannot be
                                                  used like other incomplete types */
              extern int* fwd_ptr0; /* Constraint violation: incompatible
                                       with incomplete type. */

              enum forward1 : int;
              extern enum forward1 fwd_val1;
              extern int fwd_val1;
              extern enum forward1* fwd_ptr1;
              extern int* fwd_ptr1;

              int main () {
                    enum e : short;
                    enum e : short f = 0; /* Constraint violation */
                    enum g : short { y } h = y;
                    return 0;
              }

22   EXAMPLE 6 Enumerations with a fixed underlying type are complete when the enum type specifier for that
     specific enumeration is complete. The enumeration e in this snippet:

              enum e : typeof ((enum e : short { A })0, (short)0);

     enum e is considered complete by the first opening brace within the typeof in this snippet.

     Forward references: generic selection (6.5.2.1), tags (6.7.3.4), declarations (6.7), declarators (6.7.7),
     function declarators (6.7.7.4), type names (6.7.8).

     6.7.3.4 Tags
     Constraints
1    Where two declarations that use the same tag declare the same type, they shall both use the same
     choice of struct, union, or enum. If two declarations of the same type have a member-declaration
     or enumerator-list, one shall not be nested within the other and both declarations shall fulfill
     all requirements of compatible types (6.2.7) with the additional requirement that corresponding
     members of structure or union types shall have the same (and not merely compatible) types.
2    A type specifier of the form
                enum identifier
     without an enumerator list shall only appear after the type it specifies is complete.
3    A type specifier of the form
                 struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifier
     shall not contain an attribute specifier sequence.142)

     Semantics
4    All declarations of structure, union, or enumerated types that have the same scope and use the same
     tag declare the same type.
5    Irrespective of whether there is a tag or what other declarations of the type are in the same trans-
     lation unit, the type (except enumerated types with a fixed underlying type) is incomplete until
     immediately after the closing brace of the list defining the content for the first time and complete
     thereafter.
6    Enumerated types with fixed underlying type (6.7.3.3) are complete immediately after their first
     142) As specified in 6.7.3.2, the type specifier may be followed by a ; or a member declaration list.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                              § 6.7.3.4
                                                           Language — 114

     associated enum type specifier ends.
7    EXAMPLE 1 The following example shows allowed redeclarations of the same structure, union, or enumerated
     type in the same scope:

                 struct foo { struct { int x; }; };
                 struct foo { struct { int x; }; };
                 union bar { int x; float y; };
                 union bar { int x; float y; };
                 typedef struct q { int x; } q_t;
                 typedef struct q { int x; } q_t;
                 void foo(void)
                 {
                       struct S { int x; };
                       struct T { struct S s; };
                       struct S { int x; };
                       struct T { struct S s; };
                 }
                 enum X { A = 1, B = 1 + 1 };
                 enum X { B = 2, A = 1 };

                 enum Q { C = 1 };
                 enum Q { C = C };                   // ok!

8    EXAMPLE 2 The following example shows invalid redeclarations of the same structure, union, or enumerated
     type in the same scope:

                 struct foo { int (*p)[3]; };
                 struct foo { int (*p)[]; };         // member has different type

                 union bar { int x; float y; };
                 union bar { int z; float y; }; // member has different name

                 union purr { int x; float y; };
                 union purr { float y; int x; }; // members have different order
                 // "purr" only valid if each union "purr" is in
                 // two different translation units

                 typedef struct { int x; } q_t;
                 typedef struct { int x; } q_t; // not the same type

                 struct S { int x; };

                 void foo(void)
                 {
                       struct T { struct S s; };
                       struct S { int x; };
                       struct T { struct S s; }; // struct S not the same type
                 }

                 enum X { A = 1, B = 2 };
                 enum X { A = 1, B = 3 };            // different enumeration constant

                 enum R { C = 1 };
                 enum Q { C = 1 };                   // conflicting enumeration constant

9    Two declarations of structure, union, or enumerated types which are in different scopes or use
     different tags declare distinct types. Each declaration of a structure, union, or enumerated type
     which does not include a tag declares a distinct type.
10   A type specifier of the form
                  struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifieropt { member-declaration-list }

     § 6.7.3.4                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 115

     or
                  enum attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifieropt enum-type-specifieropt { enumerator-list }
     or
                  enum attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifieropt enum-type-specifieropt { enumerator-list , }
     declares a structure, union, or enumerated type. The list defines the structure content, union content,
     or enumeration content. If an identifier is provided,143) the type specifier also declares the identifier to
     be the tag of that type. The optional attribute specifier sequence appertains to the structure, union,
     or enumerated type being declared; the attributes in that attribute specifier sequence are thereafter
     considered attributes of the structure, union, or enumerated type whenever it is named.
11   A declaration of the form
                  struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifier ;
     or
                  enum identifier enum-type-specifier ;
     specifies a structure, union, or enumerated type and declares the identifier as a tag of that type.144)
     The optional attribute specifier sequence appertains to the structure or union type being declared;
     the attributes in that attribute specifier sequence are thereafter considered attributes of the structure
     or union type whenever it is named.
12   If a type specifier of the form
                  struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifier
     occurs other than as part of one of the preceding forms, and no other declaration of the identifier as
     a tag is visible, then it declares an incomplete structure or union type, and declares the identifier as
     the tag of that type.144)
13   If a type specifier of the form
                  struct-or-union attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifier
     or
                  enum identifier
     occurs other than as part of one of the preceding forms, and a declaration of the identifier as a tag is
     visible, then it specifies the same type as that other declaration, and does not redeclare the tag.
14   EXAMPLE 3 This mechanism allows declaration of a self-referential structure.

                struct tnode {
                      int count;
                      struct tnode *left, *right;
                };

     specifies a structure that contains an integer and two pointers to objects of the same type. Once this declaration
     has been given, the declaration

                struct tnode s, *sp;

     declares s to be an object of the given type and sp to be a pointer to an object of the given type. With these
     declarations, the expression sp->left refers to the left struct tnode pointer of the object to which sp points;
     the expression s.right->count designates the count member of the right struct tnode pointed to from s.
15   The following alternative formulation uses the typedef mechanism:

      143) If there is no identifier, the type can, within the translation unit, only be referred to by the declaration of which it is a part.

     Of course, when the declaration is of a typedef name, subsequent declarations can make use of that typedef name to declare
     objects having the specified structure, union, or enumerated type.
      144) A similar construction for an enum that does not contain a fixed underlying type does not exist. Enumerations with a

     fixed underlying type are always complete after the enum type specifier.

                                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                                § 6.7.3.4
                                                               Language — 116

                 typedef struct tnode TNODE;
                 struct tnode {
                       int count;
                       TNODE *left, *right;
                 };
                 TNODE s, *sp;

16   EXAMPLE 4 To illustrate the use of prior declaration of a tag to specify a pair of mutually referential structures,
     the declarations

                 struct s1 { struct s2 *s2p; /* ... */ }; // D1
                 struct s2 { struct s1 *s1p; /* ... */ }; // D2

     specify a pair of structures that contain pointers to each other. Note, however, that if s2 were already declared
     as a tag in an enclosing scope, the declaration D1 would refer to it, not to the tag s2 declared in D2. To eliminate
     this context sensitivity, the declaration

                 struct s2;

     can be inserted ahead of D1. This declares a new tag s2 in the inner scope; the declaration D2 then completes
     the specification of the new type.
     Forward references: declarators (6.7.7), type definitions (6.7.9).

     6.7.3.5 Atomic type specifiers
     Syntax
1     atomic-type-specifier:
                         _Atomic ( type-name )

     Constraints
2    Atomic type specifiers shall not be used if the implementation does not support atomic types (see
     6.10.10.4).
3    The type name in an atomic type specifier shall not refer to an array type, a function type, an atomic
     type, or a qualified type.

     Semantics
4    The properties associated with atomic types are meaningful only for expressions that are lvalues.
     If the _Atomic keyword is immediately followed by a left parenthesis, it is interpreted as a type
     specifier (with a type name), not as a type qualifier.

     6.7.3.6 Typeof specifiers
     Syntax
1     typeof-specifier:
                           typeof ( typeof-specifier-argument )
                           typeof_unqual ( typeof-specifier-argument )
     typeof-specifier-argument:
                          expression
                          type-name

2    The typeof and typeof_unqual tokens are collectively called the typeof operators.

     Constraints
3    The typeof operators shall not be applied to an expression that designates a bit-field member.

     § 6.7.3.6                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                     Language — 117

    Semantics
4   The typeof specifier applies the typeof operators to an expression (6.5.1) or a type name. If the typeof
    operators are applied to an expression, they yield the type of their operand.145) Otherwise, they
    designate the same type as the type name with any nested typeof specifier evaluated.146) If the type
    of the operand is a variably modified type, the operand is evaluated; otherwise, the operand is not
    evaluated.
5   The result of the typeof_unqual operator is the non-atomic unqualified version of the type that
    would result from the typeof operator.147) The typeof operator preserves all qualifiers.
6   EXAMPLE 1 Type of an expression.

      typeof(1+1) main () {
            return 0;
      }

    is equivalent to this program:

      int main () {
            return 0;
      }

7   EXAMPLE 2 The following program:

      const _Atomic int purr = 0;
      const int meow = 1;
      const char* const animals[] = {
            "aardvark",
            "bluejay",
            "catte",
      };

      typeof_unqual(meow) main (int argc, char* argv[]) {
            typeof_unqual(purr)          plain_purr;
            typeof(_Atomic typeof(meow)) atomic_meow;
            typeof(animals)              animals_array;
            typeof_unqual(animals)       animals2_array;
            return 0;
      }

    is equivalent to this program:

      const _Atomic int purr = 0;
      const int meow = 1;
      const char* const animals[] = {
            "aardvark",
            "bluejay",
            "catte",
      };

      int main (int argc, char* argv[]) {
            int               plain_purr;
            const _Atomic int atomic_meow;
            const char* const animals_array[3];
            const char*       animals2_array[3];
            return 0;

     145)When applied to a parameter declared to have array or function type, the typeof operators yield the adjusted (pointer)

    type (see 6.9.2).
     146) If the typeof specifier argument is itself a typeof specifier, the operand will be evaluated before evaluating the current

    typeof operator. This happens recursively until a typeof specifier is no longer the operand.
     147) _Atomic ( type-name), with parentheses, is considered an _Atomic-qualified type.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                           § 6.7.3.6
                                                          Language — 118

      }

8    EXAMPLE 3 The equivalence between sizeof and typeof’s deduction of the type means this program has no
     constraint violations:

      int main (int argc, char* argv[]) {
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof(’p’)) == sizeof(int));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof(’p’)) == sizeof(’p’));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof((char)’p’)) == sizeof(char));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof((char)’p’)) == sizeof((char)’p’));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof("meow")) == sizeof(char[5]));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof("meow")) == sizeof("meow"));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof(argc)) == sizeof(int));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof(argc)) == sizeof(argc));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof(argv)) == sizeof(char**));
            static_assert(sizeof(typeof(argv)) == sizeof(argv));

                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual(’p’)) == sizeof(int));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual(’p’)) == sizeof(’p’));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual((char)’p’)) == sizeof(char));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual((char)’p’)) == sizeof((char)’p’));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual("meow")) == sizeof(char[5]));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual("meow")) == sizeof("meow"));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual(argc)) == sizeof(int));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual(argc)) == sizeof(argc));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual(argv)) == sizeof(char**));
                 static_assert(sizeof(typeof_unqual(argv)) == sizeof(argv));
                 return 0;
      }

9    EXAMPLE 4 The following program with nested typeof(...):

      int main (int argc, char*[]) {
            float val = 6.0f;
            return (typeof(typeof_unqual(typeof(argc))))val;
      }

     is equivalent to this program:

      int main (int argc, char*[]) {
            float val = 6.0f;
            return (int)val;
      }

10   EXAMPLE 5 Variable length arrays with typeof operators performs the operation at execution time rather than
     translation time.

      #include <stddef.h>

      size_t vla_size (int n) {
            typedef char vla_type[n + 3];
            vla_type b; // variable length array
            return sizeof(
                  typeof_unqual(b)
            ); // execution-time sizeof, translation-time typeof operation
      }

      int main () {
            return (int)vla_size(10); // vla_size returns 13
      }

     § 6.7.3.6                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                 Language — 119

11   EXAMPLE 6 Nested typeof operators, arrays, and pointers do not perform array to pointer decay.

      int main () {
            typeof(typeof(const char*)[4]) y = {
                  "a",
                  "b",
                  "c",
                  "d"
            }; // 4-element array of "pointer to const char"
            return 0;
      }

12   EXAMPLE 7 Function, pointer, and array types may be substituted with typeof operations.

      void f(int);

      typeof(f(5)) g(double x) {                     // g has type "void(double)"
            printf("value %g\n", x);
      }

      typeof(g)* h;                                  // h has type "void(*)(double)"
      typeof(true ? g : nullptr) k;                  // k has type "void(*)(double)"

      void j(double A[5], typeof(A)* B); // j has type "void(double*, double**)"

      extern typeof(double[]) D;                     // D has an incomplete type
      typeof(D) C = { 0.7, 99 };                     // C has type "double[2]"

      typeof(D) D = { 5, 8.9, 0.1, 99 }; // D is now completed to "double[4]"
      typeof(D) E;                       // E has type "double[4]" from D’s completed type

     6.7.4    Type qualifiers
     6.7.4.1 General
     Syntax
1     type-qualifier:
                           const
                           restrict
                           volatile
                           _Atomic

     Constraints
2    Types other than pointer types whose referenced type is an object type and (possibly multi-
     dimensional) array types with such pointer types as element type shall not be restrict-qualified.
3    The _Atomic qualifier shall not be used if the implementation does not support atomic types
     (see 6.10.10.4).
4    The type modified by the _Atomic qualifier shall not be an array type or a function type.

     Semantics
5    The properties associated with qualified types are meaningful only for expressions that are lval-
     ues.148)
6    If the same qualifier appears more than once in the same specifier-qualifier list or as declaration
     specifiers, either directly, via one or more typeof specifiers, or via one or more typedefs, the behavior
     is the same as if it appeared only once. If other qualifiers appear along with the _Atomic qualifier
      148) The implementation can place a const object that is not volatile in a read-only region of storage. Moreover, the

     implementation does not have to allocate storage for such an object if its address is never used.

                                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                     § 6.7.4.1
                                                       Language — 120

     the resulting type is the so-qualified atomic type.
7    If an attempt is made to modify an object defined with a const-qualified type through use of an
     lvalue with non-const-qualified type, the behavior is undefined. If an attempt is made to refer to an
     object defined with a volatile-qualified type through use of an lvalue with non-volatile-qualified
     type, the behavior is undefined.149)
8    An object that has volatile-qualified type may be modified in ways unknown to the implementation
     or have other unknown side effects. Therefore, any expression referring to such an object shall be
     evaluated strictly according to the rules of the abstract machine, as described in 5.1.2.4. Furthermore,
     at every sequence point the value last stored in the object shall agree with that prescribed by the
     abstract machine, except as modified by the unknown factors mentioned previously.150) What
     constitutes an access to an object that has volatile-qualified type is implementation-defined.
9    An object that is accessed through a restrict-qualified pointer has a special association with that
     pointer. This association, defined in 6.7.4.2, requires that all accesses to that object use, directly
     or indirectly, the value of that pointer.151) The intended use of the restrict qualifier (like the
     register storage class) is to promote optimization, and deleting all instances of the qualifier from
     all preprocessing translation units composing a conforming program does not change its meaning
     (i.e. observable behavior), unless _Generic is used to distinguish whether or not a type has that
     qualifier.
10   If the specification of an array type includes any type qualifiers, both the array and the element type
     are so-qualified. If the specification of a function type includes any type qualifiers, the behavior is
     undefined.152)
11   For two qualified types to be compatible, both shall have the identically qualified version of a
     compatible type; the order of type qualifiers within a list of specifiers or qualifiers does not affect the
     specified type.
12   EXAMPLE 1 An object declared

                 extern const volatile int real_time_clock;

     may be modifiable by hardware, but cannot be assigned to, incremented, or decremented.
13   EXAMPLE 2 The following declarations and expressions illustrate the behavior when type qualifiers modify
     an aggregate type:

                 const struct s { int mem; } cs = { 1 };
                 struct s ncs; // the object ncs is modifiable
                 typedef int A[2][3];
                 const A a = {{4, 5, 6}, {7, 8, 9}}; // array of array of const int
                 int *pi;
                 const int *pci;

                 ncs = cs;      // valid
                 cs = ncs;      // violates modifiable lvalue constraint for =
                 pi = &ncs.mem; // valid
                 pi = &cs.mem; // violates type constraints for =
                 pci = &cs.mem; // valid
                 pi = a[0];     // invalid: a[0] has type "const int *"

14   EXAMPLE 3 The declaration
      149) This applies to those objects that behave as if they were defined with qualified types, even if they are never actually

     defined as objects in the program (such as an object at a memory-mapped input/output address).
      150) A volatile declaration can be used to describe an object corresponding to a memory-mapped input/output port or an

     object accessed by an asynchronously interrupting function. Actions on objects so declared are not allowed to be "optimized
     out" by an implementation or reordered except as permitted by the rules for evaluating expressions.
      151) For example, a statement that assigns a value returned by malloc to a single pointer establishes this association between

     the allocated object and the pointer.
      152) This can occur with typedef s. Note that this rule does not apply to the _Atomic qualifier, and that qualifiers do not

     have any direct effect on the array type itself, but affect conversion rules for pointer types that reference an array type.

     § 6.7.4.1                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 121

              _Atomic volatile int *p;

    specifies that p has the type "pointer to volatile atomic int", a pointer to a volatile-qualified atomic type.

    6.7.4.2 Formal definition of restrict
1   Let D be a declaration of an ordinary identifier that provides a means of designating an object P as a
    restrict-qualified pointer to type T.
2   If D appears inside a block and does not have storage class extern, let B denote the block. If D
    appears in the list of parameter declarations of a function definition, let B denote the associated block.
    Otherwise, let B denote the block of main (or the block of whatever function is called at program
    startup in a freestanding environment).
3   In what follows, a pointer expression E is said to be based on object P if (at some sequence point in
    the execution of B prior to the evaluation of E) modifying P to point to a copy of the array object into
    which it formerly pointed would change the value of E.153) Note that "based" is defined only for
    expressions with pointer types.
4   During each execution of B, let L be any lvalue that has &L based on P. If L is used to access the
    value of the object X that it designates, and X is also modified (by any means), then the following
    requirements apply: T shall not be const-qualified. Every other lvalue used to access the value of
    X shall also have its address based on P. Every access that modifies X shall be considered also to
    modify P, for the purposes of this subclause. If P is assigned the value of a pointer expression E that
    is based on another restricted pointer object P2, associated with block B2, then either the execution
    of B2 shall begin before the execution of B, or the execution of B2 shall end prior to the assignment.
    If these requirements are not met, then the behavior is undefined.
5   Here an execution of B means that portion of the execution of the program that would correspond to
    the lifetime of an object with scalar type and automatic storage duration associated with B.
6   A translator is free to ignore any or all aliasing implications of uses of restrict.
7   EXAMPLE 1 The file scope declarations

              int * restrict a;
              int * restrict b;
              extern int c[];

    assert that if an object is accessed using one of a, b, or c, and that object is modified anywhere in the program,
    then it is never accessed using either of the other two.
8   EXAMPLE 2 The function parameter declarations in the following example

              void f(int n, int * restrict p, int * restrict q)
              {
                    while (n-- > 0)
                          *p++ = *q++;
              }

    assert that, during each execution of the function, if an object is accessed through one of the pointer parameters,
    then it is not also accessed through the other. The translator can make this no-aliasing inference based on the
    parameter declarations alone, without analyzing the function body.
9   The benefit of the restrict qualifiers is that they enable a translator to make an effective dependence analysis
    of function f without examining any of the calls of f in the program. The cost is that the programmer has to
    examine all those calls to ensure that none give undefined behavior. For example, the second call of f in g has
    undefined behavior because each of d[1] through d[49] is accessed through both p and q.

              void g(void)
              {
     153) In other words, E depends on the value of P itself rather than on the value of an object referenced indirectly through P.

    For example, if identifier p has type (int **restrict), then the pointer expressions p and p+1 are based on the restricted
    pointer object designated by p, but the pointer expressions *p and p[1] are not.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.7.4.2
                                                         Language — 122

                      extern int d[100];
                      f(50, d + 50, d); // valid
                      f(50, d + 1, d); // undefined behavior
                 }

10   EXAMPLE 3 The function parameter declarations

                 void h(int n, int * restrict p, int * restrict q, int * restrict r)
                 {
                       int i;
                       for (i = 0; i < n; i++)
                             p[i] = q[i] + r[i];
                 }

     illustrate how an unmodified object can be aliased through two restricted pointers. If a and b are disjoint arrays,
     a call of the form h(100, a, b, b) has defined behavior, because array b is not modified within function h.
11   EXAMPLE 4 The rule limiting assignments between restricted pointers does not distinguish between a function
     call and an equivalent nested block. With one exception, only "outer-to-inner" assignments between restricted
     pointers declared in nested blocks have defined behavior.

                 {
                      int * restrict p1;
                      int * restrict q1;
                      p1 = q1; // undefined behavior
                      {
                            int * restrict p2 = p1; // valid
                            int * restrict q2 = q1; // valid
                            p1 = q2;                // undefined behavior
                            p2 = q2;                // undefined behavior
                      }
                 }

12   The one exception allows the value of a restricted pointer to be carried out of the block in which it (or, more
     precisely, the ordinary identifier used to designate it) is declared when that block finishes execution. For
     example, this permits new_vector to return a vector.

                 typedef struct { int n; float * restrict v; } vector;
                 vector new_vector(int n)
                 {
                       vector t;
                       t.n = n;
                       t.v = malloc(n * sizeof(float));
                       return t;
                 }

13   EXAMPLE 5 Suppose that a programmer knows that references of the form p[i] and q[j] are never aliases in
     the body of a function:

                 void f(int n, int *p, int *q) { /* ... */ }

     There are several ways that this information could be conveyed to a translator using the restrict qualifier.
     Example 2 shows the most effective way, qualifying all pointer parameters, and can be used provided that
     neither p nor q becomes based on the other in the function body. A potentially effective alternative is:

                 void f(int n, int * restrict p, int * const q) { /* ... */ }

     Again, it is possible for a translator to make the no-aliasing inference based on the parameter declarations alone,
     though now subtler reasoning is used: that the const-qualification of q precludes it becoming based on p. There
     is also a requirement that q is not modified, so this alternative cannot be used for the function in Example 2, as
     written.

     § 6.7.4.2                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 123

14   EXAMPLE 6 Another potentially effective alternative is:

               void f(int n, int *p, int const * restrict q) { /* ... */ }

     Again, it is possible for a translator to make the no-aliasing inference based on the parameter declarations alone,
     though now even subtler reasoning is used: that this combination of restrict and const means that objects
     referenced using q cannot be modified, and so no modified object can be referenced using both p and q.
15   EXAMPLE 7 The least effective alternative is:

               void f(int n, int * restrict p, int *q) { /* ... */ }

     Here the translator can make the no-aliasing inference only by analyzing the body of the function and proving
     that q cannot become based on p. Some translator designs may choose to exclude this analysis, given availability
     of the more effective alternatives described previously. Such a translator is required to assume that aliases are
     present because assuming that aliases are not present may result in an incorrect translation. Also, a translator
     that attempts the analysis may not succeed in all cases and consequently need to conservatively assume that
     aliases are present.

     6.7.5     Function specifiers
     Syntax
1     function-specifier:
                             inline
                             _Noreturn

     Constraints
2    Function specifiers shall be used only in the declaration of an identifier for a function.
3    An inline definition of a function with external linkage shall not contain, anywhere in the tokens
     making up the function definition, a definition of a modifiable object with static or thread storage
     duration, and shall not contain, anywhere in the tokens making up the function definition, a reference
     to an identifier with internal linkage.
4    In a hosted environment, no function specifier(s) shall appear in a declaration of main.

     Semantics
5    A function specifier may appear more than once; the behavior is the same as if it appeared only
     once.
6    A function declared with an inline function specifier is an inline function. Making a function an
     inline function suggests that calls to the function be as fast as possible.154) The extent to which such
     suggestions are effective is implementation-defined.155)
7    Any function with internal linkage can be an inline function. For a function with external linkage,
     the following restrictions apply: If a function is declared with an inline function specifier, then it
     shall also be defined in the same translation unit. If all the file scope declarations for a function in a
     translation unit include the inline function specifier without extern, then the definition in that
     translation unit is an inline definition. An inline definition does not provide an external definition for
     the function and does not forbid an external definition in another translation unit. Inline definitions
     provide an alternative to external definitions, which a translator may use to implement any call to
     the function in the same translation unit. It is unspecified whether a call to the function uses the

      154) By using, for example, an alternative to the usual function call mechanism, such as "inline substitution". Inline

     substitution is not textual substitution, nor does it create a new function. Therefore, for example, the expansion of a macro
     used within the body of the function uses the definition it had at the point the function body appears, and not where the
     function is called; and identifiers refer to the declarations in scope where the body occurs. Likewise, the function has a single
     address, regardless of the number of inline definitions that occur in addition to the external definition.
      155) For example, an implementation may never perform inline substitution, or may only perform inline substitutions to calls

     in the scope of an inline declaration.

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                             § 6.7.5
                                                           Language — 124

     inline definition or the external definition.156)
8    A function declared with a _Noreturn function specifier shall not return to its caller. The attribute
     [[noreturn]] provides similar semantics. The _Noreturn function specifier is an obsolescent
     feature (6.7.13.7).

     Recommended practice
9    The implementation should produce a diagnostic message for a function declared with a _Noreturn
     function specifier that appears to be capable of returning to its caller.
10   EXAMPLE 1 The declaration of an inline function with external linkage can result in either an external
     definition, or a definition available for use only within the translation unit. A file scope declaration with extern
     creates an external definition. The following example shows an entire translation unit.

               inline double fahr(double t)
               {
                     return (9.0 * t) / 5.0 + 32.0;
               }

               inline double cels(double t)
               {
                     return (5.0 * (t - 32.0)) / 9.0;
               }

               extern double fahr(double);                // creates an external definition

               double convert(int is_fahr, double temp)
               {
                     /* A translator may perform inline substitutions */
                     return is_fahr ? cels(temp): fahr(temp);
               }

11   Note that the definition of fahr is an external definition because fahr is also declared with extern, but the
     definition of cels is an inline definition. Because cels has external linkage and is referenced, an external
     definition has to appear in another translation unit (see 6.9); the inline definition and the external definition are
     distinct and either can be used for the call.
12   EXAMPLE 2 The following inline definitions are invalid:

               static int a;
               typeof (a) inline f() { return 0; }
               typeof ((int) { 0 }) inline g() { return 0; }

     Forward references: function definitions (6.9.2).

     6.7.6     Alignment specifier
     Syntax
1     alignment-specifier:
                             alignas ( type-name )
                             alignas ( constant-expression )

     Constraints
2    An alignment specifier shall appear only in the declaration specifiers of a declaration, or in the
     specifier-qualifier list of a member declaration, or in the type name of a compound literal. An
     alignment specifier shall not be used in conjunction with either of the storage-class specifiers
     typedef or register, nor in a declaration of a function or bit-field.
      156) Since an inline definition is distinct from the corresponding external definition and from any other corresponding inline

     definitions in other translation units, all corresponding objects with static storage duration are also distinct in each of the
     definitions.

     § 6.7.6                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 125

3   The constant expression shall be an integer constant expression. It shall evaluate to a valid funda-
    mental alignment, or to a valid extended alignment supported by the implementation for an object
    of the storage duration (if any) being declared, or to zero.
4   An object shall not be declared with an over-aligned type with an extended alignment requirement
    not supported by the implementation for an object of that storage duration.
5   The combined effect of all alignment specifiers in a declaration shall not specify an alignment that is
    less strict than the alignment that would otherwise be required for the type of the object or member
    being declared.

    Semantics
6   The first form is equivalent to alignas(alignof( type-name )).
7   The alignment requirement of the declared object or member is taken to be the specified alignment.
    An alignment specification of zero has no effect.157) When multiple alignment specifiers occur in a
    declaration, the effective alignment requirement is the strictest specified alignment.
8   If the definition of an object has an alignment specifier, any other declaration of that object shall
    either specify equivalent alignment or have no alignment specifier. If the definition of an object does
    not have an alignment specifier, any other declaration of that object shall also have no alignment
    specifier. If declarations of an object in different translation units have different alignment specifiers,
    the behavior is undefined.

    6.7.7    Declarators
    6.7.7.1 General
    Syntax
1    declarator:
                             pointeropt direct-declarator

      direct-declarator:
                             identifier attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                             ( declarator )
                             array-declarator attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                             function-declarator attribute-specifier-sequenceopt

      array-declarator:
                             direct-declarator [ type-qualifier-listopt assignment-expressionopt ]
                             direct-declarator [ static type-qualifier-listopt assignment-expression ]
                             direct-declarator [ type-qualifier-list static assignment-expression ]
                             direct-declarator [ type-qualifier-listopt * ]

      function-declarator:
                        direct-declarator ( parameter-type-listopt )

      pointer:
                             * attribute-specifier-sequenceopt type-qualifier-listopt
                             * attribute-specifier-sequenceopt type-qualifier-listopt pointer
      type-qualifier-list:
                        type-qualifier
                        type-qualifier-list type-qualifier
      parameter-type-list:
                        parameter-list
                        parameter-list , ...
                             ...
      parameter-list:
                             parameter-declaration
    157) An alignment specification of zero also does not affect other alignment specifications in the same declaration.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.7.7.1
                                                         Language — 126

                       parameter-list , parameter-declaration
      parameter-declaration:
                       attribute-specifier-sequenceopt declaration-specifiers declarator
                       attribute-specifier-sequenceopt declaration-specifiers abstract-declaratoropt

    Semantics
2   Each declarator declares an identifier for a single object, function, or type, within a declaration. The
    preceding specifiers indicate the type, storage class, or other properties of the identifier or identifiers
    being declared. Each declarator specifies one declaration and names it and/or modifies the type of
    the specifiers with operators such as * (pointer to) and () (function returning).
3   A full declarator is a declarator that is not part of another declarator. If, in the nested sequence of
    declarators in a full declarator, there is a declarator specifying a variable length array type, the type
    specified by the full declarator is said to be variably modified. Furthermore, any type derived by
    declarator type derivation from a variably modified type is itself variably modified.
4   In the following subclauses, consider a declaration
                T D1
    where T contains the declaration specifiers that specify a type T (such as int) and D1 is a declarator
    that contains an identifier ident. The type specified for the identifier ident in the various forms of
    declarator is described inductively using this notation.
5   If, in the declaration "T D1", D1 has the form
                 identifier attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
    then the type specified for ident is T and the optional attribute specifier sequence appertains to the
    entity that is declared.
6   If, in the declaration "T D1", D1 has the form
                 (D )
    then ident has the type specified by the declaration "T D". Thus, a declarator in parentheses is
    identical to the unparenthesized declarator, but the binding of complicated declarators may be
    altered by parentheses.

    Implementation limits
7   As discussed in 5.2.5.2, an implementation may limit the number of pointer, array, and function
    declarators that modify an arithmetic, structure, union, or void type, either directly or via one or
    more typedefs.
    Forward references: array declarators (6.7.7.3), type definitions (6.7.9).

    6.7.7.2 Pointer declarators
    Semantics
1   If, in the declaration "T D1", D1 has the form
                 * attribute-specifier-sequenceopt type-qualifier-listopt D
    and the type specified for ident in the declaration "T D" is "derived-declarator-type-list T", then the
    type specified for ident is "derived-declarator-type-list type-qualifier-list pointer to T". For each type
    qualifier in the list, ident is a so-qualified pointer. The optional attribute specifier sequence appertains
    to the pointer and not the object pointed to.
2   For two pointer types to be compatible, both shall be identically qualified and both shall be pointers
    to compatible types.
3   EXAMPLE The following pair of declarations demonstrates the difference between a "variable pointer to a
    constant value" and a "constant pointer to a variable value".

                const int *ptr_to_constant;
                int *const constant_ptr;

    § 6.7.7.2                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 127

    The contents of any object pointed to by ptr_to_constant cannot be modified through that pointer, but
    ptr_to_constant itself can be changed to point to another object. Similarly, the contents of the int pointed to
    by constant_ptr can be modified, but constant_ptr itself always points to the same location.
4   The declaration of the constant pointer constant_ptr can be clarified by including a definition for the type
    "pointer to int".

                       typedef int *int_ptr;
                       const int_ptr constant_ptr;

    declares constant_ptr as an object that has type "const-qualified pointer to int".

    6.7.7.3 Array declarators
    Constraints
1   In addition to optional type qualifiers and the keyword static, the [ and ] may delimit an expres-
    sion or *. If they delimit an expression (which specifies the size of an array), the expression shall
    have an integer type. If the expression is a constant expression, it shall have a value greater than
    zero. The element type shall not be an incomplete or function type. The optional type qualifiers and
    the keyword static shall appear only in a declaration of a function parameter with an array type,
    and then only in the outermost array type derivation.
2   If an identifier is declared as having a variably modified type, it shall be an ordinary identifier (as
    defined in 6.2.3), have no linkage, and have either block scope or function prototype scope. If an
    identifier is declared to be an object with static or thread storage duration, it shall not have a variable
    length array type.

    Semantics
3   If, in the declaration "T D1", D1 has one of the forms:
                D [ type-qualifier-listopt assignment-expressionopt ] attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                D [ static type-qualifier-listopt assignment-expression ] attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                D [ type-qualifier-list static assignment-expression         ] attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                D [ type-qualifier-listopt * ] attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
    and the type specified for ident in the declaration "T D" is "derived-declarator-type-list T", then the
    type specified for ident is "derived-declarator-type-list array of T".158)159) The optional attribute specifier
    sequence appertains to the array. (See 6.7.7.4 for the meaning of the optional type qualifiers and the
    keyword static.)
4   If the size is not present, the array type is an incomplete type. If the size is * instead of being an
    expression, the array type is a variable length array type of unspecified size, which can only be used
    as part of the nested sequence of declarators or abstract declarators for a parameter declaration, not
    including anything inside an array size expression in one of those declarators;160) such arrays are
    nonetheless complete types. If the size is an integer constant expression and the element type has a
    known constant size, the array type is not a variable length array type; otherwise, the array type is a
    variable length array type. (Variable length arrays with automatic storage duration are a conditional
    feature that implementations may support; see 6.10.10.4.)
5   If the size is an expression that is not an integer constant expression: if it occurs in a declaration at
    function prototype scope, it is treated as if it were replaced by *; otherwise, each time it is evaluated
    it shall have a value greater than zero. The size of each instance of a variable length array type does
    not change during its lifetime. Where a size expression is part of the operand of a typeof or sizeof
    operator and changing the value of the size expression would not affect the result of the operator, it
    is unspecified whether or not the size expression is evaluated. Where a size expression is part of the
    operand of an alignof operator, that expression is not evaluated.
     158)When several "array of" specifications are adjacent, a multidimensional array is declared.
     159) The array is considered identically qualified to T according to 6.2.5.
     160) They can be used only in function declarations that are not definitions (see 6.7.7.4 and 6.9.2).

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                              § 6.7.7.3
                                                           Language — 128

6    For two array types to be compatible, both shall have compatible element types, and if both size
     specifiers are present, and are integer constant expressions, then both size specifiers shall have
     the same constant value. If the two array types are used in a context which requires them to be
     compatible, it is undefined behavior if the two size specifiers evaluate to unequal values.
7    EXAMPLE 1

                 float fa[11], *afp[17];

     declares an array of float numbers and an array of pointers to float numbers.
8    EXAMPLE 2 Note the distinction between the declarations

                 extern int *x;
                 extern int y[];

     The first declares x to be a pointer to int; the second declares y to be an array of int of unknown size (an
     incomplete type), the storage for which is defined elsewhere.
9    EXAMPLE 3 The following declarations demonstrate the compatibility rules for variably modified types.

                 extern int n;
                 extern int m;

                 void fcompat(void)
                 {
                       int a[n][6][m];
                       int (*p)[4][n+1];
                       int c[n][n][6][m];
                       int (*r)[n][n][n+1];
                       p = a;      // invalid: not compatible because 4 != 6
                       r = c;      // compatible, but defined behavior only if
                                   // n == 6 and m == n+1
                 }

10   EXAMPLE 4 All valid declarations of variably modified (VM) types are either at block scope or function
     prototype scope. Array objects declared with the thread_local, static, or extern storage-class specifier
     cannot have a variable length array (VLA) type. However, an object declared with the static storage-class
     specifier can have a VM type (that is, a pointer to a VLA type). Finally, only ordinary identifiers can be declared
     with a VM type and identifiers with VM type cannot, therefore, be members of structures or unions.

                 extern int n;
                 int A[n];                                   // invalid: file scope VLA
                 extern int (*p2)[n];                        // invalid: file scope VM
                 int B[100];                                 // valid: file scope but not VM

                 void fvla(int m, int C[m][m]);              // valid:     VLA with prototype scope

                 void fvla(int m, int C[m][m])               // valid:     adjusted to auto pointer to VLA
                 {
                       typedef int VLA[m][m];                // valid:     block scope typedef VLA

                      struct tag {
                            int (*y)[n];                     // invalid:     y not ordinary identifier
                            int z[n];                        // invalid:     z not ordinary identifier
                      };
                      int D[m];                              // valid: auto VLA
                      static int E[m];                       // invalid: static block scope VLA
                      extern int F[m];                       // invalid: F has linkage and is VLA
                      int (*s)[m];                           // valid: auto pointer to VLA
                      extern int (*r)[m];                    // invalid: r has linkage and points to VLA
                      static int (*q)[m] = &B;               // valid: q is a static block pointer to VLA
                 }

     § 6.7.7.3                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 129

11   EXAMPLE 5 The following is invalid, because the use of [*] is inside an array size expression rather than
     directly part of the nested sequence of abstract declarators for a parameter declaration:

              void f(int (*)[sizeof(int (*)[*])]);

     Forward references: function declarators (6.7.7.4), function definitions (6.9.2), initialization (6.7.11).

     6.7.7.4 Function declarators
     Constraints
1    A function declarator shall not specify a return type that is a function type or an array type.
2    The only storage-class specifier that shall occur in a parameter declaration is register.
3    After adjustment, the parameters in a parameter type list in a function declarator that is part of a
     definition of that function shall not have incomplete type.

     Semantics
4    If, in the declaration "T D1", D1 has the form
               D ( parameter-type-listopt ) attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
     and the type specified for ident in the declaration "T D" is "derived-declarator-type-list T", then the
     type specified for ident is "derived-declarator-type-list function returning the unqualified, non-atomic
     version of T". The optional attribute specifier sequence appertains to the function type.
5    A parameter type list specifies the types of, and may declare identifiers for, the parameters of the
     function.
6    A declaration of a parameter as "array of type" shall be adjusted to "qualified pointer to type", where
     the type qualifiers (if any) are those specified within the [ and ] of the array type derivation. If the
     keyword static also appears within the [ and ] of the array type derivation, then for each call to
     the function, the value of the corresponding actual argument shall provide access to the first element
     of an array with at least as many elements as specified by the size expression.
7    A declaration of a parameter as "function returning type" shall be adjusted to "pointer to function
     returning type", as in 6.3.2.1.
8    If the list terminates with an ellipsis (...), no information about the number or types of the
     parameters after the comma is supplied.161)
9    The special case of an unnamed parameter of type void as the only item in the list specifies that the
     function has no parameters.
10   If, in a parameter declaration, an identifier can be treated either as a typedef name or as a parameter
     name, it shall be taken as a typedef name.
11   If the function declarator is not part of a definition of that function, parameters may have incomplete
     type and may use the [*] notation in their sequences of declarator specifiers to specify variable
     length array types.
12   The storage-class specifier in the declaration specifiers for a parameter declaration, if present, is
     ignored unless the declared parameter is one of the members of the parameter type list for a function
     definition. The optional attribute specifier sequence in a parameter declaration appertains to the
     parameter.
13   For a function declarator without a parameter type list: the effect is as if it were declared with a
     parameter type list consisting of the keyword void. A function declarator provides a prototype for
     the function.
14   For two function types to be compatible, both shall specify compatible return types. Moreover,
     the parameter type lists shall agree in the number of parameters and in use of the final ellipsis;
     corresponding parameters shall have compatible types. In the determination of type compatibility
     and of a composite type, each parameter declared with function or array type is taken as having the
     161) The macros defined in the <stdarg.h> header (7.16) can be used to access arguments that correspond to the ellipsis.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                        § 6.7.7.4
                                                        Language — 130

     adjusted type and each parameter declared with qualified type is taken as having the unqualified
     version of its declared type.
15   EXAMPLE 1 The declaration

                 int f(void), *fip(), (*pfi)();

     declares a function f with no parameters returning an int, a function fip with no parameters returning a
     pointer to an int, and a pointer pfi to a function with no parameters returning an int. It is especially useful
     to compare the last two. The binding of *fip() is *(fip()), so that the declaration suggests, and the same
     construction in an expression requires, the calling of a function fip, and then using indirection through the
     pointer result to yield an int. In the declarator (*pfi)(), the extra parentheses are necessary to indicate that
     indirection through a pointer to a function yields a function designator, which is then used to call the function;
     it returns an int.
16   If the declaration occurs outside of any function, the identifiers have file scope and external linkage. If the
     declaration occurs inside a function, the identifiers of the functions f and fip have block scope and either
     internal or external linkage (depending on what file scope declarations for these identifiers are visible), and the
     identifier of the pointer pfi has block scope and no linkage.
17   EXAMPLE 2 The declaration

                 int (*apfi[3])(int *x, int *y);

     declares an array apfi of three pointers to functions returning int. Each of these functions has two parameters
     that are pointers to int. The identifiers x and y are declared for descriptive purposes only and go out of scope
     at the end of the declaration of apfi.
18   EXAMPLE 3 The declaration

                 int (*fpfi(int (*)(long), int))(int, ...);

     declares a function fpfi that returns a pointer to a function returning an int. The function fpfi has two
     parameters: a pointer to a function returning an int (with one parameter of type long int), and an int. The
     pointer returned by fpfi points to a function that has one int parameter and accepts zero or more additional
     arguments of any type.
19   EXAMPLE 4 The following prototype has a variably modified parameter.

                 void addscalar(int n, int m,
                       double a[n][n*m+300], double x);

                 int main(void)
                 {
                       double b[4][308];
                       addscalar(4, 2, b, 2.17);
                       return 0;
                 }

                 void addscalar(int n, int m,
                       double a[n][n*m+300], double x)
                 {
                       for (int i = 0; i < n; i++)
                             for (int j = 0, k = n*m+300; j < k; j++)
                                   // a is a pointer to a VLA with n*m+300 elements
                                   a[i][j] += x;
                 }

20   EXAMPLE 5 The following are all compatible function prototype declarators.

                 double maximum(int n, int m, double a[n][m]);
                 double maximum(int n, int m, double a[*][*]);
                 double maximum(int n, int m, double a[ ][*]);
                 double maximum(int n, int m, double a[ ][m]);

     § 6.7.7.4                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 131

    as are:

              void f(double (* restrict a)[5]);
              void f(double a[restrict][5]);
              void f(double a[restrict 3][5]);
              void f(double a[restrict static 3][5]);

    The last declaration also specifies that the argument corresponding to a in any call to f can be expected to be a
    non-null pointer to the first of at least three arrays of 5 doubles, which the others do not.
    Forward references: function definitions (6.9.2), type names (6.7.8).

    6.7.8     Type names
    Syntax
1    type-name:
                         specifier-qualifier-list abstract-declaratoropt
      abstract-declarator:
                         pointer
                         pointeropt direct-abstract-declarator
      direct-abstract-declarator:
                         ( abstract-declarator )
                         array-abstract-declarator attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
                         function-abstract-declarator attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
      array-abstract-declarator:
                         direct-abstract-declaratoropt [ type-qualifier-listopt assignment-expressionopt ]
                         direct-abstract-declaratoropt [ static type-qualifier-listopt assignment-expression ]
                         direct-abstract-declaratoropt [ type-qualifier-list static assignment-expression ]
                         direct-abstract-declaratoropt [ * ]

      function-abstract-declarator:
                        direct-abstract-declaratoropt ( parameter-type-listopt )

    Semantics
2   In several contexts, it is necessary to specify a type. This is accomplished using a type name, which is
    syntactically a declaration for a function or an object of that type that omits the identifier.162) The
    optional attribute specifier sequence in a direct abstract declarator appertains to the preceding array
    or function type. The attribute specifier sequence affects the type only for the declaration it appears
    in, not other declarations involving the same type.
3   EXAMPLE The constructions

              (a)           int
              (b)           int *
              (c)           int *[3]
              (d)           int (*)[3]
              (e)           int (*)[*]
              (f)           int *()
              (g)           int (*)(void)
              (h)           int (*const [])(unsigned int, ...)

    name respectively the types

      (a) int,
      (b) pointer to int,
      (c) array of three pointers to int,
     162) As indicated by the syntax, empty parentheses in a type name are interpreted as "function with no parameters", rather

    than redundant parentheses around the omitted identifier.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.7.8
                                                        Language — 132

      (d) pointer to an array of three int s,
      (e) pointer to a variable length array of an unspecified number of int s,
      (f) function with no parameters returning a pointer to int,
      (g) pointer to function with no parameters returning an int, and
      (h) array of an unspecified number of constant pointers to functions, each with one parameter that has type
          unsigned int and an unspecified number of other parameters, returning an int.

    6.7.9     Type definitions
    Syntax
1    typedef-name:
                         identifier

    Constraints
2   If a typedef name specifies a variably modified type then it shall have block scope.

    Semantics
3   In a declaration whose storage-class specifier is typedef, each declarator defines an identifier to be
    a typedef name that denotes the type specified for the identifier in the way described in 6.7.7. Any
    array size expressions associated with variable length array declarators and typeof operators are
    evaluated each time the declaration of the typedef name is reached in the order of execution. A
    typedef declaration does not introduce a new type, only a synonym for the type so specified. That
    is, in the following declarations:

              typedef T type_ident;
              type_ident D;

    type_ident is defined as a typedef name with the type specified by the declaration specifiers in T
    (known as T), and the identifier in D has the type "derived-declarator-type-list T" where the derived-
    declarator-type-list is specified by the declarators of D. A typedef name shares the same name space
    as other identifiers declared in ordinary declarators. If the identifier is redeclared in an enclosed
    block, the type of the inner declaration shall not be inferred (6.7.10).
4   EXAMPLE 1 After

              typedef int MILES, KLICKSP();
              typedef struct { double hi, lo; } range;

    the constructions

              MILES distance;
              extern KLICKSP *metricp;
              range x;
              range z, *zp;

    are all valid declarations. The type of distance is int, that of metricp is "pointer to function with no
    parameters returning int", and that of x and z is the specified structure; zp is a pointer to such a structure. The
    object distance has a type compatible with any other int object.
5   EXAMPLE 2 After the declarations

              typedef struct s1 { int x; } t1, *tp1;
              typedef struct s2 { int x; } t2, *tp2;

    type t1 and the type pointed to by tp1 are compatible. Type t1 is also compatible with type struct s1, but
    not compatible with the types struct s2, t2, the type pointed to by tp2, or int.
6   EXAMPLE 3 The following obscure constructions

    § 6.7.9                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Language — 133

              typedef signed int t;
              typedef int plain;
              struct tag {
                    unsigned t:4;
                    const t:5;
                    plain r:5;
              };

    declare a typedef name t with type signed int, a typedef name plain with type int, and a structure with
    three bit-field members, one named t that contains values in the range [0, 15], an unnamed const-qualified
    bit-field which (if it could be accessed) would contain values in the range [−16, +15], and one named r that
    contains values in one of the ranges [0, 31] or [−16, +15]. (The choice of range is implementation-defined.) The
    first two bit-field declarations differ in that unsigned is a type specifier (which forces t to be the name of a
    structure member), while const is a type qualifier (which modifies t which is still visible as a typedef name). If
    these declarations are followed in an inner scope by

              t f(t (t));
              long t;

    then a function f is declared with type "function returning signed int with one unnamed parameter with
    type pointer to function returning signed int with one unnamed parameter with type signed int", and an
    identifier t with type long int.
7   EXAMPLE 4 On the other hand, typedef names can be used to improve code readability. All three of the
    following declarations of the signal function specify exactly the same type, the first without making use of
    any typedef names.

              typedef void fv(int), (*pfv)(int);

              void (*signal(int, void (*)(int)))(int);
              fv *signal(int, fv *);
              pfv signal(int, pfv);

8   EXAMPLE 5 If a typedef name denotes a variable length array type, the length of the array is fixed at the time
    the typedef name is defined, not each time it is used:

              void copyt(int n)
              {
                    typedef int B[n];   // B is n ints, n evaluated now
                    n += 1;
                    B a;                // a is n ints, n without += 1
                    int b[n];           // a and b are different sizes
                    for (int i = 1; i < n; i++)
                          a[i-1] = b[i];
              }

    6.7.10     Type inference
    Constraints
1   A declaration for which the type is inferred shall contain the storage-class specifier auto.

    Semantics
2   For such a declaration that is the definition of an object the init-declarator shall have the form
                direct-declarator = assignment-expression
    The inferred type of the declared object is the type of the assignment expression after lvalue, array
    to pointer or function to pointer conversion, additionally qualified by qualifiers and amended by
    attributes as they appear in the declaration specifiers, if any.163) Implementations may or may not
     163) The scope rules as described in 6.2.1 also prohibit the use of the identifier of the declarator within the assignment

    expression.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                        § 6.7.10
                                                        Language — 134

    accept a direct declarator that is not of the form
                   identifier attribute-specifier-sequenceopt
    optionally enclosed in balanced pairs of parentheses; if a direct declarator of a different form is
    accepted, the behavior is implementation-defined.164)
3   NOTE A declaration that also defines a structure or union type has implementation-defined behavior. Here,
    the identifier x which is not ordinary but in the name space of the structure type is declared.

               auto p = (struct { int x; } *)0;

    Even a forward declaration of a structure tag

               struct s;
               auto p = (struct s { int x; } *)0;

    would not change that situation. A direct use of the structure definition as the type specifier ensures portability
    of the declaration.

               struct s { int x; } * p = 0;

    The following also has implementation-defined behavior:

               auto alignas (struct s *) x = 0;

4   EXAMPLE 1 The following file scope definitions:

               static auto a = 3.5;
               auto p = &a;

    are interpreted as if they had been written as:

               static double a = 3.5;
               double * p = &a;

    So effectively a is a double and p is a double*. Note that the restrictions on the syntax of such declarations
    does not allow the declarator to be *p, but that the final type here nevertheless is a pointer type.
5   EXAMPLE 2 The scope of the identifier for which the type is inferred only starts after the end of the initializer
    (6.2.1), so the assignment expression cannot use the identifier to refer to the object or function that is declared,
    for example to take its address. Any use of the identifier in the initializer is invalid, even if an entity with the
    same name exists in an outer scope.

               {
                        double a = 7;
                        double b = 9;
                        {
                              double b = b * b;    // undefined, uses uninitialized
                                                   // variable without address
                                printf("%g\n", a); // valid, uses "a" from outer scope, prints 7
                                auto a   = a * a; // invalid, "a" from outer scope is not
                                                   // visible during initialization
                        }
                        {
                                auto b   = a * a; // valid, uses "a" from outer scope
                                auto a   = b;      // valid, "a" from outer scope not visible now
                                // ...
                                printf("%g\n", a); // valid, uses "a" from inner scope, prints 49
                        }

     164) It is recommended that implementations that accept different forms of direct declarators follow the syntax and semantics

    of the corresponding feature in ISO/IEC 14882.

    § 6.7.10                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 135

                      // ...
             }

6   EXAMPLE 3 In the following, declarations of pA and qA are valid. The type of A after array-to-pointer
    conversion is a pointer type, and qA is a pointer to array.

             double A[3] = { 0 };
             auto pA = A;
             auto qA = &A;

7   EXAMPLE 4 Type inference can be used to capture the type of a call to a type-generic function. It ensures that
    the same type as the argument x is used.

             #include <tgmath.h>
             auto y = cos(x);

    If instead the type of y is explicitly specified to a different type than x, a diagnosis of the mismatch is not
    enforced.
8   EXAMPLE 5 A type-generic macro that generalizes the div functions (7.24.6.2) is defined and used as follows.

             #define div(X, Y) _Generic((X)+(Y),\
                   int: div,\
                   long: ldiv,\
                   long long: lldiv)((X), (Y))
             auto z = div(x, y);
             auto q = z.quot;
             auto r = z.rem;

9   EXAMPLE 6 Definitions of objects with inferred type are valid in all contexts that allow the initializer syntax
    as described. In particular they can be used to ensure type safety of for-loop controlling expressions.

             for (auto i = j; i < 2*j; ++i) {
                   // ...
             }

    Here, regardless of the integer rank or signedness of the type of j, i will have the non-atomic unqualified
    version of j’s type. So, after lvalue conversion and possible promotion, the two operands of the < operator in
    the controlling expression are guaranteed to have the same type, and, in particular, the same signedness.

    6.7.11       Initialization
    Syntax
1    braced-initializer:
                           { }
                           { initializer-list }
                           { initializer-list , }

    initializer:
                           assignment-expression
                           braced-initializer

      initializer-list:
                           designationopt initializer
                           initializer-list , designationopt initializer

      designation:
                           designator-list =

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                               § 6.7.11
                                                     Language — 136

       designator-list:
                            designator
                            designator-list designator
       designator:
                            [ constant-expression ]
                            . identifier

2    An empty brace pair ({}) is called an empty initializer and is referred to as empty initialization.

     Constraints
3    No initializer shall attempt to provide a value for an object not contained within the entity being
     initialized.
4    The type of the entity to be initialized shall be an array of unknown size or a complete object type.
     An entity of variable length array type shall not be initialized except by an empty initializer. An
     array of unknown size shall not be initialized by an empty initializer.
5    All the expressions in an initializer for an object that has static or thread storage duration or is
     declared with the constexpr storage-class specifier shall be constant expressions or string literals.
6    If the declaration of an identifier has block scope, and the identifier has external or internal linkage,
     the declaration shall have no initializer for the identifier.
7    If a designator has the form
                [ constant-expression ]
     then the current object (defined subsequently in this subclause) shall have array type and the
     expression shall be an integer constant expression. If the array is of unknown size, any nonnegative
     value is valid.
8    If a designator has the form
                . identifier
     then the current object (defined subsequently in this subclause) shall have structure or union type
     and the identifier shall be the name of a member of that type.

     Semantics
9    An initializer specifies the initial value stored in an object. For objects with atomic type additional
     restrictions apply, see 7.17.2 and 7.17.8.
10   Except where explicitly stated otherwise, for the purposes of this subclause unnamed members
     of objects of structure and union type do not participate in initialization. Unnamed members of
     structure objects have indeterminate representation even after initialization.
11   If an object that has automatic storage duration is not initialized explicitly, its representation is
     indeterminate. If an object that has static or thread storage duration is not initialized explicitly, or
     any object is initialized with an empty initializer, then it is subject to default initialization, which
     initializes an object as follows:

       — if it has pointer type, it is initialized to a null pointer;

       — if it has decimal floating type, it is initialized to positive zero, and the quantum exponent is
         implementation-defined;165)

       — if it has arithmetic type, and it does not have decimal floating type, it is initialized to (positive
         or unsigned) zero;

       — if it is an aggregate, every member is initialized (recursively) according to these rules, and any
         padding is initialized to zero bits;
     165) A representation with all bits zero results in a decimal floating-point zero with the most negative exponent.

     § 6.7.11                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 137

        — if it is a union, the first named member is initialized (recursively) according to these rules, and
          any padding is initialized to zero bits.

12   The initializer for a scalar shall be a single expression, optionally enclosed in braces, or it shall be
     an empty initializer. If the initializer is not the empty initializer, the initial value of the object is
     that of the expression (after conversion); the same type constraints and conversions as for simple
     assignment apply, taking the type of the scalar to be the unqualified version of its declared type.
13   The rest of this subclause deals with initializers for objects that have aggregate or union type.
14   The initializer for a structure or union object shall be either an initializer list as described subse-
     quently in this subclause, or a single expression that has compatible structure or union type. In the
     latter case, the initial value of the object, including unnamed members, is that of the expression.166)
15   An array of character type may be initialized by a character string literal or UTF-8 string literal,
     optionally enclosed in braces. Successive bytes of the string literal (including the terminating null
     character if there is room or if the array is of unknown size) initialize the elements of the array.
16   An array with element type compatible with a qualified or unqualified wchar_t, char16_t, or
     char32_t may be initialized by a wide string literal with the corresponding encoding prefix (L, u, or
     U, respectively), optionally enclosed in braces. Successive wide characters of the wide string literal
     (including the terminating null wide character if there is room or if the array is of unknown size)
     initialize the elements of the array.
17   Otherwise, the initializer for an object that has aggregate or union type shall be a brace-enclosed list
     of initializers for the elements or named members.
18   Each brace-enclosed initializer list has an associated current object. When no designations are present,
     subobjects of the current object are initialized in order according to the type of the current object:
     array elements in increasing subscript order, structure members in declaration order, and the first
     named member of a union.167) In contrast, a designation causes the following initializer to begin
     initialization of the subobject described by the designator. Initialization then continues forward in
     order, beginning with the next subobject after that described by the designator.168)
19   Each designator list begins its description with the current object associated with the closest sur-
     rounding brace pair. Each item in the designator list (in order) specifies a particular member of its
     current object and changes the current object for the next designator (if any) to be that member.169)
     The current object that results at the end of the designator list is the subobject to be initialized by the
     following initializer.
20   The initialization shall occur in initializer list order, each initializer provided for a particular subobject
     overriding any previously listed initializer for the same subobject;170) all subobjects that are not
     initialized explicitly are subject to default initialization.
21   If the aggregate or union contains elements or members that are aggregates or unions, these rules
     apply recursively to the subaggregates or contained unions. If the initializer of a subaggregate or
     contained union begins with a left brace, the initializers enclosed by that brace and its matching right
     brace initialize the elements or members of the subaggregate or the contained union. Otherwise, only
     enough initializers from the list are taken to account for the elements or members of the subaggregate
     or the first member of the contained union; any remaining initializers are left to initialize the next
     element or member of the aggregate of which the current subaggregate or contained union is a part.
22   If there are fewer initializers in a brace-enclosed list than there are elements or members of an
      166) If the object being initialized does not have automatic storage duration, this case violates a constraint unless the expression

     is a named constant or compound literal constant (6.6).
      167) If the initializer list for a subaggregate or contained union does not begin with a left brace, its subobjects are initialized as

     usual, but the subaggregate or contained union does not become the current object: current objects are associated only with
     brace-enclosed initializer lists.
      168) After a union member is initialized, the next object is not the next member of the union; instead, it is the next subobject of

     an object containing the union.
      169) Thus, a designator can only specify a strict subobject of the aggregate or union that is associated with the surrounding

     brace pair. Note, too, that each separate designator list is independent.
      170) Any initializer for the subobject which is overridden and so not used to initialize that subobject may not be evaluated at

     all.

                                                  © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                               § 6.7.11
                                                              Language — 138

     aggregate, or fewer characters in a string literal used to initialize an array of known size than there
     are elements in the array, the remainder of the aggregate is subject to default initialization.
23   If an array of unknown size is initialized, its size is determined by the largest indexed element with
     an explicit initializer. The array type is completed at the end of its initializer list.
24   The evaluations of the initialization list expressions are indeterminately sequenced with respect to
     one another and thus the order in which any side effects occur is unspecified.171)
25   EXAMPLE 1 Provided that <complex.h> has been included, the declarations

                int i = 3.5;
                double complex c = 5 + 3 * I;

     define and initialize i with the value 3 and c with the value 5.0 + i3.0.
26   EXAMPLE 2 The declaration

                int x[] = { 1, 3, 5 };

     defines and initializes x as a one-dimensional array object that has three elements, as no size was specified and
     there are three initializers.
27   EXAMPLE 3 The declaration

                int y[4][3] = {
                      { 1, 3, 5 },
                      { 2, 4, 6 },
                      { 3, 5, 7 },
                };

     is a definition with a fully bracketed initialization: 1, 3, and 5 initialize the first row of y (the array object y[0]),
     namely y[0][0], y[0][1], and y[0][2]. Likewise the next two lines initialize y[1] and y[2]. The initializer
     ends early, so y[3] is initialized with zeros. Precisely the same effect could have been achieved by

                int y[4][3] = {
                      1, 3, 5, 2, 4, 6, 3, 5, 7
                };

     The initializer for y[0] does not begin with a left brace, so three items from the list are used. Likewise the next
     three are taken successively for y[1] and y[2].
28   EXAMPLE 4 The declaration

                int z[4][3] = {
                      { 1 }, { 2 }, { 3 }, { 4 }
                };

     initializes the first column of z as specified and initializes the rest with zeros.
29   EXAMPLE 5 The declaration

                struct { int a[3], b; } w[] = { { 1 }, 2 };

     is a definition with an inconsistently bracketed initialization. It defines an array with two element structures:
     w[0].a[0] is 1 and w[1].a[0] is 2; all the other elements are zero.
30   EXAMPLE 6 The declaration

                short q[4][3][2] = {
                      { 1 },
                      { 2, 3 },
                      { 4, 5, 6 }

     171) In particular, the evaluation order can be the same or different as the order of subobject initialization.

     § 6.7.11                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                          Language — 139

               };

     contains an incompletely but consistently bracketed initialization. It defines a three-dimensional array object:
     q[0][0][0] is 1, q[1][0][0] is 2, q[1][0][1] is 3, and 4, 5, and 6 initialize q[2][0][0], q[2][0][1], and
     q[2][1][0], respectively; all the rest are zero. The initializer for q[0][0] does not begin with a left brace, so up
     to six items from the current list could be used. There is only one, so the values for the remaining five elements
     are initialized with zero. Likewise, the initializers for q[1][0] and q[2][0] do not begin with a left brace, so
     each uses up to six items, initializing their respective two-dimensional subaggregates. If there had been more
     than six items in any of the lists, a diagnostic message would have been issued. The same initialization result
     could have been achieved by:

               short q[4][3][2] = {
                     1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0,
                     2, 3, 0, 0, 0, 0,
                     4, 5, 6
               };

     or by:

               short q[4][3][2] = {
                     {
                           { 1 },
                     },
                     {
                           { 2, 3 },
                     },
                     {
                           { 4, 5 },
                           { 6 },
                     }
               };

     in a fully bracketed form.
31   Note that the fully bracketed and minimally bracketed forms of initialization are, in general, less likely to cause
     confusion.
32   EXAMPLE 7 One form of initialization that completes array types involves typedef names. Given the declara-
     tion

               typedef int A[];       // OK - declared with block scope

     the declaration

               A a = { 1, 2 }, b = { 3, 4, 5 };

     is identical to

               int a[] = { 1, 2 }, b[] = { 3, 4, 5 };

     due to the rules for incomplete types.
33   EXAMPLE 8 The declaration

               char s[] = "abc", t[3] = "abc";

     defines "plain" char array objects s and t whose elements are initialized with character string literals. This
     declaration is identical to

               char s[] = { ’a’, ’b’, ’c’, ’\0’ },
                    t[] = { ’a’, ’b’, ’c’ };

     The contents of the arrays are modifiable. On the other hand, the declaration

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                     § 6.7.11
                                                      Language — 140

                char *p = "abc";

     defines p with type "pointer to char" and initializes it to point to an object with type "array of char" with
     length 4 whose elements are initialized with a character string literal. If an attempt is made to use p to modify
     the contents of the array, the behavior is undefined.
34   EXAMPLE 9 Arrays can be initialized to correspond to the elements of an enumeration by using designators:

                enum { member_one, member_two };
                const char *nm[] = {
                      [member_two] = "member two",
                      [member_one] = "member one",
                };

35   EXAMPLE 10 Structure members can be initialized to nonzero values without depending on their order:

                div_t answer = {.quot = 2, .rem = -1 };

36   EXAMPLE 11 Designators can be used to provide explicit initialization when unadorned initializer lists are
     difficult to understand:

                struct { int a[3], b; } w[] =
                      { [0].a = {1}, [1].a[0] = 2 };

37   EXAMPLE 12

                struct T {
                      int k;
                      int l;
                };

                struct S {
                      int i;
                      struct T t;
                };

                struct T x = {.l = 43, .k = 42, };

                void f(void)
                {
                      struct S l = { 1, .t = x, .t.l = 41, };
                }

     The value of l.t.k is 42, because implicit initialization does not override explicit initialization.
38   EXAMPLE 13 Space can be "allocated" from both ends of an array by using a single designator:

                int a[A_MAX] = {
                      1, 3, 5, 7, 9, [A_MAX-5] = 8, 6, 4, 2, 0
                };

     In the preceding snippet, if A_MAX is greater than ten, there will be some zero-valued elements in the middle; if
     it is less than ten, some of the values provided by the first five initializers will be overridden by the second five.
39   EXAMPLE 14 Any member of a union can be initialized:

                union { /* ... */ } u = {.any_member = 42 };

     Forward references: common definitions <stddef.h> (7.21).

     § 6.7.11                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                     Language — 141

    6.7.12     Static assertions
    Syntax
1    static_assert-declaration:
                          static_assert ( constant-expression , string-literal ) ;
                          static_assert ( constant-expression ) ;

    Constraints
2   The constant expression shall compare unequal to 0.

    Semantics
3   The constant expression shall be an integer constant expression. If the value of the constant expres-
    sion compares unequal to 0, the declaration has no effect. Otherwise, the constraint is violated and
    the implementation shall produce a diagnostic message which should include the text of the string
    literal, if present.
    Forward references: diagnostics (7.2).

    6.7.13     Attributes
    6.7.13.1 Introduction
1   Attributes specify additional information for various source constructs such as types, objects,
    identifiers, or blocks. They are identified by an attribute token, which can either be a attribute prefixed
    token (for implementation-specific attributes) or a standard attribute specified by an identifier (for
    attributes specified in this document).
2   Support for any of the standard attributes specified in this document is implementation-defined
    and optional. For an attribute token (including an attribute prefixed token) not specified in this
    document, the behavior is implementation-defined. Any attribute token that is not supported by the
    implementation is ignored.
3   Attributes are said to appertain to some source construct, identified by the syntactic context where
    they appear, and for each individual attribute, the corresponding clause constrains the syntactic
    context in which this appurtenance is valid. The attribute specifier sequence appertaining to some
    source construct shall contain only attributes that are allowed to apply to that source construct.
4   In all aspects of the language, a standard attribute specified by this document as an identifier attr
    and an identifier of the form __attr__ shall behave the same when used as an attribute token,
    except for the spelling.172)
5   For all standard attributes specified by this document, the current value when its token sequence is
    given to the __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) is written in the associated
    subclause for that attribute. A history of those values can be found in Annex M.

    Recommended practice
6   It is recommended that implementations support all standard attributes as defined in this document.

    6.7.13.2 General
    Syntax
1    attribute-specifier-sequence:
                          attribute-specifier-sequenceopt attribute-specifier
      attribute-specifier:
                          [ [ attribute-list ] ]
      attribute-list:
                          attributeopt
                          attribute-list , attributeopt

     172) Thus, the attributes [[nodiscard]] and [[__nodiscard__]] can be freely interchanged. Implementations are encour-

    aged to behave similarly for attribute tokens (including attribute prefixed tokens) they provide.

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                   § 6.7.13.2
                                                      Language — 142

      attribute:
                          attribute-token attribute-argument-clauseopt
      attribute-token:
                        standard-attribute
                        attribute-prefixed-token
      standard-attribute:
                        identifier

      attribute-prefixed-token:
                         attribute-prefix :: identifier
      attribute-prefix:
                         identifier
      attribute-argument-clause:
                         ( balanced-token-sequenceopt )
      balanced-token-sequence:
                         balanced-token
                         balanced-token-sequence balanced-token
      balanced-token:
                         ( balanced-token-sequenceopt )
                         [ balanced-token-sequenceopt ]
                         { balanced-token-sequenceopt }
                        any token other than a parenthesis, a bracket, or a brace

    Constraints
2   The identifier in a standard attribute shall be one of:

    deprecated                    maybe_unused                   noreturn                       unsequenced
    fallthrough                   nodiscard                      _Noreturn                      reproducible

    Semantics
3   An attribute specifier that contains no attributes has no effect. The order in which attribute tokens
    appear in an attribute list is not significant. If a keyword (6.4.1) that satisfies the syntactic require-
    ments of an identifier (6.4.2) is contained in an attribute token, it is considered an identifier. A strictly
    conforming program using a standard attribute remains strictly conforming in the absence of that
    attribute.173)
4   NOTE For each standard attribute, the form of the balanced token sequence, if any, will be specified.

    Recommended practice
5   Each implementation should choose a distinctive name for the attribute prefix in an attribute
    prefixed token. Implementations should not define attributes without an attribute prefix unless it is
    a standard attribute as specified in this document.
6   EXAMPLE 1 Suppose that an implementation chooses the attribute prefix hal and provides specific attributes
    named daisy and rosie.

     [[deprecated, hal::daisy]] double nine1000(double);
     [[deprecated]] [[hal::daisy]] double nine1000(double);
     [[deprecated]] double nine1000 [[hal::daisy]] (double);

    Then all the following declarations should be equivalent aside from the spelling:

     [[__deprecated__, __hal__::__daisy__]] double nine1000(double);
     [[__deprecated__]] [[__hal__::__daisy__]] double nine1000(double);
     [[__deprecated__]] double nine1000 [[__hal__::__daisy__]] (double);

     173) Standard attributes specified by this document can be parsed but ignored by an implementation without changing the

    semantics of a correct program; the same is not true for attributes not specified by this document.

    § 6.7.13.2                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                     Language — 143

    These use the alternate spelling that is required for all standard attributes and recommended for prefixed
    attributes. These may be better-suited for use in header files, where the use of the alternate spelling avoids
    naming conflicts with user-provided macros.
7   EXAMPLE 2 For the same implementation, the following two declarations are equivalent, because the ordering
    inside attribute lists is not important.

     [[hal::daisy, hal::rosie]] double nine999(double);
     [[hal::rosie, hal::daisy]] double nine999(double);

    On the other hand the following two declarations are not equivalent, because the ordering of different attribute
    specifiers may affect the semantics.

     [[hal::daisy]] [[hal::rosie]] double nine999(double);
     [[hal::rosie]] [[hal::daisy]] double nine999(double); // may have different semantics

    6.7.13.3 The nodiscard attribute
    Constraints
1   The nodiscard attribute shall be applied to a function or to the definition of a structure, union, or
    enumerated type. If an attribute argument clause is present, it shall have the form:
              ( string-literal )

    Semantics
2   The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
    when given nodiscard as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.
3   A name or entity declared without the nodiscard attribute can later be redeclared with the attribute
    and vice versa. An entity is considered marked after the first declaration that marks it.

    Recommended practice
4   A nodiscard call is a function call expression that calls a function previously declared with attribute
    nodiscard, or whose return type is a structure, union, or enumerated type marked with attribute
    nodiscard. Evaluation of a nodiscard call as a void expression (6.8.4) is discouraged unless explicitly
    cast to void. Implementations are encouraged to issue a diagnostic in such cases. This is typically
    because immediately discarding the return value of a nodiscard call has surprising consequences.
5   The diagnostic message should include text provided by the string literal within the attribute
    argument clause of any nodiscard attribute applied to the name or entity.
6   EXAMPLE 1

     struct [[nodiscard]] error_info { /*...*/ };
     struct error_info enable_missile_safety_mode(void);
     void launch_missiles(void);
     void test_missiles(void) {
           enable_missile_safety_mode();
           launch_missiles();
     }

    A diagnostic for the call to enable_missile_safety_mode is encouraged.
7   EXAMPLE 2

     [[nodiscard]] int important_func(void);
     void call(void) {
           int i = important_func();
     }

    No diagnostic for the call to important_func is encouraged despite the value of i not being used.
8   EXAMPLE 3

                                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                § 6.7.13.3
                                                   Language — 144

              [[nodiscard("armer needs to check armed state")]]
              bool arm_detonator(int within);

              void call(void) {
                    arm_detonator(3);
                    detonate();
              }

    A diagnostic for the call to arm_detonator using the string literal "armer needs to check armed state"
    from the attribute argument clause is encouraged.

    6.7.13.4 The maybe_unused attribute
    Constraints
1   The maybe_unused attribute shall be applied to the declaration of a structure, a union, a typedef
    name, an object, a structure or union member, a function, an enumeration, an enumerator, or a label.
    No attribute argument clause shall be present.

    Semantics
2   The maybe_unused attribute indicates that a name or entity is possibly intentionally unused.
3   The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
    when given maybe_unused as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.
    A name or entity declared without the maybe_unused attribute can later be redeclared with the
    attribute and vice versa. An entity is considered marked with the attribute after the first declaration
    that marks it.

    Recommended practice
4   For an entity marked maybe_unused, implementations are encouraged not to emit a diagnostic that
    the entity is unused, or that the entity is used despite the presence of the attribute.
5   EXAMPLE

      [[maybe_unused]] void f([[maybe_unused]] int i) {
            [[maybe_unused]] int j = i + 100;
            assert(j);
      }

    Implementations are encouraged not to diagnose that j is unused, even if NDEBUG is defined.

    6.7.13.5 The deprecated attribute
    Constraints
1   The deprecated attribute shall be applied to the declaration of a structure, a union, a typedef name,
    an object, a structure or union member, a function, an enumeration, or an enumerator.
2   If an attribute argument clause is present, it shall have the form:
                 ( string-literal )

    Semantics
3   The deprecated attribute can be used to mark names and entities whose use is still allowed, but is
    discouraged for some reason.174)
4   The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
    when given deprecated as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.
5   A name or entity declared without the deprecated attribute can later be redeclared with the attribute
    and vice versa. An entity is considered marked with the attribute after the first declaration that
    marks it.
     174) In particular, deprecated is appropriate for names and entities that are obsolescent, insecure, unsafe, or otherwise unfit

    for purpose.

    § 6.7.13.5                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 145

    Recommended practice
6   Implementations should use the deprecated attribute to produce a diagnostic message in case the
    program refers to a name or entity other than to declare it, after a declaration that specifies the
    attribute, when the reference to the name or entity is not within the context of a related deprecated
    entity. The diagnostic message should include text provided by the string literal within the attribute
    argument clause of any deprecated attribute applied to the name or entity.
7   EXAMPLE

     struct [[deprecated]] S {
           int a;
     };

     enum [[deprecated]] E1 {
           one
     };

     enum E2 {
           two [[deprecated("use ’three’ instead")]],
           three
     };

     [[deprecated]] typedef int Foo;

     void f1(struct S s) { // Diagnose use of S
           int i = one; // Diagnose use of E1
           int j = two; // Diagnose use of two: "use ’three’ instead"
           int k = three;
           Foo f; // Diagnose use of Foo
     }

     [[deprecated]] void f2(struct S s) {
           int i = one;
           int j = two;
           int k = three;
           Foo f;
     }

     struct [[deprecated]] T {
           Foo f;
           struct S s;
     };

    Implementations are encouraged to diagnose the use of deprecated entities within a context which is not itself
    deprecated, as indicated for function f1, but not to diagnose within function f2 and struct T, as they are
    themselves deprecated.

    6.7.13.6 The fallthrough attribute
    Constraints
1   The attribute token fallthrough shall only appear in an attribute declaration (6.7); such a dec-
    laration is a fallthrough declaration. No attribute argument clause shall be present. A fallthrough
    declaration may only appear within an enclosing switch statement (6.8.5.3). The next block item
    (6.8.3) that would be encountered after a fallthrough declaration shall be a case label or default
    label associated with the innermost enclosing switch statement and, if the fallthrough declaration is
    contained in an iteration statement, the next statement shall be part of the same execution of the
    secondary block of the innermost enclosing iteration statement.

    Semantics
2   The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
    when given fallthrough as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.

                                        © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                               § 6.7.13.6
                                                  Language — 146

    Recommended practice
3   The use of a fallthrough declaration is intended to suppress a diagnostic that an implementation may
    otherwise issue for a case or default label that is reachable from another case or default label
    along some path of execution. Implementations are encouraged to issue a diagnostic if a fallthrough
    declaration is not dynamically reachable.
4   EXAMPLE

     void f(int n) {
           void g(void), h(void), i(void);
           switch (n) {
           case 1: /* diagnostic on fallthrough discouraged */
           case 2:
                 g();
                 [[fallthrough]];
           case 3: /* diagnostic on fallthrough discouraged */
                 do {
                       [[fallthrough]]; /* constraint violation: next statement is not
                                           part of the same secondary block execution */
                 } while(false);
           case 6:
                 do {
                       [[fallthrough]]; /* constraint violation: next statement is not
                                           part of the same secondary block execution */
                 } while (n--);
           case 7:
                 while (false) {
                       [[fallthrough]]; /* constraint violation: next statement is not
                                           part of the same secondary block execution */
                 }
           case 5:
                 h();
           case 4: /* fallthrough diagnostic encouraged */
                 i();
                 [[fallthrough]]; /* constraint violation */
           }
     }

    6.7.13.7 The noreturn and _Noreturn attributes
    Description
1   When _Noreturn is used as an attribute token (instead of a function specifier), the constraints and
    semantics are identical to that of the noreturn attribute token. Use of _Noreturn as an attribute
    token is an obsolescent feature.175)

    Constraints
2   The noreturn attribute shall be applied to a function. No attribute argument clause shall be present.

    Semantics
3   The first declaration of a function shall specify the noreturn attribute if any declaration of that
    function specifies the noreturn attribute. If a function is declared with the noreturn attribute in
    one translation unit and the same function is declared without the noreturn attribute in another
    translation unit, the behavior is undefined.
4   If a function f is called where f was previously declared with the noreturn attribute and f eventually
    returns, the behavior is undefined.
5   The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
    when given noreturn as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.
     175) [[_Noreturn]] and [[noreturn]] are equivalent attributes to support code that includes <stdnoreturn.h>, because

    that header defines noreturn as a macro that expands to _Noreturn.

    § 6.7.13.7                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 147

    Recommended practice
6   The implementation should produce a diagnostic message for a function declared with a noreturn
    attribute that appears to be capable of returning to its caller.
7   EXAMPLE

      [[noreturn]] void f(void) {
            abort(); // ok
      }

      [[noreturn]] void g(int i) { // causes undefined behavior if i <= 0
            if (i > 0) abort();
      }

      [[noreturn]] int h(void);

    Implementations are encouraged to diagnose the definition of g() because it is capable of returning to its caller.
    Implementations are similarly encouraged to diagnose the declaration of h() because it appears capable of
    returning to its caller due to the non-void return type.

    6.7.13.8 Standard attributes for function types
    6.7.13.8.1 General
    Constraints
1   The identifier in a standard function type attribute shall be one of:

    unsequenced                     reproducible

2   An attribute for a function type shall be applied to a function declarator176) or to a type specifier that
    has a function type. The corresponding attribute is a property of the function type.177) No attribute
    argument clause shall be present.

    Description
3   The main purpose of the function type properties and attributes defined in this clause is to provide
    the translator with information about the access of objects by a function such that certain prop-
    erties of function calls can be deduced; the properties distinguish read operations (stateless and
    independent) and write operations (effectless, idempotent and reproducible) or a combination of
    both (unsequenced). Although semantically attached to a function type, the attributes described are
    not part of the prototype of such a function, and redeclarations and conversions that drop such an
    attribute are valid and constitute compatible types. Conversely, if a definition that does not have the
    asserted property is accessed by a function declaration or a function pointer with a type that has the
    attribute, the behavior is undefined.178)
4   To allow reordering of calls to functions as they are described here, possible access to objects with a
    lifetime that starts before or ends after a call has to be restricted; effects on all objects that are accessed
    during a function call are restricted to the same thread as the call and the based-on relation between
    pointer parameters and lvalues (6.7.4.2) models the fact that objects do not change inadvertently
    during the call. In the following, an operation is said to be sequenced during a function call if it is
    sequenced after the start of the function call179) and before the call terminates. An object definition
    of an object X in a function f escapes if an access to X happens while no call to f is active. An object
    is local to a call to a function f if its lifetime starts and ends during the call or if it is defined by f
     176) That is, they appear in the attributes right after the closing parenthesis of the parameter list, independently of whether

    the function type is, for example, used directly to declare a function or whether it is used in a pointer to function type.
     177) If several declarations of the same function or function pointer are visible, regardless whether an attribute is present

    at several or just one of the declarators, it is attached to the type of the corresponding function definition, function pointer
    object, or function pointer value.
     178) That is, the fact that a function has one of these properties is in general not determined by the specification of the

    translation unit in which it is found; other translation units and specific run time conditions also condition the possible
    assertion of the properties.
     179) The initializations of the parameters is sequenced during the function call.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                       § 6.7.13.8.1
                                                          Language — 148

     but does not escape. A function call and an object X synchronize if all accesses to X that are not
     sequenced during the call happen before or after the call. Execution state that is described in the
     library clause, such as the floating-point environment, conversion state, locale, input/output streams,
     external files or errno are considered as objects for the purposes of these attributes; operations that
     access this state, even indirectly, are considered as lvalue conversions for the purposes of these
     attributes, and operations that allow to change this state are considered as store operations, for the
     purposes of these attributes.
5    A function definition f is stateless if any definition of an object of static or thread storage duration in
     f or in a function that is called by f is const but not volatile qualified.
6    An object X is observed by a function call if both synchronize, if X is not local to the call, if X has a
     lifetime that starts before the function call and if an access of X is sequenced during the call; the last
     value of X, if any, that is stored before the call is said to be the value of X that is observed by the
     call. A function pointer value f is independent if for any object X that is observed by some call to f
     through an lvalue that is not based on a parameter of the call, then all accesses to X in all calls to
     f during the same program execution observe the same value; otherwise if the access is based on
     a pointer parameter, there shall be a unique such pointer parameter P such that any access to X
     shall be to an lvalue that is based on P . A function definition is independent if the derived function
     pointer value is independent.
7    A store operation to an object X that is sequenced during a function call such that both synchronize
     is said to be observable if X is not local to the call, if the lifetime of X ends after the call, if the stored
     value is different from the value observed by the call, if any, and if it is the last value written before
     the termination of the call. An evaluation of a function call180) is effectless if any store operation
     that is sequenced during the call is the modification of an object that synchronizes with the call; if
     additionally the operation is observable, there shall be a unique pointer parameter P of the function
     such that any access to X shall be to an lvalue that is based on P . A function pointer value f is
     effectless if any evaluation of a function call that calls f is effectless. A function definition is effectless
     if the derived function pointer value is effectless.
8    An evaluation E is idempotent if a second evaluation of E can be sequenced immediately after the
     original one without changing the resulting value, if any, or the observable state of the execution.
     A function pointer value f is idempotent if any evaluation of a function call181) that calls f is
     idempotent. A function definition is idempotent if the derived function pointer value is idempotent.
9    A function is reproducible if it is effectless and idempotent; it is unsequenced if it is stateless, effectless,
     idempotent and independent.182)
10   NOTE 1 The synchronization requirements with respect to any accessed object X for the independence of
     functions provide boundaries up to which a function call may safely be reordered without changing the
     semantics of the program. If X is const but not volatile qualified the reordering is unconstrained. If it is an
     object that is conditioned in an initialization phase, for a single threaded program a synchronization is provided
     by the sequenced before relation and the reordering may, in principle, move the call just after the initialization.
     For a multi-threaded program, synchronization guarantees can be given by calls to synchronizing functions
     of the <threads.h> header or by an appropriate call to atomic_thread_fence at the end of the initialization
     phase. If a function is known to be independent or effectless, adding restrict qualifications to the declarations
     of all pointer parameters does not change the semantics of any call. Similarly, changing the memory order to
     memory_order_relaxed for all atomic operations during a call to such a function preserves semantics.
11   NOTE 2 In general the functions provided by the <math.h> header do not have the properties that are defined
     previously in this subclause; many of them change the floating-point state or errno when they encounter an
     error (so they have observable side effects) and the results of most of them depend on execution-wide state
     such as the rounding direction mode (so they are not independent). Whether a particular C library function
     is reproducible or unsequenced additionally often depends on properties of the implementation, such as
      180) This considers the evaluation of the function call itself, not the evaluation of a full function call expression. Such an

     evaluation is sequenced after all evaluations that determine f and the call arguments, if any, have been performed.
      181) This considers the evaluation of the function call itself, not the evaluation of a full function call expression. Such an

     evaluation is sequenced after all evaluations that determine f and the call arguments, if any, have been performed.
      182) A function call of an unsequenced function can be executed as early as the function pointer value, the values of the

     arguments and all objects that are accessible through them, and all values of globally accessible state have been determined,
     and it can be executed as late as the arguments and the objects they possibly target are unchanged and as any of its return
     value or modified pointed-to arguments are accessed.

     § 6.7.13.8.1                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 149

     implementation-defined behavior for certain error conditions.

     Recommended practice
12   If possible, it is recommended that implementations diagnose if an attribute of this clause is applied
     to a function definition that does not have the corresponding property. It is recommended that appli-
     cations that assert the independent or effectless properties for functions qualify pointer parameters
     with restrict.
     Forward references: errors <errno.h> (7.5), floating-point environment <fenv.h> (7.6), local-
     ization <locale.h> (7.11), mathematics <math.h> (7.12), fences (7.17.4), input/output <stdio.h>
     (7.23), threads <threads.h> (7.28), extended multibyte and wide character utilities <wchar.h>
     (7.31).

     6.7.13.8.2 The reproducible type attribute
     Description
1    The reproducible type attribute asserts that a function or pointed-to function with that type is
     reproducible.
2    The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
     when given reproducible as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.
3    EXAMPLE The attribute in the following function declaration asserts that two consecutive calls to the function
     will result in the same return value. Changes to the abstract state during the call are possible as long as they
     are not observable, but no other side effects will occur. Thus the function definition may for example use local
     objects of static or thread storage duration to keep track of the arguments for which the function has been called
     and cache their computed return values.

                      size_t hash(char const[static 32]) [[reproducible]];

     6.7.13.8.3 The unsequenced type attribute
     Description
1    The unsequenced type attribute asserts that a function or pointed-to function with that type is
     unsequenced.
2    The __has_c_attribute conditional inclusion expression (6.10.2) shall return the value 202311L
     when given unsequenced as the pp-tokens operand if the implementation supports the attribute.
3    NOTE 1 The unsequenced type attribute asserts strong properties for such a function, in particular that
     certain sequencing requirements for function calls can be relaxed without affecting the state of the abstract
     machine. Thereby, calls to such functions are natural candidates for optimization techniques such as common
     subexpression elimination, local memoization or lazy evaluation.
4    NOTE 2 A proof of validity of the annotation of a function type with the unsequenced attribute may depend
     on the property of whether a derived function pointer escapes the translation unit or not. For a function with
     internal linkage where no function pointer escapes the translation unit, all calling contexts are known and it is
     possible, in principle, to prove that no control flow exists such that a library function is called with arguments
     that trigger an exceptional condition. For a function with external linkage such a proof may not be possible and
     the use of such a function then has to ensure that no exceptional condition results from the provided arguments.
5    NOTE 3 The unsequenced property does not necessarily imply that the function is reentrant or that calls can
     be executed concurrently. This is because an unsequenced function can read from and write to objects of static
     storage duration, as long as no change is observable after a call terminates.
6    EXAMPLE 1 The attribute in the following function declaration asserts that it doesn’t depend on any modifiable
     state of the abstract machine. Calls to the function can be executed out of sequence before the return value is
     needed and two calls to the function with the same argument value will result in the same return value.

                      bool tendency(signed char) [[unsequenced]];

     Therefore such a call for a given argument value needs only to be executed once and the returned value can be
     reused when appropriate. For example, calls for all possible argument values can be executed during program
     startup and tabulated.

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                               § 6.7.13.8.3
                                                     Language — 150

7   EXAMPLE 2 The attribute in the following function declaration asserts that it doesn’t depend on any modifiable
    state of the abstract machine. Within the same thread, calls to the function can be executed out of sequence
    before the return value is needed and two calls to the function will result in the same pointer return value.
    Therefore such a call needs only to be executed once in a given thread and the returned pointer value can be
    reused when appropriate. For example, a single call can be executed during thread startup and the return value
    p and the value of the object *p of type toto const can be cached.

                     typedef struct toto toto;
                     toto const* toto_zero(void) [[unsequenced]];

8   EXAMPLE 3 The unsequenced property of a function f can be locally asserted within a function g that uses it.
    For example the library function sqrt is in general not unsequenced because a negative argument will raise a
    domain error and because the result may depend on the rounding mode. Nevertheless in contexts similar to the
    following function a user can prove that it will not be called with invalid arguments, and, that the floating-point
    environment has the same value for all calls.

                     #include <math.h>
                     #include <fenv.h>

                     inline double distance (double const x[static 2]) [[reproducible]] {
                           #pragma STDC FP_CONTRACT OFF
                           #pragma STDC FENV_ROUND FE_TONEAREST
                           // We assert that sqrt will not be called with invalid arguments
                           // and the result only depends on the argument value.
                           extern typeof(sqrt) [[unsequenced]] sqrt;
                           return sqrt(x[0]*x[0] + x[1]*x[1]);
                     }

    The function distance potentially has the side effect of changing the floating-point environment. Nevertheless
    the floating environment is thread local, thus a change to that state outside the function is sequenced with
    the change within and additionally the observed value is restored when the function returns. Thus this side
    effect is not observable for a caller. Overall the function distance is stateless, effectless and idempotent
    and in particular it is reproducible as the attribute indicates. Because the function can be called in a context
    where the floating-point environment has different state, distance is not independent and thus it is also not
    unsequenced. Nevertheless, adding an unsequenced attribute where this is justified may introduce optimization
    opportunities.

             double g (double y[static 1], double const x[static 2]) {
                   // We assert that distance will not see different states of the floating
                   // point environment.
                   extern double distance (double const x[static 2]) [[unsequenced]];
                   y[0] = distance(x);
                   ...
                   return distance(x);   // replacement by y[0] is valid
             }

    § 6.7.13.8.3                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Language — 151

    6.8 Statements and blocks
    6.8.1 General
    Syntax
1    statement:
                       labeled-statement
                       unlabeled-statement
      unlabeled-statement:
                       expression-statement
                       attribute-specifier-sequenceopt primary-block
                       attribute-specifier-sequenceopt jump-statement
      primary-block:
                       compound-statement
                       selection-statement
                       iteration-statement

       secondary-block:
                          statement

    Semantics
2   A statement specifies an action to be performed. Except as indicated, statements are executed in
    sequence. The optional attribute specifier sequence appertains to the respective statement.
3   A block is either a primary block, a secondary block, or the block associated with a function definition;
    it allows a set of declarations and statements to be grouped into one syntactic unit. Whenever a
    block B appears in the syntax production as part of the definition of an enclosing block A, scopes of
    identifiers and lifetimes of objects that are associated with B do not extend to the parts of A that are
    outside of B. The initializers of objects that have automatic storage duration, and any size expressions
    and typeof operators in declarations of ordinary identifiers with block scope, are evaluated and
    the values are stored in the objects (the representation of objects without an initializer becomes
    indeterminate) each time the declaration is reached in the order of execution, as if it were a statement,
    and within each declaration in the order that declarators appear.
4   A full expression is an expression that is not part of another expression, nor part of a declarator
    or abstract declarator. There is also an implicit full expression in which the non-constant size
    expressions for a variably modified type are evaluated; within that full expression, the evaluation of
    different size expressions are unsequenced with respect to one another. There is a sequence point
    between the evaluation of a full expression and the evaluation of the next full expression to be
    evaluated.
5   NOTE Each of the following is a full expression:

       — a full declarator for a variably modified type,
       — an initializer that is not part of a compound literal,
       — the expression in an expression statement,
       — the controlling expression of a selection statement (if or switch),
       — the controlling expression of a while or do statement,
       — each of the (optional) expressions of a for statement,
       — the (optional) expression in a return statement.

    While a constant expression satisfies the definition of a full expression, evaluating it does not depend on nor
    produce any side effects, so the sequencing implications of being a full expression are not relevant to a constant
    expression.
    Forward references: expression and null statements (6.8.4), selection statements (6.8.5), iteration
    statements (6.8.6), the return statement (6.8.7.5).

                                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                    § 6.8.1
                                                    Language — 152

    6.8.2     Labeled statements
    Syntax
1    label:
                        attribute-specifier-sequenceopt identifier :
                        attribute-specifier-sequenceopt case constant-expression :
                        attribute-specifier-sequenceopt default :
      labeled-statement:
                        label statement

    Constraints
2   A case or default label shall appear only in a switch statement. Further constraints on such labels
    are discussed under the switch statement.
3   Label names shall be unique within a function.

    Semantics
4   Any statement or declaration in a compound statement may be preceded by a prefix that declares an
    identifier as a label name. The optional attribute specifier sequence appertains to the label. Labels in
    themselves do not alter the flow of control, which continues unimpeded across them.
    Forward references: the goto statement (6.8.7.2), the switch statement (6.8.5.3) .

    6.8.3     Compound statement
    Syntax
1    compound-statement:
                           { block-item-listopt }
      block-item-list:
                           block-item
                           block-item-list block-item
      block-item:
                           declaration
                           unlabeled-statement
                           label

    Semantics
2   A compound statement that is a function body together with the parameter type list and the optional
    attribute specifier sequence between them forms the block associated with the function definition
    in which it appears. Otherwise, it is a block that is different from any other block. A label shall be
    translated as if it were followed by a null statement.

    6.8.4     Expression and null statements
    Syntax
1    expression-statement:
                       expressionopt ;
                       attribute-specifier-sequence expression ;

    Semantics
2   The attribute specifier sequence appertains to the expression. The expression in an expression
    statement is evaluated as a void expression for its side effects.183)
3   A null statement (consisting of just a semicolon) performs no operations.
    183) Such as assignments, and function calls which have side effects.

    § 6.8.4                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                       Language — 153

4   EXAMPLE 1 If a function call is evaluated as an expression statement for its side effects only, the discarding of
    its value can be made explicit by converting the expression to a void expression by means of a cast:

              int p(int);
              /* ... */
              (void)p(0);

5   EXAMPLE 2 In the program fragment

              char *s;
              /* ... */
              while (*s++ != ’\0’)
                    ;

    a null statement is used to supply an empty loop body to the iteration statement.
    Forward references: iteration statements (6.8.6).

    6.8.5     Selection statements
    6.8.5.1 General
    Syntax
1    selection-statement:
                            if ( expression ) secondary-block
                            if ( expression ) secondary-block else secondary-block
                            switch ( expression ) secondary-block

    Semantics
2   A selection statement selects among a set of secondary blocks depending on the value of a controlling
    expression.

    6.8.5.2 The if statement
    Constraints
1   The controlling expression of an if statement shall have scalar type.

    Semantics
2   In both forms, the first substatement is executed if the expression compares unequal to 0. In the
    else form, the second substatement is executed if the expression compares equal to 0. If the first
    substatement is reached via a label, the second substatement is not executed.
3   An else is associated with the lexically nearest preceding if that is allowed by the syntax.

    6.8.5.3 The switch statement
    Constraints
1   The controlling expression of a switch statement shall have integer type.
2   If a switch statement has an associated case or default label within the scope of an identifier with
    a variably modified type, the entire switch statement shall be within the scope of that identifier.184)
3   The expression of each case label shall be an integer constant expression and no two of the case
    constant expressions associated to the same switch statement shall have the same value after
    conversion. There may be at most one default label associated to a switch statement. (Any
    enclosed switch statement may have a default label or case constant expressions with values that
    duplicate case constant expressions in the enclosing switch statement.)

     184) That is, the declaration either precedes the switch statement, or it follows the last case or default label associated with

    the switch that is in the block containing the declaration.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                           § 6.8.5.3
                                                          Language — 154

    Semantics
4   A switch statement causes control to jump to, into, or past the statement that is the switch body,
    depending on the value of a controlling expression, and on the presence of a default label and the
    values of any case labels on or in the switch body. A case or default label is accessible only within
    the closest enclosing switch statement.
5   The integer promotions are performed on the controlling expression. The constant expression in
    each case label is converted to the promoted type of the controlling expression. If a converted value
    matches that of the promoted controlling expression, control jumps to the statement or declaration
    following the matched case label. Otherwise, if there is a default label, control jumps to the
    statement or declaration following the default label. If no converted case constant expression
    matches and there is no default label, no part of the switch body is executed.

    Implementation limits
6   As discussed in 5.2.5.2, the implementation may limit the number of case values in a switch
    statement.
7   EXAMPLE In the artificial program fragment

                switch (expr)
                {
                      int i = 4;
                      f(i);
                case 0:
                      i = 17;
                      /* falls through into default code */
                default:
                      printf("%d\n", i);
                }

    the object whose identifier is i exists with automatic storage duration (within the block) but is never initialized,
    and thus if the controlling expression has a nonzero value, the call to the printf function will access an object
    with an indeterminate representation. Similarly, the call to the function f cannot be reached.

    6.8.6       Iteration statements
    6.8.6.1 General
    Syntax
1    iteration-statement:
                           while ( expression ) secondary-block
                           do secondary-block while ( expression ) ;
                           for ( expressionopt ; expressionopt ; expressionopt ) secondary-block
                           for ( declaration expressionopt ; expressionopt ) secondary-block

    Constraints
2   The controlling expression of an iteration statement shall have scalar type.

    Semantics
3   An iteration statement causes a secondary block called the loop body to be executed repeatedly until
    the controlling expression compares equal to 0. The repetition occurs regardless of whether the loop
    body is entered from the iteration statement or by a jump.185)
4   An iteration statement may be assumed by the implementation to terminate if its controlling
    expression is not a constant expression,186) and none of the following operations are performed in its

    185) Code jumped over is not executed. In particular, the controlling expression of a for or while statement is not evaluated

    before entering the loop body, nor is clause-1 (6.8.6.4) of a for statement.
     186) An omitted controlling expression is replaced by a nonzero constant, which is a constant expression.

    § 6.8.6.1                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 155

    body, controlling expression or (in the case of a for statement) its expression-3:187)

      — input/output operations

      — accessing a volatile object

      — synchronization or atomic operations.

    6.8.6.2 The while statement
1   The evaluation of the controlling expression takes place before each execution of the loop body.

    6.8.6.3 The do statement
1   The evaluation of the controlling expression takes place after each execution of the loop body.

    6.8.6.4 The for statement
1   The statement

              for (clause-1; expression-2; expression-3) statement

    behaves as follows: The expression expression-2 is the controlling expression that is evaluated before
    each execution of the loop body. The expression expression-3 is evaluated as a void expression after
    each execution of the loop body. If clause-1 is a declaration, the scope of any identifiers it declares
    is the remainder of the declaration and the entire loop, including the other two expressions; it is
    reached in the order of execution before the first evaluation of the controlling expression. If clause-1
    is an expression, it is evaluated as a void expression before the first evaluation of the controlling
    expression.188)
2   Both clause-1 and expression-3 can be omitted. An omitted expression-2 is replaced by a nonzero
    constant.

    6.8.7     Jump statements
    6.8.7.1 General
    Syntax
1    jump-statement:
                           goto identifier ;
                           continue ;
                           break ;
                           return expressionopt ;

    Semantics
2   A jump statement causes an unconditional jump to another place.

    6.8.7.2 The goto statement
    Constraints
1   The identifier in a goto statement shall name a label located somewhere in the enclosing function. A
    goto statement shall not jump from outside the scope of an identifier having a variably modified
    type to inside the scope of that identifier.

     187) This is intended to allow compiler transformations such as removal of empty loops even when termination cannot be

    proven.
     188) Thus, clause-1 specifies initialization for the loop, possibly declaring one or more variables for use in the loop; the

    controlling expression, expression-2, specifies an evaluation made before each iteration, such that execution of the loop
    continues until the expression compares equal to 0; and expression-3 specifies an operation (such as incrementing) that is
    performed after each iteration.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 6.8.7.2
                                                         Language — 156

    Semantics
2   A goto statement causes an unconditional jump to the statement prefixed by the named label in the
    enclosing function.
3   EXAMPLE 1 It is sometimes convenient to jump into the middle of a complicated set of statements. The
    following outline presents one possible approach to a problem based on these three assumptions:

       1. The general initialization code accesses objects only visible to the current function.
       2. The general initialization code is too large to warrant duplication.
       3. The code to determine the next operation is at the head of the loop. (To allow it to be reached by continue
          statements, for example.)

                /* ... */
                goto first_time;
                for (;;) {
                      // determine next operation
                      /* ... */
                      if (need to reinitialize) {
                            // reinitialize-only code
                            /* ... */
                      first_time:
                            // general initialization code
                            /* ... */
                            continue;
                      }
                      // handle other operations
                      /* ... */
                }

4   EXAMPLE 2 A goto statement which jumps past any declarations of objects with variably modified types is
    not conforming. A jump within the scope, however, is valid.

                goto lab3;                 // invalid:      going INTO scope of VLA.
                {
                      double a[n];
                      a[j] = 4.4;
                lab3:
                      a[j] = 3.3;
                      goto lab4;           // valid:     going WITHIN scope of VLA.
                      a[j] = 5.5;
                lab4:
                      a[j] = 6.6;
                }
                goto lab4;                 // invalid:      going INTO scope of VLA.

    6.8.7.3 The continue statement
    Constraints
1   A continue statement shall appear only in or as a loop body.

    Semantics
2   A continue statement causes a jump to the loop-continuation portion of the innermost enclosing
    iteration statement; that is, to the end of the loop body. More precisely, in each of the statements

          while (/* ...      */) {           do {                                for (/* ... */) {
             /* ... */                          /* ... */                           /* ... */
             continue;                          continue;                           continue;
             /* ... */                          /* ... */                           /* ... */
          contin:                            contin:;                            contin:
          }                                  } while (/* ...       */);          }

    § 6.8.7.3                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                  Language — 157

    unless the continue statement shown is in an enclosed iteration statement (in which case it is
    interpreted within that statement), it is equivalent to goto contin; .189)

    6.8.7.4 The break statement
    Constraints
1   A break statement shall appear only in or as a switch body or loop body.

    Semantics
2   A break statement terminates execution of the innermost enclosing switch or iteration statement.

    6.8.7.5 The return statement
    Constraints
1   A return statement with an expression shall not appear in a function whose return type is void. A
    return statement without an expression shall only appear in a function whose return type is void.

    Semantics
2   A return statement terminates execution of the current function and returns control to its caller. A
    function may have any number of return statements.
3   If a return statement with an expression is executed, the value of the expression is returned to the
    caller as the value of the function call expression. If the expression has a type different from the
    return type of the function in which it appears, the value is converted as if by assignment to an
    object having the return type of the function.190)
4   EXAMPLE In:

              struct s { double i; } f(void);
              union {
                    struct {
                          int f1;
                          struct s f2;
                    } u1;
                    struct {
                          struct s f3;
                          int f4;
                    } u2;
              } g;

              struct s f(void)
              {
                    return g.u1.f2;
              }

              /* ... */
              g.u2.f3 = f();

    there is no undefined behavior, although there would be if the assignment were done directly (without using a
    function call to fetch the value).

     189) Following the contin: label in the 2nd example is a null statement. The null statement in the first and third example is

    implied by the label (6.8.3).
     190) The return statement is not an assignment. The overlap restriction of 6.5.17.2 does not apply to the case of function

    return. The representation of floating-point values can have wider range or precision than implied by the type; a cast can be
    used to remove this extra range and precision.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 6.8.7.5
                                                         Language — 158

    6.9 External definitions
    6.9.1 General
    Syntax
1    translation-unit:
                            external-declaration
                            translation-unit external-declaration

          external-declaration:
                            function-definition
                            declaration

    Constraints
2   The storage-class specifier register shall not appear in the declaration specifiers in an external
    declaration. The storage-class specifier auto shall only appear in the declaration specifiers in an
    external declaration if the type is inferred.
3   There shall be no more than one external definition for each identifier declared with internal linkage
    in a translation unit. Moreover, if an identifier declared with internal linkage is used in an expression
    there shall be exactly one external definition for the identifier in the translation unit, unless it is:

          — part of the operand of a sizeof operator whose result is an integer constant;
          — part of the operand of an alignof operator whose result is an integer constant;
          — part of the controlling expression of a generic selection;
          — part of the expression in a generic association that is not the result expression of its generic
            selection;
          — or, part of the operand of any typeof operator whose result is not a variably modified type.

    Semantics
4   As discussed in 5.1.1.1, the unit of program text after preprocessing is a translation unit, which
    consists of a sequence of external declarations. These are described as "external" because they
    appear outside any function (and hence have file scope). As discussed in 6.7, a declaration that also
    causes storage to be reserved for an object or a function named by the identifier is a definition.
5   An external definition is an external declaration that is also a definition of a function (other than an
    inline definition) or an object. If an identifier declared with external linkage is used in an expression
    (other than as part of the operand of a typeof operator whose result is not a variably modified type,
    part of the controlling expression of a generic selection, part of the expression in a generic association
    that is not the result expression of its generic selection, or part of a sizeof or alignof operator
    whose result is an integer constant expression), somewhere in the entire program there shall be
    exactly one external definition for the identifier; otherwise, there shall be no more than one.191)

    6.9.2       Function definitions
    Syntax
1    function-definition:
                         attribute-specifier-sequenceopt declaration-specifiers declarator function-body

          function-body:
                            compound-statement

     191) Thus, if an identifier declared with external linkage is not used in an expression, there need be no external definition for

    it.

    § 6.9.2                                   © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                          Language — 159

     Constraints
2    The identifier declared in a function definition (which is the name of the function) shall have a
     function type, as specified by the declarator portion of the function definition.
3    The return type of a function shall be void or a complete object type other than array type.
4    The storage-class specifier, if any, in the declaration specifiers shall be either extern or static.
5    If the parameter list consists of a single parameter of type void, the parameter declarator shall not
     include an identifier.
6    Variable length array types of unspecified size shall not be used as part of a parameter declaration
     in a function definition.

     Semantics
7    The optional attribute specifier sequence in a function definition appertains to the function.
8    The declarator in a function definition specifies the name of the function being defined and the
     types (and optionally the names) of all the parameters; the declarator also serves as a function
     prototype for later calls to the same function in the same translation unit. The type of each parameter
     is adjusted as described in 6.7.7.4.
9    If a function that accepts a variable number of arguments is defined without a parameter type list
     that ends with the ellipsis notation, the behavior is undefined.
10   The parameter type list, the attribute specifier sequence of the declarator that follows the parameter
     type list, and the compound statement of the function body form a single block.192) Each parameter
     has automatic storage duration; its identifier, if any,193) is an lvalue.194) The layout of the storage for
     parameters is unspecified.
11   On entry to the function, the size expressions of each variably modified parameter and typeof opera-
     tors used in declarations of parameters are evaluated and the value of each argument expression is
     converted to the type of the corresponding parameter as if by assignment. (Array expressions and
     function designators as arguments were converted to pointers before the call.)
12   After all parameters have been assigned, the compound statement of the function body is executed.
13   Unless otherwise specified, if the } that terminates the function body is reached, and the value of the
     function call is used by the caller, the behavior is undefined.
14   NOTE In a function definition, the return type of the function and its prototype cannot be inherited from a
     typedef:

               typedef int F(void);                           // type F is "function with no parameters
                                                              // returning int"
               F f, g;                                        // f and g both have type compatible with F
               F f { /* ... */ }                              // WRONG: syntax/constraint error
               F g() { /* ... */ }                            // WRONG: declares that g returns a function
               int f(void) { /* ... */ }                      // RIGHT: f has type compatible with F
               int g() { /* ... */ }                          // RIGHT: g has type compatible with F
               F *e(void) { /* ... */ }                       // e returns a pointer to a function
               F *((e))(void) { /* ... */ }                   // same: parentheses irrelevant
               int (*fp)(void);                               // fp points to a function that has type F
               F *Fp;                                         // Fp points to a function that has type F

15   EXAMPLE 1 In the following:

               extern int max(int a, int b)
               {

      192) The visibility scope of a parameter in a function definition starts when its declaration is completed, extends to following

     parameter declarations, to possible attributes that follow the parameter type list, and then to the entire function body. The
     lifetime of each instance of a parameter starts when the declaration is evaluated starting a call and ends when that call
     terminates.
      193) A parameter that has no declared name is inaccessible within the function body.
      194) A parameter identifier cannot be redeclared in the function body except in an enclosed block.

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                             § 6.9.2
                                                           Language — 160

                         return a   >   b ? a: b;
               }

     extern is the storage-class specifier and int is the type specifier; max(int a, int b) is the function declarator;
     and

               { return a     >     b ? a: b; }

     is the function body.
16   EXAMPLE 2 To pass one function to another, one can say

                         int f(void);
                         /* ... */
                         g(f);

     Then the definition of g can read

               void g(int (*funcp)(void))
               {
                     /* ... */
                     (*funcp)(); /* or funcp(); ...*/
               }

     or, equivalently,

               void g(int func(void))
               {
                     /* ... */
                     func(); /* or (*func)(); ...*/
               }

     6.9.3     External object definitions
     Semantics
1    If the declaration of an identifier for an object has file scope and an initializer, or has file scope and
     storage-class specifier thread_local, the declaration is an external definition for the identifier.
2    A declaration of an identifier for an object that has file scope without an initializer, and without
     the storage-class specifier extern or thread_local, constitutes a tentative definition. If a translation
     unit contains one or more tentative definitions for an identifier, and the translation unit contains no
     external definition for that identifier, then the behavior is exactly as if the translation unit contains a
     file scope declaration of that identifier with an empty initializer and a type determined as follows:

       — if the composite type as of the end of the translation unit is an array of unknown size, then an
         array of size one with the composite element type;
       — otherwise, the composite type at the end of the translation unit.

3    If the declaration of an identifier for an object is a tentative definition and has internal linkage, the
     declared type shall not be an incomplete type.

     § 6.9.3                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 161

4   EXAMPLE 1

             int i1 = 1;               // definition, external linkage
             static int i2 = 2;        // definition, internal linkage
             extern int i3 = 3;        // definition, external linkage
             int i4;                   // tentative definition, external linkage
             static int i5;            // tentative definition, internal linkage

             int i1;                   // valid tentative definition, refers to previous
             int i2;                   // 6.2.2 renders undefined, linkage disagreement
             int i3;                   // valid tentative definition, refers to previous
             int i4;                   // valid tentative definition, refers to previous
             int i5;                   // 6.2.2 renders undefined, linkage disagreement

             extern int i1;            // refers to previous, whose linkage is external
             extern int i2;            // refers to previous, whose linkage is internal
             extern int i3;            // refers to previous, whose linkage is external
             extern int i4;            // refers to previous, whose linkage is external
             extern int i5;            // refers to previous, whose linkage is internal

5   EXAMPLE 2 If at the end of the translation unit containing

             int i[];

    the array i still has incomplete type, the implicit initializer causes it to have one element, which is set to zero
    on program startup.

                                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                     § 6.9.3
                                                    Language — 162

    6.10       Preprocessing directives
    6.10.1       General
    Syntax

1    preprocessing-file:
                           groupopt
      group:
                           group-part
                           group group-part
      group-part:
                           if-section
                           control-line
                           text-line
                           # non-directive
      if-section:
                           if-group elif-groupsopt else-groupopt endif-line
      if-group:
                           # if constant-expression new-line groupopt
                           # ifdef identifier new-line groupopt
                           # ifndef identifier new-line groupopt
      elif-groups:
                           elif-group
                           elif-groups elif-group
      elif-group:
                           # elif constant-expression new-line groupopt
                           # elifdef identifier new-line groupopt
                           # elifndef identifier new-line groupopt
      else-group:
                           # else new-line groupopt
      endif-line:
                           # endif new-line
      control-line:
                           # include pp-tokens new-line
                           # embed pp-tokens new-line
                           # define identifier replacement-list new-line
                           # define identifier lparen identifier-listopt ) replacement-list new-line
                           # define identifier lparen ... ) replacement-list new-line
                           # define identifier lparen identifier-list , ... ) replacement-list new-line
                           # undef identifier new-line
                           # line pp-tokens new-line
                           # error pp-tokensopt new-line
                           # warning pp-tokensopt new-line
                           # pragma pp-tokensopt new-line
                           # new-line

    text-line:
                           pp-tokensopt new-line

    non-directive:
                           pp-tokens new-line

    lparen:
                           a ( character not immediately preceded by white space

    § 6.10.1                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                    Language — 163

    replacement-list:
                         pp-tokensopt

    pp-tokens:
                         preprocessing-token
                         pp-tokens preprocessing-token

    new-line:
                         the new-line character

    identifier-list:
                         identifier
                         identifier-list , identifier

    pp-parameter:
                         pp-parameter-name pp-parameter-clauseopt

    pp-parameter-name:
                     pp-standard-parameter
                     pp-prefixed-parameter

    pp-standard-parameter:
                      identifier

    pp-prefixed-parameter:
                       identifier :: identifier

    pp-parameter-clause:
                         ( pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt )

    pp-balanced-token-sequence:
                       pp-balanced-token
                       pp-balanced-token-sequence pp-balanced-token

    pp-balanced-token:
                         ( pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt )
                         [ pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt ]
                         { pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt }
                         any pp-token other than a parenthesis, a bracket, or a brace

    embed-parameter-sequence:
                      pp-parameter
                      embed-parameter-sequence pp-parameter

    Description
2   A preprocessing directive consists of a sequence of preprocessing tokens that satisfies the following
    constraints: The first token in the sequence is a # preprocessing token that (at the start of translation
    phase 4) is either the first character in the source file (optionally after white space containing no
    new-line characters) or that follows white space containing at least one new-line character. The last

                                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                            § 6.10.1
                                                    Language — 164

     token in the sequence is the first new-line character that follows the first token in the sequence.195) A
     new-line character ends the preprocessing directive even if it occurs within what would otherwise
     be an invocation of a function-like macro.
3    A text line shall not begin with a # preprocessing token. A non-directive shall not begin with any of
     the directive names appearing in the syntax.
4    Some preprocessing directives take additional information using preprocessor parameters. A
     preprocessing parameter (pp-parameter) shall be either a preprocessor prefixed parameter (identified by
     a pp-prefixed-parameter, for implementation-defined preprocessor parameters) or a preprocessor
     standard parameter (identified with a pp-standard-parameter, for pp-parameters specified by this
     document).
5    In all aspects, a preprocessor standard parameter specified by this document as an identifier
     pp_param and an identifier of the form __pp_param__ shall behave the same when used as a
     preprocessor parameter, except for the spelling.
6    EXAMPLE 1 Thus, the preprocessor parameters on the two binary resource inclusion directives (6.10.4):

                #embed "boop.h" limit(5)
                #embed "boop.h" __limit__(5)

     behave the same, and can be freely interchanged. Implementations are encouraged to behave similarly for
     preprocessor parameters (including preprocessor prefixed parameters) they provide.
7    When in a group that is skipped (6.10.2), the directive syntax is relaxed to allow any sequence of
     preprocessing tokens to occur between the directive name and the following new-line character.

     Constraints
8    The only white-space characters that shall appear between preprocessing tokens within a prepro-
     cessing directive (from just after the introducing # preprocessing token through just before the
     terminating new-line character) are space and horizontal-tab (including spaces that have replaced
     comments or possibly other white-space characters in translation phase 3).
9    A preprocessor parameter shall be either a preprocessor standard parameter, or an implementation-
     defined preprocessor prefixed parameter.196)

     Semantics
10   The implementation can process and skip sections of source files conditionally, include other source
     files, and replace macros. These capabilities are called preprocessing, because conceptually they occur
     before translation of the resulting translation unit.
11   The preprocessing tokens within a preprocessing directive are not subject to macro expansion unless
     otherwise stated.
12   EXAMPLE 2 In:

                        #define EMPTY
                        EMPTY # include <file.h>

     the sequence of preprocessing tokens on the second line is not a preprocessing directive, because it does not
     begin with a # at the start of translation phase 4 (5.1.1.2), even though it will do so after the macro EMPTY has
     been replaced.
13   The execution of a non-directive preprocessing directive results in undefined behavior.

      195) Thus, preprocessing directives are commonly called "lines". These "lines" have no other syntactic significance, as all

     white space is equivalent except in certain situations during preprocessing (see the # character string literal creation operator
     in 6.10.5.2, for example).
      196) An unrecognized preprocessor prefixed parameter is a constraint violation, except within has_embed expressions (6.10.2).

     § 6.10.1                                 © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                          Language — 165

    6.10.2      Conditional inclusion
    Syntax
1    defined-macro-expression:
                            defined identifier
                            defined ( identifier )
    h-preprocessing-token:
                        any preprocessing-token other than >
    h-pp-tokens:
                         h-preprocessing-token
                         h-pp-tokens h-preprocessing-token
    header-name-tokens:
                         string-literal
                         < h-pp-tokens >
    has-include-expression:
                         __has_include ( header-name )
                         __has_include ( header-name-tokens )
    has-embed-expression:
                         __has_embed ( header-name embed-parameter-sequenceopt )
                         __has_embed ( header-name-tokens pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt )
    has-c-attribute-express:
                         __has_c_attribute ( pp-tokens )

2   The #if and #elif directives are collectively known as the conditional expression inclusion prepro-
    cessing directives. The conditional expression inclusion preprocessing directives, #ifdef, #ifndef,
    #elifdef, and #elifndef directives are collectively known as the conditional inclusion preprocessing
    directives.

    Constraints
3   The expression that controls conditional inclusion shall be an integer constant expression except that:
    identifiers (including those lexically identical to keywords) are interpreted as described subsequently
    in this subclause197) and it may contain zero or more defined macro expressions, has_include expres-
    sions, has_embed expressions, and/or has_c_attribute expressions as unary operator expressions.
4   A defined macro expression evaluates to 1 if the identifier is currently defined as a macro name (that
    is, if it is predefined or if it has been the subject of a #define preprocessing directive without an
    intervening #undef directive with the same subject identifier), 0 if it is not.
5   The second form of the has_include expression and has_embed expression is considered only if the
    first form does not match, in which case the preprocessing tokens are processed just as in normal
    text.
6   The header or source file identified by the parenthesized preprocessing token sequence in each
    contained has_include expression is searched for as if that preprocessing token were the pp-tokens
    in a #include directive, except that no further macro expansion is performed. Such a directive shall
    satisfy the syntactic requirements of a #include directive. The has_include expression evaluates to
    1 if the search for the source file succeeds, and to 0 if the search fails.
7   The resource (6.10.4) identified by the header-name preprocessing token sequence in each contained
    has_embed expression is searched for as if those preprocessing token were the pp-tokens in a #embed
    directive, except that no further macro expansion is performed. Such a directive shall satisfy the
    syntactic requirements of a #embed directive. The has_embed expression evaluates to the same value
    as the following predefined macros (6.10.10.2):

      — __STDC_EMBED_NOT_FOUND__ , if the search fails or if any of the embed parameters in the
        embed parameter sequence specified are not supported by the implementation for the #embed
    197) Because the controlling constant expression is evaluated during translation phase 4, all identifiers either are or are not

    macro names — there simply are no keywords, enumeration constants, etc.

                                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                           § 6.10.2
                                                          Language — 166

           directive; or,

       — __STDC_EMBED_FOUND__ , if the search for the resource succeeds and all embed parameters in
         the embed parameter sequence specified are supported by the implementation for the #embed
         directive and the resource is not empty; or,

       — __STDC_EMBED_EMPTY__ , if the search for the resource succeeds and all embed parameters in
         the embed parameter sequence specified are supported by the implementation for the #embed
         directive and the resource is empty.

8    NOTE 1 Unrecognized preprocessor prefixed parameters in has_embed expressions are not a constraint
     violation and instead cause the expression to be evaluated to 0, as specified previously.
9    Each has_c_attribute expression is replaced by a nonzero pp-number matching the form of an integer
     constant if the implementation supports an attribute with the name specified by interpreting the
     pp-tokens as an attribute token, and by 0 otherwise. The pp-tokens shall match the form of an
     attribute token.
10   Each preprocessing token that remains (in the list of preprocessing tokens that will become the
     controlling expression) after all macro replacements have occurred shall be in the lexical form of a
     token (6.4).

     Semantics
11   The #ifdef, #ifndef, #elifdef, and #elifndef directives, and the defined conditional inclusion
     operator, shall treat __has_include, __has_embed and __has_c_attribute as if they were the
     name of defined macros. The identifiers __has_include, __has_embed, and __has_c_attribute
     shall not appear in any context not mentioned in this subclause.
12   Preprocessing directives of the forms
                            # if   constant-expression new-line groupopt
                            # elif constant-expression new-line groupopt
     check whether the controlling constant expression evaluates to nonzero.
13   Prior to evaluation, macro invocations in the list of preprocessing tokens that will become the control-
     ling constant expression are replaced (except for those macro names modified by the defined unary
     operator), just as in normal text. If the token defined is generated as a result of this replacement
     process or use of the defined unary operator does not match one of the two specified forms prior
     to macro replacement, the behavior is undefined. After all replacements due to macro expansion
     and evaluations of defined macro expressions, has_include expressions, has_embed expressions,
     and has_c_attribute expressions have been performed, all remaining identifiers other than true
     (including those lexically identical to keywords such as false) are replaced with the pp-number 0,
     true is replaced with pp-number 1, and then each preprocessing token is converted into a token.
     The resulting tokens compose the controlling constant expression which is evaluated according
     to the rules of 6.6. For the purposes of this token conversion and evaluation, all signed integer
     types and all unsigned integer types act as if they have the same representation as, respectively,
     the types intmax_t and uintmax_t defined in the header <stdint.h>. This includes interpreting
     character constants, which may involve converting escape sequences into execution character set
     members. Whether the numeric value for these character constants matches the value obtained
     when an identical character constant occurs in an expression (other than within a #if or #elif
     directive) is implementation-defined. Whether a single-character character constant may have a
     negative value is implementation-defined.
14   NOTE 2 On an implementation where INT_MAX is 0x7FFF and UINT_MAX is 0xFFFF, the constant 0x8000 is
     signed and positive within a #if expression even though it would be unsigned in translation phase 7 (5.1.1.2).
15   NOTE 3 The constant expression in the following #if directive and if statement is not guaranteed to evaluate
     to the same value in these two contexts.

                #if ’z’ - ’a’ == 25
                if (’z’ - ’a’ == 25)

     § 6.10.2                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                  Language — 167

16   Preprocessing directives of the forms
                           # ifdef identifier new-line groupopt
                           # ifndef identifier new-line groupopt
                           # elifdef identifier new-line groupopt
                           # elifndef identifier new-line groupopt
     check whether the identifier is or is not currently defined as a macro name. Their conditions
     are equivalent to #if defined identifier, #if !defined identifier, #elif defined identifier, and
     #elif !defined identifier respectively.
17   Each directive’s condition is checked in order. If it evaluates to false (zero), the group that it controls
     is skipped: directives are processed only through the name that determines the directive to keep
     track of the level of nested conditionals; the rest of the directives’ preprocessing tokens are ignored,
     as are the other preprocessing tokens in the group. Only the first group whose control condition
     evaluates to true (nonzero) is processed; any following groups are skipped and their controlling
     directives are processed as if they were in a group that is skipped. If none of the conditions evaluates
     to true, and there is a #else directive, the group controlled by the #else is processed; lacking a
     #else directive, all the groups until the #endif are skipped.198)
18   EXAMPLE 1 This demonstrates a way to include a header file only if it is available.

      #if __has_include(<optional.h>)
      #     include <optional.h>
      #     define have_optional 1
      #elif __has_include(<experimental/optional.h>)
      #     include <experimental/optional.h>
      #     define have_optional 1
      #     define have_experimental_optional 1
      #endif
      #ifndef have_optional
      #     define have_optional 0
      #endif

19   EXAMPLE 2

      /* Fallback for compilers not yet implementing this feature. */
      #ifndef __has_c_attribute
      #define __has_c_attribute(x) 0
      #endif /* __has_c_attribute */

      #if __has_c_attribute(fallthrough)
      /* Standard attribute is available, use it. */
      #define FALLTHROUGH [[fallthrough]]
      #elif __has_c_attribute(vendor::fallthrough)
      /* Vendor attribute is available, use it. */
      #define FALLTHROUGH [[vendor::fallthrough]]
      #else
      /* Fallback implementation. */
      #define FALLTHROUGH
      #endif

20   EXAMPLE 3

      #ifdef __STDC__
      #define TITLE "ISO C Compilation"
      #elifndef __cplusplus
      #define TITLE "Non-ISO C Compilation"
      #else

      198) As indicated by the syntax, no preprocessing tokens are allowed to follow a #else or #endif directive before the

     terminating new-line character. However, comments can appear anywhere in a source file, including within a preprocessing
     directive.

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                       § 6.10.2
                                                        Language — 168

      /* C++ */
      #define TITLE "C++ Compilation"
      #endif

21   EXAMPLE 4 A combination of __FILE__ (6.10.10.2) and __has_embed could be used to check for support of
     specific implementation extensions for the #embed (6.10.4) directive’s parameters.

                #if __has_embed(__FILE__ ext::token(0xB055))
                #define DESCRIPTION "Supports extended token embed parameter"
                #else
                #define DESCRIPTION "Does not support extended token embed parameter"
                #endif

22   EXAMPLE 5 The following snippet uses __has_embed to check for support of a specific implementation-
     defined embed parameter, and otherwise uses standard behavior to produce the same effect.

                void parse_into_s(short* ptr, unsigned char* ptr_bytes, unsigned long long size);

                int main () {
                #if __has_embed ("bits.bin" ds9000::element_type(short))
                      /* Implementation extension: create short integers from the */
                      /* translation environment resource into */
                      /* a sequence of integer constants */
                      short meow[] = {
                #embed "bits.bin" ds9000::element_type(short)
                      };
                #elif __has_embed ("bits.bin")
                      /* no support for implementation-specific */
                      /* ds9000::element_type(short) parameter */
                      const unsigned char meow_bytes[] = {
                #embed "bits.bin"
                      };
                      short meow[sizeof(meow_bytes) / sizeof(short)] = {};
                      /* parse meow_bytes into short values by-hand! */
                      parse_into_s(meow, meow_bytes, sizeof(meow_bytes));
                #else
                #error "cannot find bits.bin resource"
                #endif
                      return (int)(meow[0] + meow[(sizeof(meow) / sizeof(*meow)) - 1]);
                }

23   EXAMPLE 6 If the search for the resource is successful, this resource is always considered empty due to the
     limit(0) embed parameter, including in __has_embed expressions.

                int main () {
                #if __has_embed(<infinite-resource> limit(0)) == 2
                      // if <infinite-resource> exists, this
                      // token sequence is always taken.
                      return 0;
                #else
                      // the ’infinite-resource’ resource does not exist
                      #error "The resource does not exist"
                #endif
                }

     Forward references: macro replacement (6.10.5), source file inclusion (6.10.3), mandatory macros
     (6.10.10.2), largest integer types (7.22.1.5).

     § 6.10.2                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                 Language — 169

    6.10.3      Source file inclusion
    Constraints
1   A #include directive shall identify a header or source file that can be processed by the implementa-
    tion.

    Semantics
2   A preprocessing directive of the form

                            # include < h-char-sequence > new-line
    searches a sequence of implementation-defined places for a header identified uniquely by the
    specified sequence between the < and > delimiters, and causes the replacement of that directive
    by the entire contents of the header. How the places are specified or the header identified is
    implementation-defined.
3   A preprocessing directive of the form

                            # include " q-char-sequence " new-line
    causes the replacement of that directive by the entire contents of the source file identified by
    the specified sequence between the " delimiters. The named source file is searched for in an
    implementation-defined manner. If this search is not supported, or if the search fails, the directive is
    reprocessed as if it read
                            # include < h-char-sequence > new-line
    with the identical contained sequence (including > characters, if any) from the original directive.
4   A preprocessing directive of the form
                            # include pp-tokens new-line
    (that does not match one of the two previous forms) is permitted. The preprocessing tokens after
    include in the directive are processed just as in normal text. (Each identifier currently defined as a
    macro name is replaced by its replacement list of preprocessing tokens.) The directive resulting after
    all replacements shall match one of the two previous forms.199) The method by which a sequence
    of preprocessing tokens between a < and a > preprocessing token pair or a pair of " characters is
    combined into a single header name preprocessing token is implementation-defined.
5   The implementation shall provide unique mappings for sequences consisting of one or more nondig-
    its or digits (6.4.2.1) followed by a period (.) and a single nondigit. The first character shall not be a
    digit. The implementation may ignore distinctions of alphabetical case and restrict the mapping to
    eight significant characters before the period.
6   A #include preprocessing directive may appear in a source file that has been read because of a
    #include directive in another file, up to an implementation-defined nesting limit (see 5.2.5.2).
7   EXAMPLE 1 The most common uses of #include preprocessing directives are as in the following:

              #include <stdio.h>
              #include "myprog.h"

8   EXAMPLE 2 This illustrates macro-replaced #include directives:

              #if VERSION == 1
                    #define INCFILE             "vers1.h"
              #elif VERSION == 2
                    #define INCFILE             "vers2.h"         // and so on
              #else
                    #define INCFILE             "versN.h"
     199) Note that adjacent string literals are not concatenated into a single string literal (see the translation phases in 5.1.1.2);

    thus, an expansion that results in two string literals is an invalid directive.

                                               © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                             § 6.10.3
                                                           Language — 170

              #endif
              #include INCFILE

    Forward references: macro replacement (6.10.5).

    6.10.4       Binary resource inclusion
    6.10.4.1 #embed preprocessing directive
    Description
1   A resource is a source of data accessible from the translation environment. An embed parameter is a
    single preprocessor parameter in the embed parameter sequence. It has an implementation resource
    width, which is the implementation-defined size in bits of the located resource. It also has a resource
    width, which is either:

      — the number of bits as computed from the optionally-provided limit embed parameter
        (6.10.4.2), if present; or,

      — the implementation resource width.

2   An embed parameter sequence is a whitespace-delimited list of preprocessor parameters which may
    modify the result of the replacement for the #embed preprocessing directive.

    Constraints
3   An #embed directive shall identify a resource that can be processed by the implementation as a
    binary data sequence given the provided embed parameters.
4   Embed parameters not specified in this document shall be implementation-defined. Implementation-
    defined embed parameters may change the subsequently-defined semantics of the directive; oth-
    erwise, #embed directives which do not contain implementation-defined embed parameters shall
    behave as described in this document.
5   A resource is considered empty when its resource width is zero.
6   Let embed element width be either:

      — an integer constant expression greater than zero determined by an implementation-defined
        embed parameter; or,

      — CHAR_BIT (5.2.5.3.2).

    The result of (resource width) % (embed element width) shall be zero.200)

    Semantics
7   The expansion of a #embed directive is a token sequence formed from the list of integer constant
    expressions described later in this subclause. The group of tokens for each integer constant expres-
    sion in the list is separated in the token sequence from the group of tokens for the previous integer
    constant expression in the list by a comma. The sequence neither begins nor ends in a comma. If the
    list of integer constant expressions is empty, the token sequence is empty. The directive is replaced
    by its expansion and, with the presence of certain embed parameters, additional or replacement
    token sequences.
8   A preprocessing directive of the form
                           # embed < h-char-sequence > embed-parameter-sequenceopt new-line
    searches a sequence of implementation-defined places for a resource identified uniquely by the spec-
    ified sequence between the < and >. The search for the named resource is done in an implementation-
    defined manner.
     200) This constraint helps ensure data is neither filled with padding values nor truncated in a given environment, and helps

    ensure the data is portable with respect to usages of memcpy (7.26.2.1) with character type arrays initialized from the data.

    § 6.10.4.1                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 171

9    A preprocessing directive of the form
                             # embed " q-char-sequence " embed-parameter-sequenceopt new-line
     searches a sequence of implementation-defined places for a resource identified uniquely by the
     specified sequence between the " delimiters. The search for the named resource is done in an
     implementation-defined manner. If this search is not supported, or if the search fails, the directive is
     reprocessed as if it read
                              # embed < h-char-sequence > embed-parameter-sequenceopt new-line
     with the identical contained q-char-sequence (including > characters, if any) from the original
     directive.
10   Either form of the #embed directive specified previously behaves as specified later in this subclause.
     The values of the integer constant expressions in the expanded sequence are determined by an
     implementation-defined mapping of the resource’s data. Each integer constant expression’s value is
     in the range from 0 to (2embed element width ) − 1, inclusive.201) If:

        — the list of integer constant expressions is used to initialize an array of a type compatible with
          unsigned char, or compatible with char if char cannot hold negative values; and,

        — the embed element width is equal to CHAR_BIT (5.2.5.3.2),

     then the contents of the initialized elements of the array are as-if the resource’s binary data is fread
     (7.23.8.1) into the array at translation time.
11   A preprocessing directive of the form
                             # embed pp-tokens new-line
     (that does not match one of the two previous forms) is permitted. The preprocessing tokens after
     embed in the directive are processed just as in normal text. (Each identifier currently defined as a
     macro name is replaced by its replacement list of preprocessing tokens.) The directive resulting after
     all replacements shall match one of the two previous forms.202) The method by which a sequence
     of preprocessing tokens between a < and a > preprocessing token pair or a pair of " characters is
     combined into a single resource name preprocessing token is implementation-defined.
12   An embed parameter with a preprocessor parameter token that is one of the following is a standard
     embed parameter:

     limit                            prefix                            suffix                          if_empty

     The significance of these standard embed parameters is specified later in this subclause.

     Recommended practice
13   The #embed directive is meant to translate binary data in a resource to a sequence of integer constant
     expressions in a way that preserves the value of the resource’s bit stream where possible.
14   A mechanism similar to, but distinct from, the implementation-defined search paths used for source
     file inclusion (6.10.3) is encouraged.
15   Implementations should take into account translation-time bit and byte orders as well as execution-
     time bit and byte orders to more appropriately represent the resource’s binary data from the directive.
     This maximizes the chance that, if the resource referenced at translation time through the #embed
     directive is the same one accessed through execution-time means, the data that is e.g. fread or
     similar into contiguous storage will compare bit-for-bit equal to an array of character type initialized
     from an #embed directive’s expanded contents.
16   EXAMPLE 1 Placing a small image resource.
     201) For example, an embed element width of 8 will yield a range of values from 0 to 255, inclusive.
     202) Note that adjacent string literals are not concatenated into a single string literal (see the translation phases in 5.1.1.2);

     thus, an expansion that results in two string literals is an invalid directive.

                                                © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                          § 6.10.4.1
                                                            Language — 172

              #include <stddef.h>

              void have_you_any_wool(const unsigned char*, size_t);

              int main (int, char*[]) {
                    static const unsigned char baa_baa[] = {
              #embed "black_sheep.ico"
                    };

                     have_you_any_wool(baa_baa, sizeof(baa_baa));

                     return 0;
              }

17   EXAMPLE 2 This snippet:

              int main (int, char*[]) {
                    static const unsigned char coefficients[] = {
              #embed "only_8_bits.bin" // potential constraint violation
                    };

                     return 0;
              }

     may violate the constraint that (resource width) % (embed element width) is 0. The 8 bits may potentially
     not be evenly divisible by the embed element width (e.g. on a system where CHAR_BIT is 16). Issuing a
     diagnostic in this case may aid in portability by calling attention to potentially incompatible expectations
     between implementations and their resources.
18   EXAMPLE 3 Initialization of non-arrays.

              int main () {
                    /* Braces may be kept or elided as per normal initialization rules */
                    int i = {
              #embed "i.dat"
                    }; /* valid if i.dat produces 1 value,
                          i value is [0, 2(embed element width) ) */
                    int i2 =
              #embed "i.dat"
                    ; /* valid if i.dat produces 1 value,
                         i2 value is [0, 2(embed element width) ) */
                    struct s {
                          double a, b, c;
                          struct { double e, f, g; };
                          double h, i, j;
                    };
                    struct s x = {
                    /* initializes each element in order according to initialization
                    rules with comma-separated list of integer constant expressions
                    inside of braces */
              #embed "s.dat"
                    };
                    return 0;
              }

     Non-array types can still be initialized since the directive produces a comma-delimited list of integer constant
     expressions, a single integer constant expression, or nothing.
19   EXAMPLE 4 Equivalency of bit sequence and bit order between a translation-time read and an execution-time
     read of the same resource/file.

              #include <string.h>

     § 6.10.4.1                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                   Language — 173

            #include <stddef.h>
            #include <stdio.h>

            int main(void) {
                  static const unsigned char embed_data[] = {
            #embed <data.dat>
                  };

                   const size_t f_size = sizeof(embed_data);
                   unsigned char f_data[f_size];
                   FILE* f_source = fopen("data.dat", "rb");
                   if (f_source == nullptr)
                         return 1;
                   char* f_ptr = (char*)&f_data[0];
                   if (fread(f_ptr, 1, f_size, f_source) != f_size) {
                         fclose(f_source);
                         return 1;
                   }
                   fclose(f_source);

                   int is_same = memcmp(&embed_data[0], f_ptr, f_size);
                   // if both operations refers to the same resource/file at
                   // execution time and translation time, "is_same" should be 0
                   return is_same == 0 ? 0 : 1;
            }

    6.10.4.2 limit parameter
    Constraints
1   The limit standard embed parameter may appear zero times or one time in the embed parameter
    sequence. Its preprocessor argument clause shall be present and have the form:
                       ( constant-expression )
    and shall be an integer constant expression. The integer constant expression shall not evaluate to a
    value less than 0.
2   The token defined shall not appear within the constant expression.

    Semantics
3   The embed parameter with a preprocessor parameter token limit denotes a balanced preprocessing
    token sequence that will be used to compute the resource width. Independently of any macro
    replacement done previously (e.g. when matching the form of #embed), the constant expression is
    evaluated after the balanced preprocessing token sequence is processed as in normal text, using
    the rules specified for conditional inclusion (6.10.2), with the exception that any defined macro
    expressions are not permitted.
4   The resource width is:

      — 0, if the integer constant expression evaluates to 0; or,
      — the implementation resource width if it is less than the embed element width multiplied by
        the integer constant expression; or,
      — the embed element width multiplied by the integer constant expression, if it is less than or
        equal to the implementation resource width.

5   EXAMPLE 1 Checking the first 4 elements of a sound resource.

            #include <assert.h>

            int main (int, char*[]) {

                                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                        § 6.10.4.2
                                                 Language — 174

                   static const char sound_signature[] = {
             #embed <sdk/jump.wav> limit(2+2)
                   };
                   static_assert((sizeof(sound_signature) / sizeof(*sound_signature)) == 4,
                         "There should only be 4 elements in this array.");

                   // verify PCM WAV resource
                   assert(sound_signature[0] == ’R’);
                   assert(sound_signature[1] == ’I’);
                   assert(sound_signature[2] == ’F’);
                   assert(sound_signature[3] == ’F’);
                   assert(sizeof(sound_signature) == 4);

                   return 0;
             }

6   EXAMPLE 2 Similar to a previous example, except it illustrates macro expansion specifically done for the
    limit(...) parameter.

             #include <assert.h>

             #define TWO_PLUS_TWO 2+2

             int main (int, char*[]) {
                   const char sound_signature[] = {
                   /* the token sequence within the parentheses
                   for the "limit" parameter undergoes macro
                   expansion, at least once, resulting in
             #embed <sdk/jump.wav> limit(2+2)
                   */
             #embed <sdk/jump.wav> limit(TWO_PLUS_TWO)
                   };
                   static_assert((sizeof(sound_signature) / sizeof(*sound_signature)) == 4,
                         "There should only be 4 elements in this array.");

                   // verify PCM WAV resource
                   assert(sound_signature[0] == ’R’);
                   assert(sound_signature[1] == ’I’);
                   assert(sound_signature[2] == ’F’);
                   assert(sound_signature[3] == ’F’);
                   assert(sizeof(sound_signature) == 4);

                   return 0;
             }

7   EXAMPLE 3 A potential constraint violation from a resource that may not have enough information in an
    environment that has a CHAR_BIT greater than 24.

             int main (int, char*[]) {
                   const unsigned char arr[] = {
             #embed "24_bits.bin" limit(1) // may be a constraint violation
                   };

                   return 0;
             }

8   EXAMPLE 4 Resources interfacing with certain implementations may have an infinite stream of data, such as
    the </owo/uwurandom> resource used in the following snippet:

             int main (int, char*[]) {
                   const unsigned char arr[] = {

    § 6.10.4.2                        © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                               Language — 175

            #embed </owo/uwurandom> limit(513)
                  };

                   return 0;
            }

    The limit parameter may help process only a portion of that information and prevent exhaustion of an
    implementation’s internal resources when processing such data.

    6.10.4.3 suffix parameter
    Constraints
1   The suffix standard embed parameter may appear zero times or one time in the embed parameter
    sequence. Its preprocessor argument clause shall be present and have the form:
                       ( pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt )

    Semantics
2   The embed parameter with a preprocessing parameter token suffix denotes a balanced preprocess-
    ing token sequence within its preprocessor argument clause that will be placed immediately after
    the result of the associated #embed directive’s expansion.
3   If the resource is empty, then suffix has no effect and is ignored.
4   EXAMPLE Extra elements added to array initializer.

            #include <string.h>

            #ifndef SHADER_TARGET
            #define SHADER_TARGET "edith-impl.glsl"
            #endif

            extern char* null_term_shader_data;

            void fill_in_data () {
                  const char internal_data[] = {
            #embed SHADER_TARGET \
                        suffix(,)
                  };

                   strcpy(null_term_shader_data, internal_data);
            }

    6.10.4.4 prefix parameter
    Constraints
1   The prefix standard embed parameter may appear zero times or one time in the embed parameter
    sequence. Its preprocessor parameter clause shall be present and have the form:
                       ( pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt )

    Semantics
2   The embed parameter with a preprocessor parameter token prefix denotes a balanced preprocessing
    token sequence within its preprocessor argument clause that will be placed immediately before the
    result of the associated #embed directive’s expansion, if any.
3   If the resource is empty, then prefix has no effect and is ignored.
4   EXAMPLE A null-terminated character array with prefixed and suffixed additional tokens when the resource
    is not empty, providing null termination and a byte order mark.

            #include <assert.h>
            #include <string.h>

                                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                            § 6.10.4.4
                                                Language — 176

             #ifndef SHADER_TARGET
             #define SHADER_TARGET "ches.glsl"
             #endif

             extern char* merp;

             void init_data () {
                   const char whl[] = {
             #embed SHADER_TARGET                                 \
                         prefix(0xEF, 0xBB, 0xBF, ) /* UTF-8 BOM */ \
                         suffix(,)
                   };
                   // always null terminated,
                   // contains BOM if not-empty
                   int is_good = (sizeof(whl) == 1 && whl[0] == ’\0’)
                   || (whl[0] == ’\xEF’ && whl[1] == ’\xBB’
                   && whl[2] == ’\xBF’ && whl[sizeof(whl) - 1] == ’\0’);
                   assert(is_good);
                   strcpy(merp, whl);
             }

    6.10.4.5 if_empty parameter
    Constraints
1   The if_empty standard embed parameter may appear zero times or one time in the embed parameter
    sequence. Its preprocessor argument clause shall be present and have the form:
                        ( pp-balanced-token-sequenceopt )

    Semantics
2   The embed parameter with a preprocessing parameter token if_empty denotes a balanced pre-
    processing token sequence within its preprocessor argument clause that will replace the #embed
    directive entirely.
    If the resource is not empty, then if_empty has no effect and is ignored.
3   EXAMPLE 1 If the search for the resource is successful, this resource is always considered empty due to the
    limit(0) embed parameter. This program always returns 0, even if the resource is searched for and found
    successfully by the implementation and has an implementation resource width greater than 0.

             int main () {
                   return
             #embed <some_resource> limit(0) prefix(1) if_empty(0)
                   ;
                   // becomes:
                   // return 0;
             }

4   EXAMPLE 2 An example similar to using the suffix embed parameter, but changed slightly.

             #include <string.h>

             #ifndef SHADER_TARGET
             #define SHADER_TARGET "edith-impl.glsl"
             #endif

             extern char* null_term_shader_data;

             void fill_in_data () {
                   const char internal_data[] = {

    § 6.10.4.5                        © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 177

             #embed SHADER_TARGET   \
                         suffix(, 0) \
                         if_empty(0)
                   };

                    strcpy(null_term_shader_data, internal_data);
             }

5   EXAMPLE 3 This resource is considered empty due to the limit(0) embed parameter, meaning an if_empty
    expression replaces the directive as specified previously. A constraint is still violated if the search for the
    resource is unsuccessful.

             int main () {
                   return
                         #embed <infinite-resource> limit(0) if_empty(45540)
                   ;
             }

    becomes:

             int main () {
                   return 45540;
             }

    6.10.5       Macro replacement
    Constraints
1   Two replacement lists are identical if and only if the preprocessing tokens in both have the same
    number, ordering, spelling, and white-space separation, where all white-space separations are
    considered identical.
2   An identifier currently defined as an object-like macro shall not be redefined by another #define
    preprocessing directive unless the second definition is an object-like macro definition and the two
    replacement lists are identical. Likewise, an identifier currently defined as a function-like macro
    shall not be redefined by another #define preprocessing directive unless the second definition is a
    function-like macro definition that has the same number and spelling of parameters, and the two
    replacement lists are identical.
3   There shall be white space between the identifier and the replacement list in the definition of an
    object-like macro.
4   If the identifier-list in the macro definition does not end with an ellipsis, the number of arguments
    (including those arguments consisting of no preprocessing tokens) in an invocation of a function-like
    macro shall equal the number of parameters in the macro definition. Otherwise, there shall be at
    least as many arguments in the invocation as there are parameters in the macro definition (excluding
    the ...). There shall exist a ) preprocessing token that terminates the invocation.
5   The identifiers __VA_ARGS__ and __VA_OPT__ shall occur only in the replacement-list of a function-
    like macro that uses the ellipsis notation in the parameters.
6   A parameter identifier in a function-like macro shall be uniquely declared within its scope.

    Semantics
7   The identifier immediately following the define is called the macro name. There is one name
    space for macro names. Any white-space characters preceding or following the replacement list of
    preprocessing tokens are not considered part of the replacement list for either form of macro.
8   If a # preprocessing token, followed by an identifier, occurs lexically at the point at which a prepro-
    cessing directive could begin, the identifier is not subject to macro replacement.
9   A preprocessing directive of the form
                         # define identifier replacement-list new-line

                                         © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                 § 6.10.5
                                                   Language — 178

     defines an object-like macro that causes each subsequent instance of the macro name203) to be replaced
     by the replacement list of preprocessing tokens that constitute the remainder of the directive. The
     replacement list is then rescanned for more macro names as specified later in this subclause.
10   A preprocessing directive of the form
                            # define identifier lparen identifier-listopt ) replacement-list new-line
                            # define identifier lparen ... ) replacement-list new-line
                            # define identifier lparen identifier-list , ... ) replacement-list new-line
     defines a function-like macro with parameters, whose use is similar syntactically to a function call. The
     parameters are specified by the optional list of identifiers, whose scope extends from their declaration
     in the identifier list until the new-line character that terminates the #define preprocessing directive.
     Each subsequent instance of the function-like macro name followed by a ( as the next preprocessing
     token introduces the sequence of preprocessing tokens that is replaced by the replacement list
     in the definition (an invocation of the macro). The replaced sequence of preprocessing tokens is
     terminated by the matching ) preprocessing token, skipping intervening matched pairs of left and
     right parenthesis preprocessing tokens. Within the sequence of preprocessing tokens making up an
     invocation of a function-like macro, new-line is considered a normal white-space character.
11   The sequence of preprocessing tokens bounded by the outside-most matching parentheses forms
     the list of arguments for the function-like macro. The individual arguments within the list are
     separated by comma preprocessing tokens, but comma preprocessing tokens between matching
     inner parentheses do not separate arguments. If there are sequences of preprocessing tokens within
     the list of arguments that would otherwise act as preprocessing directives,204) the behavior is
     undefined.
12   If there is a ... in the identifier-list in the macro definition, then the trailing arguments (if any),
     including any separating comma preprocessing tokens, are merged to form a single item: the variable
     arguments. The number of arguments so combined is such that, following merger, the number of
     arguments is one more than the number of parameters in the macro definition (excluding the ...),
     except that if there are as many arguments as named parameters, the macro invocation behaves as if
     a comma token has been appended to the argument list such that variable arguments are formed
     that contain no pp-tokens.

     6.10.5.1 Argument substitution
     Syntax
1     va-opt-replacement:
                            __VA_OPT__ ( pp-tokensopt )

     Description
2    Argument substitution is a process during macro expansion in which identifiers corresponding to
     the parameters of the macro definition and the special constructs __VA_ARGS__ and __VA_OPT__
     are replaced with token sequences from the arguments of the macro invocation and possibly of the
     argument of the feature __VA_OPT__. The latter process allows to control a substitute token sequence
     that is only expanded if the argument list that corresponds to a trailing ... of the parameter list is
     present and has a non-empty substitution.

     Constraints
3    The identifier __VA_OPT__ shall always occur as part of the preprocessing token sequence va-opt-
     replacement; its closing ) is determined by skipping intervening pairs of matching left and right
     parentheses in its pp-tokens. The pp-tokens of a va-opt-replacement shall not contain __VA_OPT__.
     The pp-tokens shall form a valid replacement list for the current function-like macro.

      203) Since, by macro-replacement time, all character constants and string literals are preprocessing tokens, not sequences

     possibly containing identifier-like subsequences (see 5.1.1.2, translation phases), they are never scanned for macro names or
     parameters.
      204) Despite the name, a non-directive is a preprocessing directive.

     § 6.10.5.1                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                         Language — 179

    Semantics
4   After the arguments for the invocation of a function-like macro have been identified, argument
    substitution takes place. A va-opt-replacement is treated as if it were a parameter. For each parameter
    in the replacement list that is neither preceded by a # or ## preprocessing token nor followed by a
    ## preprocessing token, the preprocessing tokens naming the parameter are replaced by a token
    sequence determined as follows:

      — If the parameter is of the form va-opt-replacement, the replacement preprocessing tokens are
        the preprocessing token sequence for the corresponding argument, as specified later in this
        subclause.
      — Otherwise, the replacement preprocessing tokens are the preprocessing tokens of the corre-
        sponding argument after all macros contained therein have been expanded. The argument’s
        preprocessing tokens are completely macro replaced before being substituted as if they formed
        the rest of the preprocessing file with no other preprocessing tokens being available.

5   EXAMPLE 1

            #define LPAREN() (
            #define G(Q) 42
            #define F(R, X, ...) __VA_OPT__(G R X) )
            int x = F(LPAREN(), 0, <:-);    // replaced by int x = 42;

6   An identifier __VA_ARGS__ that occurs in the replacement list is treated as if it were a parameter,
    and the variable arguments form the preprocessing tokens used to replace it.
7   The preprocessing token sequence for the corresponding argument of a va-opt-replacement is
    defined as follows. If a (hypothetical) substitution of __VA_ARGS__ as neither an operand of # nor
    ## consists of no preprocessing tokens, the argument consists of a single placemarker preprocessing
    token (6.10.5.3, 6.10.5.4). Otherwise, the argument consists of the results of the expansion of the
    contained pp-tokens as the replacement list of the current function-like macro before removal of
    placemarker tokens, rescanning, and further replacement.
8   NOTE The placemarker tokens are removed before stringization (6.10.5.2), and can be removed by rescanning
    and further replacement (6.10.5.4).
9   EXAMPLE 2

            #define F(...)           f(0 __VA_OPT__(,) __VA_ARGS__)
            #define G(X, ...)        f(0, X __VA_OPT__(,) __VA_ARGS__)
            #define SDEF(sname, ...) S sname __VA_OPT__(= { __VA_ARGS__ })
            #define EMP

            F(a, b, c)           // replaced by f(0, a, b, c)
            F()                  // replaced by f(0)
            F(EMP)               // replaced by f(0)

            G(a, b, c)           // replaced by f(0, a, b, c)
            G(a, )               // replaced by f(0, a)
            G(a)                 // replaced by f(0, a)

            SDEF(foo);           // replaced by S foo;
            SDEF(bar, 1, 2);     // replaced by S bar = { 1, 2 };

            #define H1(X, ...)    X __VA_OPT__(##) __VA_ARGS__
                              // error: ## on line above
                              // may not appear at the beginning of a replacement
                              // list (6.10.5.3)

            #define H2(X, Y, ...) __VA_OPT__(X ## Y,) __VA_ARGS__

                                       © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                            § 6.10.5.1
                                                Language — 180

              H2(a, b, c, d)           // replaced by ab, c, d

              #define H3(X, ...)    #__VA_OPT__(X##X X##X)
              H3(, 0)           // replaced by ""

              #define H4(X, ...)    __VA_OPT__(a X ## X) ## b
              H4(, 1)           // replaced by a b

              #define H5A(...)             __VA_OPT__()/**/__VA_OPT__()
              #define H5B(X)               a ## X ## b
              #define H5C(X)               H5B(X)
              H5C(H5A())               // replaced by ab

    6.10.5.2 The # operator
    Constraints
1   Each # preprocessing token in the replacement list for a function-like macro shall be followed by a
    parameter as the next preprocessing token in the replacement list.

    Semantics
2   If, in the replacement list, a parameter is immediately preceded by a # preprocessing token, both
    are replaced by a single character string literal preprocessing token that contains the spelling of the
    preprocessing token sequence for the corresponding argument (excluding placemarker tokens).
3   Let the stringizing argument be the preprocessing token sequence for the corresponding argument
    with placemarker tokens removed. Each occurrence of white space between the stringizing argu-
    ment’s preprocessing tokens becomes a single space character in the character string literal. White
    space before the first preprocessing token and after the last preprocessing token composing the
    stringizing argument is deleted. Otherwise, the original spelling of each preprocessing token in
    the stringizing argument is retained in the character string literal, except for special handling for
    producing the spelling of string literals and character constants: a \ character is inserted before each
    " and \ character of a character constant or string literal (including the delimiting " characters),
    except that it is implementation-defined whether a \ character is inserted before the \ character
    beginning a universal character name.
4   If the replacement that results is not a valid character string literal, the behavior is undefined.
    The character string literal corresponding to an empty stringizing argument is "". The order of
    evaluation of # and ## operators is unspecified.

    6.10.5.3 The ## operator
    Constraints
1   A ## preprocessing token shall not occur at the beginning or at the end of a replacement list for
    either form of macro definition.

    Semantics
2   If, in the replacement list of a function-like macro, a parameter is immediately preceded or followed
    by a ## preprocessing token, the parameter is replaced by the corresponding argument’s preprocess-
    ing token sequence; however, if an argument consists of no preprocessing tokens, the parameter is
    replaced by a placemarker preprocessing token instead.205)
3   For both object-like and function-like macro invocations, before the replacement list is reexamined
    for more macro names to replace, each instance of a ## preprocessing token in the replacement list
    (not from an argument) is deleted and the preceding preprocessing token is concatenated with the
    following preprocessing token. Placemarker preprocessing tokens are handled specially: concatena-
    tion of two placemarkers results in a single placemarker preprocessing token, and concatenation
    of a placemarker with a non-placemarker preprocessing token results in the non-placemarker pre-
    processing token. If the result is not a valid preprocessing token, the behavior is undefined. The
     205) Placemarker preprocessing tokens do not appear in the syntax because they are temporary entities that exist only within

    translation phase 4 (5.1.1.2).

    § 6.10.5.3                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                        Language — 181

    resulting token is available for further macro replacement. The order of evaluation of ## operators is
    unspecified.
4   EXAMPLE In the following fragment:

             #define hash_hash # ## #
             #define mkstr(a) # a
             #define in_between(a) mkstr(a)
             #define join(c, d) in_between(c hash_hash d)

             char p[] = join(x, y); // equivalent to
                                    // char p[] = "x ## y";

    The expansion produces, at various stages:

             join(x, y)

             in_between(x hash_hash y)

             in_between(x ## y)

             mkstr(x ## y)

             "x ## y"

    In other words, expanding hash_hash produces a new token, consisting of two adjacent sharp signs, but this
    new token is not the ## operator.

    6.10.5.4 Rescanning and further replacement
1   After all parameters in the replacement list have been substituted and # and ## processing has
    taken place, all placemarker preprocessing tokens are removed. The resulting preprocessing token
    sequence is then rescanned, along with all subsequent preprocessing tokens of the source file, for
    more macro names to replace.
2   If the name of the macro being replaced is found during this scan of the replacement list (not
    including the rest of the source file’s preprocessing tokens), it is not replaced. Furthermore, if any
    nested replacements encounter the name of the macro being replaced, it is not replaced. These
    nonreplaced macro name preprocessing tokens are no longer available for further replacement even
    if they are later (re)examined in contexts in which that macro name preprocessing token would
    otherwise have been replaced.
3   The resulting completely macro-replaced preprocessing token sequence is not processed as a prepro-
    cessing directive even if it resembles one, but all pragma unary operator expressions within it are
    then processed as specified in 6.10.11.
4   EXAMPLE There are cases where it is not clear whether a replacement is nested or not. For example, given the
    following macro definitions:

             #define f(a) a*g
             #define g(a) f(a)

    the invocation

             f(2)(9)

    could expand to either

             2*f(9)

    or

             2*9*g

                                        © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                              § 6.10.5.4
                                                 Language — 182

    Strictly conforming programs are not permitted to depend on such unspecified behavior.

    6.10.5.5 Scope of macro definitions
1   A macro definition lasts (independent of block structure) until a corresponding #undef directive is
    encountered or (if none is encountered) until the end of the preprocessing translation unit. Macro
    definitions have no significance after translation phase 4.
2   A preprocessing directive of the form
                         # undef identifier new-line
    causes the specified identifier no longer to be defined as a macro name. It is ignored if the specified
    identifier is not currently defined as a macro name.
3   EXAMPLE 1 The simplest use of this facility is to define a "manifest constant", as in

             #define TABSIZE 100

             int table[TABSIZE];

4   EXAMPLE 2 The following defines a function-like macro whose value is the maximum of its arguments. It has
    the advantages of working for any compatible types of the arguments and of generating in-line code without
    the overhead of function calling. It has the disadvantages of evaluating one or the other of its arguments a
    second time (including side effects) and generating more code than a function if invoked several times. It also
    cannot have its address taken, as it has none.

             #define max(a, b) ((a)         >   (b) ? (a): (b))

    The parentheses ensure that the arguments and the resulting expression are bound properly.
5   EXAMPLE 3 To illustrate the rules for redefinition and reexamination, the sequence

             #define x      3
             #define f(a)   f(x * (a))
             #undef x
             #define x      2
             #define g      f
             #define z      z[0]
             #define h      g(~
             #define m(a)   a(w)
             #define w      0,1
             #define t(a)   a
             #define p()    int
             #define q(x)   x
             #define r(x,y) x ## y
             #define str(x) # x

             f(y+1) + f(f(z)) % t(t(g)(0) + t)(1);
             g(x+(3,4)-w) | h 5) & m
                   (f)^m(m);
             p() i[q()] = { q(1), r(2,3), r(4,), r(,5), r(,) };
             char c[2][6] = { str(hello), str() };

    results in

             f(2 * (y+1)) + f(2 * (f(2 * (z[0])))) % f(2 * (0)) + t(1);
             f(2 * (2+(3,4)-0,1)) | f(2 * (~ 5)) & f(2 * (0,1))^m(0,1);
             int i[] = { 1, 23, 4, 5, };
             char c[2][6] = { "hello", "" };

6   EXAMPLE 4 To illustrate the rules for creating character string literals and concatenating tokens, the sequence

             #define str(s)           # s

    § 6.10.5.5                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                  Language — 183

             #define xstr(s)     str(s)
             #define debug(s, t) printf("x" # s "= %d, x" # t "= %s", \
                                     x ## s, x ## t)
             #define INCFILE(n) vers ## n
             #define glue(a, b) a ## b
             #define xglue(a, b) glue(a, b)
             #define HIGHLOW     "hello"
             #define LOW         LOW ", world"

             debug(1, 2);
             fputs(str(strncmp("abc\0d", "abc", ’\4’) // this goes away
                   == 0) str(: @\n), s);
             #include xstr(INCFILE(2).h)
             glue(HIGH, LOW);
             xglue(HIGH, LOW)

    results in

             printf("x" "1" "= %d, x" "2" "= %s", x1, x2);
             fputs(
               "strncmp(\"abc\\0d\", \"abc\", ’\\4’) == 0" ": @\n",
               s);
             #include "vers2.h"    (after macro replacement, before file access)
             "hello";
             "hello" ", world"

    or, after concatenation of the character string literals,

             printf("x1= %d, x2= %s", x1, x2);
             fputs(
               "strncmp(\"abc\\0d\", \"abc\", ’\\4’) == 0: @\n",
               s);
             #include "vers2.h"    (after macro replacement, before file access)
             "hello";
             "hello, world"

    Space around the # and ## tokens in the macro definition is optional.
7   EXAMPLE 5 To illustrate the rules for placemarker preprocessing tokens, the sequence

             #define t(x,y,z) x ## y ## z
             int j[] = { t(1,2,3), t(,4,5), t(6,,7), t(8,9,),
                        t(10,,), t(,11,), t(,,12), t(,,) };

    results in

             int j[] = { 123, 45, 67, 89,
                         10, 11, 12, };

8   EXAMPLE 6 To demonstrate the redefinition rules, the following sequence is valid.

             #define OBJ_LIKE      (1-1)
             #define OBJ_LIKE      /* white space */ (1-1) /* other */
             #define FUNC_LIKE(a)   ( a )
             #define FUNC_LIKE( a ) (      /* note the white space */ \
                                     a /* other stuff on this line
                                        */)

    But the following redefinitions of the preceding definitions are invalid:

             #define OBJ_LIKE           (0)        // different token sequence

                                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                § 6.10.5.5
                                                      Language — 184

               #define OBJ_LIKE    (1 - 1) // different white space
               #define FUNC_LIKE(b) ( a )    // different parameter usage
               #define FUNC_LIKE(b) ( b )    // different parameter spelling

9   EXAMPLE 7 Finally, to show the variable argument list macro facilities:

               #define debug(...)      fprintf(stderr, __VA_ARGS__)
               #define showlist(...)   puts(#__VA_ARGS__)
               #define report(test, ...) ((test)?puts(#test):\
                           printf(__VA_ARGS__))
               debug("Flag");
               debug("X = %d\n", x);
               showlist(The first, second, and third items.);
               report(x>y, "x is %d but y is %d", x, y);

    results in

               fprintf(stderr, "Flag");
               fprintf(stderr, "X = %d\n", x);
               puts("The first, second, and third items.");
               ((x>y)?puts("x>y"):
                           printf("x is %d but y is %d", x, y));

    6.10.6       Line control
    Constraints
1   The string literal of a #line directive, if present, shall be a character string literal.

    Semantics
2   The line number of the current source line is one greater than the number of new-line characters read
    or introduced in translation phase 1 (5.1.1.2) while processing the source file to the current token.
3   If a preprocessing token (in particular __LINE__) spans two or more physical lines, it is unspecified
    which of those line numbers is associated with that token. If a preprocessing directive spans two or
    more physical lines, it is unspecified which of those line numbers is associated with the preprocessing
    directive. If a macro invocation spans multiple physical lines, it is unspecified which of those line
    numbers is associated with that invocation. The line number of a preprocessing token is independent
    of the context (in particular, as a macro argument or in a preprocessing directive). The line number
    of a __LINE__ in a macro body is the line number of the macro invocation.
4   A preprocessing directive of the form
                        # line digit-sequence new-line
    causes the implementation to behave as if the following sequence of source lines begins with a
    source line that has a line number as specified by the digit sequence (interpreted as a decimal integer,
    ignoring any optional digit separators (6.4.4.2) in the digit sequence). The digit sequence shall not
    specify zero, nor a number greater than 2147483647.
5   A preprocessing directive of the form
                        # line digit-sequence " s-char-sequenceopt " new-line
    sets the presumed line number similarly and changes the presumed name of the source file to be the
    contents of the character string literal.
6   A preprocessing directive of the form
                        # line pp-tokens new-line
    (that does not match one of the two previous forms) is permitted. The preprocessing tokens after
    line on the directive are processed just as in normal text (each identifier currently defined as a
    macro name is replaced by its replacement list of preprocessing tokens). The directive resulting after

    § 6.10.6                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                Language — 185

    all replacements shall match one of the two previous forms and is then processed as appropriate.206)

    Recommended practice
7   The line number associated with a pp-token should be the line number of the first character of the
    pp-token. The line number associated with a preprocessing directive should be the line number of
    the line with the first # token. The line number associated with a macro invocation should be the
    line number of the first character of the macro name in the invocation.

    6.10.7      Diagnostic directives
    Semantics
1   A preprocessing directive of either form
                           # error pp-tokensopt new-line
                           # warning pp-tokensopt new-line
    causes the implementation to produce a diagnostic message that includes the specified sequence of
    preprocessing tokens.

    6.10.8      Pragma directive
    Semantics
1   A preprocessing directive of the form
                           # pragma pp-tokensopt new-line
    where the preprocessing token STDC does not immediately follow pragma in the directive (prior
    to any macro replacement)207) causes the implementation to behave in an implementation-defined
    manner. The behavior may cause translation to fail or cause the translator or the resulting program to
    behave in a non-conforming manner. Any such pragma that is not recognized by the implementation
    is ignored.
2   If the preprocessing token STDC does immediately follow pragma in the directive (prior to any macro
    replacement), then no macro replacement is performed on the directive, and the directive shall have
    one of the following forms208) whose meanings are described elsewhere:
    standard-pragma:
                           # pragma STDC FP_CONTRACT on-off-switch
                           # pragma STDC FENV_ACCESS on-off-switch
                           # pragma STDC FENV_DEC_ROUND dec-direction
                           # pragma STDC FENV_ROUND direction
                           # pragma STDC CX_LIMITED_RANGE on-off-switch

    on-off-switch: one of
                          ON       OFF       DEFAULT

    direction: one of
                          FE_DOWNWARD            FE_TONEAREST            FE_TONEARESTFROMZERO
                          FE_TOWARDZERO            FE_UPWARD            FE_DYNAMIC

     206) Because a new-line is explicitly included as part of the #line directive, the number of new-line characters read while

    processing to the first pp-token can be different depending on whether the implementation uses a one-pass preprocessor.
    Therefore, there are two possible values for the line number following a directive of the form #line __LINE__ new-line.
     207) An implementation is not required to perform macro replacement in pragmas, but it is permitted except for in standard

    pragmas (where STDC immediately follows pragma). If the result of macro replacement in a non-standard pragma has the
    same form as a standard pragma, the behavior is still implementation-defined; an implementation is permitted to behave as
    if it were the standard pragma, but is not required to.
     208) See "future language directions" (6.11.6).

                                             © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                         § 6.10.8
                                                        Language — 186

    dec-direction: one of
                           FE_DEC_DOWNWARD            FE_DEC_TONEAREST            FE_DEC_TONEARESTFROMZERO
                           FE_DEC_TOWARDZERO            FE_DEC_UPWARD            FE_DEC_DYNAMIC

    Recommended practice
3   Implementations are encouraged to diagnose unrecognized pragmas.
    Forward references:   the FP_CONTRACT pragma (7.12.2), the FENV_ACCESS pragma
    (7.6.1), the FENV_DEC_ROUND pragma (7.6.3), the FENV_ROUND pragma (7.6.2), the
    CX_LIMITED_RANGE pragma (7.3.4).

    6.10.9      Null directive
    Semantics
1   A preprocessing directive of the form
                           # new-line
    has no effect.

    6.10.10       Predefined macro names
    6.10.10.1     General
1   The values of the predefined macros listed in the following subclauses209) (except for __FILE__ and
    __LINE__) remain constant throughout the translation unit.

2   None of the following macro names in this subclause nor the identifiers defined,
    __has_c_attribute, __has_include, or __has_embed shall be the subject of a #define or
    a #undef preprocessing directive. Any other predefined macro names: shall begin with a leading
    underscore followed by an uppercase letter; or, a second underscore; or, shall be any of the
    identifiers alignas, alignof, bool, false, static_assert, thread_local, or true.
3   The implementation shall not predefine the macro __cplusplus, nor shall it define it in any standard
    header.
    Forward references: standard headers (7.1.2).

    6.10.10.2 Mandatory macros
1   The following macro names shall be defined by the implementation:

    __DATE__ The date of translation of the preprocessing translation unit: a character string literal of
             the form "Mmm dd yyyy", where the names of the months are the same as those generated
             by the asctime function, and the first character of dd is a space character if the value is
                  less than 10. If the date of translation is not available, an implementation-defined valid
                  date shall be supplied.
    __FILE__ The presumed name of the current source file (a character string literal).210)

    __LINE__ The presumed line number (within the current source file) of the current source line (an
                  integer constant).210)
    __STDC__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate a conforming implementation.

    __STDC_EMBED_NOT_FOUND__ , __STDC_EMBED_FOUND__ , __STDC_EMBED_EMPTY__ The integer con-
             stants 0, 1, and 2, respectively.
    __STDC_HOSTED__ The integer constant 1 if the implementation is a hosted implementation or the
             integer constant 0 if it is not.
    209) See "future language directions" (6.11.7).
    210) The presumed source file name and line number can be changed by the #line directive.

    § 6.10.10.2                              © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                      Language — 187

    __STDC_UTF_16__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that values of type char16_t are
                 UTF-16 encoded.
    __STDC_UTF_32__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that values of type char32_t are
                 UTF-32 encoded.
    __STDC_VERSION__ The integer constant 202311L.211)

    __TIME__ The time of translation of the preprocessing translation unit: a character string literal of
             the form "hh:mm:ss" as in the time generated by the asctime function. If the time of
                 translation is not available, an implementation-defined valid time shall be supplied.

    Forward references: the asctime function (7.29.3.1).

    6.10.10.3 Environment macros
1   The following macro names are conditionally defined by the implementation:

    __STDC_ISO_10646__ An integer constant of the form yyyymmL (for example, 202012L). If this
                 symbol is defined, then every character in the Unicode required set, when stored in an
                 object of type wchar_t, has the same value as the short identifier of that character. The
                 Unicode required set consists of all the characters that are defined by ISO/IEC 10646, along
                 with all amendments and technical corrigenda, as of the specified year and month. If
                 some other encoding is used, the macro shall not be defined and the actual encoding
                 used is implementation-defined.
    __STDC_MB_MIGHT_NEQ_WC__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that, in the encoding for
             wchar_t, a member of the basic character set is not required to have a code value equal
                 to its value when used as the lone character in an integer character constant.

    Forward references: common definitions (7.21), Unicode utilities (7.30).

    6.10.10.4 Conditional feature macros
1   The following macro names are conditionally defined by the implementation:

    __STDC_ANALYZABLE__ The integer constant 1, if the implementation conforms to the specifications
                 in Annex L (Analyzability).
    __STDC_IEC_60559_BFP__ The integer constant 202311L, intended to indicate conformance to
                 Annex F (ISO/IEC 60559 floating-point arithmetic) for binary floating-point arithmetic.
    __STDC_IEC_559__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate conformance to the specifications
                 in Annex F (ISO/IEC 60559 floating-point arithmetic) for binary floating-point arithmetic.
                 Use of this macro is an obsolescent feature.
    __STDC_IEC_60559_DFP__ The integer constant 202311L, intended to indicate support of decimal
                 floating types and conformance to Annex F (ISO/IEC 60559 floating-point arithmetic) for
                 decimal floating-point arithmetic.
    __STDC_IEC_60559_COMPLEX__ The integer constant 202311L, intended to indicate conformance
                 to the specifications in Annex G (ISO/IEC 60559 compatible complex arithmetic).
    __STDC_IEC_60559_TYPES__ The integer constant 202311L, intended to indicate conformance to
                 the specification in Annex H (ISO/IEC 60559 interchange and extended types).
    __STDC_IEC_559_COMPLEX__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate adherence to the specifi-
                 cations in Annex G (ISO/IEC 60559 compatible complex arithmetic). Use of this macro is
                 an obsolescent feature.
     211) See Annex M for the values in previous editions of this document. The intention is that this will remain an integer

    constant of type long int that is increased with each revision of this document.

                                            © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                                    § 6.10.10.4
                                                       Language — 188

    __STDC_LIB_EXT1__ The integer constant 202311L, intended to indicate support for the extensions
                defined in Annex K (Bounds-checking interfaces).
    __STDC_NO_ATOMICS__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that the implementation does
             not support atomic types (including the _Atomic type qualifier) and the <stdatomic.h>
                header.
    __STDC_NO_COMPLEX__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that the implementation does
             not support complex types or the <complex.h> header.
    __STDC_NO_THREADS__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that the implementation does
             not support the <threads.h> header.
    __STDC_NO_VLA__ The integer constant 1, intended to indicate that the implementation does not
                support variable length arrays with automatic storage duration. Parameters declared
                with variable length array types are adjusted and then define objects of automatic storage
                duration with pointer types. Thus, support for such declarations is mandatory.

2   NOTE       The intention for the macros __STDC_LIB_EXT1__,                   __STDC_IEC_60559_BFP__,
    __STDC_IEC_60559_DFP__, __STDC_IEC_60559_COMPLEX__, and __STDC_IEC_60559_TYPES__, with
    the value 202311L, is that this will remain an integer constant of type long int that is increased with each
    revision of this document.
3   An implementation that defines __STDC_NO_COMPLEX__ shall not define __STDC_IEC_60559_COMPLEX__
    or __STDC_IEC_559_COMPLEX__.

    6.10.11     Pragma operator
    Semantics
1   A unary operator expression of the form:
                          _Pragma ( string-literal )

    is processed as follows: The string literal is destringized by deleting any encoding prefix, deleting
    the leading and trailing double-quotes, replacing each escape sequence \" by a double-quote, and
    replacing each escape sequence \\ by a single backslash. The resulting sequence of characters
    is processed through translation phase 3 to produce preprocessing tokens that are executed as if
    they were the pp-tokens in a pragma directive. The original four preprocessing tokens in the unary
    operator expression are removed.
2   EXAMPLE A directive of the form:

              #pragma listing on "..\listing.dir"

    can also be expressed as:

              _Pragma ("listing on \"..\\listing.dir\"")

    The latter form is processed in the same way whether it appears literally as shown, or results from macro
    replacement, as in:

              #define LISTING(x) PRAGMA(listing on #x)
              #define PRAGMA(x) _Pragma(#x)

              LISTING (..\listing.dir)

    § 6.10.11                          © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                                 Language — 189

    6.11 Future language directions
    6.11.1 Floating types
1   Future standardization may include additional floating types, including those with greater range,
    precision, or both than long double.

    6.11.2   Linkages of identifiers
1   Declaring an identifier with internal linkage at file scope without the static or constexpr storage-
    class specifier is an obsolescent feature.

    6.11.3   External names
1   Restriction of the significance of an external name to fewer than 255 characters (considering each
    universal character name or extended source character as a single character) is an obsolescent feature
    that is a concession to existing implementations.

    6.11.4   Character escape sequences
1   Lowercase letters as escape sequences are reserved for future standardization. Other characters may
    be used in extensions.

    6.11.5   Storage-class specifiers
1   The placement of a storage-class specifier other than at the beginning of the declaration specifiers in
    a declaration is an obsolescent feature.
2   Future standardization may change the auto storage-class specifier to a type specifier.

    6.11.6   Pragma directives
1   Pragmas whose first preprocessing token is STDC are reserved for future standardization.

    6.11.7   Predefined macro names
1   Macro names beginning with __STDC_ are reserved for future standardization.
2   Uses of the __STDC_IEC_559__ and __STDC_IEC_559_COMPLEX__ macros are obsolescent features.

                                      © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved                             § 6.11.7
                                               Language — 190
