
                                                Annex I
                                               (informative)
                                       Common warnings

    I.1     Introduction
1   An implementation may generate warnings in many situations to help find a source of unintended
    behavior during the translation or execution of a program. Many such situations are not specified as
    part of this document.

    I.2     Common situations
1   The following are a few of the common situations where an implementation may generate a warning:

      — A new struct or union type appears in a function prototype (6.2.1, 6.7.3.4).
      — A block with initialization of an object that has automatic storage duration is jumped into
        (6.2.4).
      — An implicit narrowing conversion is encountered, such as the assignment of a long int or a
        double to an int, or a pointer to void to a pointer to any type other than a character type (6.3).

      — A hexadecimal floating constant cannot be represented exactly in its evaluation format (6.4.4.3).
      — An integer character constant includes more than one character or a wide character constant
        includes more than one multibyte character (6.4.4.5).
      — The characters /* are found in a comment (6.4.7).

      — An "unordered" binary operator (not comma, &&, or ||) contains a side effect to an lvalue in
        one operand, and a side effect to, or an access to the value of, the identical lvalue in the other
        operand (6.5.1).
      — An object is defined but not used (6.7).

      — A value is given to an object of an enumerated type other than by assignment of an enumeration
        constant that is a member of that type, or an enumeration object that has the same type, or the
        value of a function that returns the same enumerated type (6.7.3.3).
      — An aggregate has a partly bracketed initialization (6.7.9).

      — A statement cannot be reached (6.8).
      — A statement with no apparent effect is encountered (6.8).
      — A constant expression is used as the controlling expression of a selection statement (6.8.5).
      — An incorrectly formed preprocessing group is encountered while skipping a preprocessing
        group (6.10.2).
      — An unrecognized #pragma directive is encountered (6.10.8).

    § I.2                           © ISO 2024 — All rights reserved
                                         Common warnings — 585
