    INTRODUCTION TO SYSTEM V IPC

System V IPC is the label used to refer to three different mechanisms for interpro-
cess communication:

•   Message queues can be used to pass messages between processes. Message
    queues are somewhat like pipes, but differ in two important respects. First,
    message boundaries are preserved, so that readers and writers communicate in
    units of messages, rather than via an undelimited byte stream. Second, each
    message includes an integer type field, and it is possible to select messages by
    type, rather than reading them in the order in which they were written.
•   Semaphores permit multiple processes to synchronize their actions. A semaphore
    is a kernel-maintained integer value that is visible to all processes that have the
    necessary permissions. A process indicates to its peers that it is performing some
    action by making an appropriate modification to the value of the semaphore.
•   Shared memory enables multiple processes to share the same region (called a
    segment) of memory (i.e., the same page frames are mapped into the virtual
    memory of multiple processes). Since access to user-space memory is a fast
    operation, shared memory is one of the quickest methods of IPC: once one
    process has updated the shared memory, the change is immediately visible to
    other processes sharing the same segment.

Although these three IPC mechanisms are quite diverse in function, there are good
reasons for discussing them together. One reason is that they were developed
           together, first appearing in the late 1970s in Columbus UNIX. This was a Bell-internal
           UNIX implementation used for database and transaction-processing systems for
           telephone company record keeping and administration. Around 1983, these IPC
           mechanisms made their way into mainstream UNIX by appearing in System V—
           hence the appellation System V IPC.
                A more significant reason for discussing the System V IPC mechanisms
           together is that their programming interfaces share a number of common charac-
           teristics, so that many of the same concepts apply to all of these mechanisms.
                        Because System V IPC is required by SUSv3 for XSI conformance, it is some-
                        times alternatively labeled XSI IPC.

           This chapter provides an overview of the System V IPC mechanisms and details
           those features that are common to all three mechanisms. The three mechanisms
           are then discussed individually in the following chapters.
                        System V IPC is a kernel option that is configured via the CONFIG_SYSVIPC option.

45.1       API Overview
           Table 45-1 summarizes the header files and system calls used for working with
           System V IPC objects.
               Some implementations require the inclusion of <sys/types.h> before including
           the header files shown in Table 45-1. Some older UNIX implementations may also
           require the inclusion of <sys/ipc.h>. (No versions of the Single UNIX Specification
           required these header files.)
                        On most hardware architectures on which Linux is implemented, a single system
                        call (ipc(2)) acts as the entry point to the kernel for all System V IPC opera-
                        tions, and all of the calls listed in Table 45-1 are actually implemented as
                        library functions layered on top of this system call. (Two exceptions to this
                        arrangement are Alpha and IA-64, where the functions listed in the table really
                        are implemented as individual system calls.) This somewhat unusual approach
                        is an artifact of the initial implementation of System V IPC as a loadable kernel
                        module. Although they are actually library functions on most Linux architec-
                        tures, throughout this chapter, we’ll refer to the functions in Table 45-1 as sys-
                        tem calls. Only implementers of C libraries need to use ipc(2); any other use in
                        applications is not portable.

Table 45-1: Summary of programming interfaces for System V IPC objects

            Interface                Message queues            Semaphores            Shared memory
            Header file               <sys/msg.h>            <sys/sem.h>             <sys/shm.h>
            Associated data structure msqid_ds               semid_ds                shmid_ds
            Create/open object        msgget()               semget()                shmget() + shmat()
            Close object              (none)                 (none)                  shmdt()
            Control operations        msgctl()               semctl()                shmctl()
            Performing IPC            msgsnd()—write message semop()—test/adjust     access memory in
                                      msgrcv()—read message semaphore                shared region

Creating and opening a System V IPC object
Each System V IPC mechanism has an associated get system call (msgget(), semget(),
or shmget()), which is analogous to the open() system call used for files. Given an
integer key (analogous to a filename), the get call either:

•   creates a new IPC object with the given key and returns a unique identifier for
    that object; or
•   returns the identifier of an existing IPC object with the given key.

We’ll (loosely) term the second use opening an existing IPC object. In this case, all
that the get call is doing is converting one number (the key) into another number
(the identifier).
             In the context of System V IPC, the object doesn’t carry any of the connotations
             associated with object-oriented programming. The term merely serves to distin-
             guish the System V IPC mechanisms from files. Although there are several
             analogies between files and System V IPC objects, the use of IPC objects differs in
             several important respects from the standard UNIX file I/O model, and this is
             a source of some complications when using the System V IPC mechanisms.
An IPC identifier is analogous to a file descriptor in that it is used in all subsequent
system calls to refer to the IPC object. There is, however, an important semantic
difference. Whereas a file descriptor is a process attribute, an IPC identifier is a
property of the object itself and is visible system-wide. All processes accessing the
same object use the same identifier. This means that if we know an IPC object
already exists, we can skip the get call, provided we have some other means of
knowing the identifier of the object. For example, the process that created the
object might write the identifier to a file that can then be read by other processes.
     The following example shows how to create a System V message queue:
    id = msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
    if (id == -1)
        errExit("msgget");

As with all of the get calls, the key is the first argument, and the identifier is
returned as the function result. We specify the permissions to be placed on the new
object as part of the final (flags) argument to the get call, using the same bit-mask con-
stants as are used for files (Table 15-4, on page 295). In the above example, permission
is granted to just the owner of the object to read and write messages on the queue.
     The process umask (Section 15.4.6) is not applied to the permissions placed on
a newly created IPC object.
             Several UNIX implementations define the following bit-mask constants for IPC
             permissions: MSG_R, MSG_W, SEM_R, SEM_A, SHM_R, and SHM_W. These correspond to
             owner (user) read and write permissions for each IPC mechanism. To get the cor-
             responding group and other permission bit masks, these constants can be right-
             shifted 3 and 6 bits. These constants are not specified by SUSv3, which employs
             the same bit masks as are used for files, and are not defined in glibc headers.
Each process that wants to access the same IPC object performs a get call specifying
the same key in order to obtain the same identifier for that object. We consider
how to choose a key for an application in Section 45.2.

               If no IPC object corresponding to the given key currently exists, and IPC_CREAT
           (analogous to the open() O_CREAT flag) was specified as part of the flags argument,
           then the get call creates a new IPC object. If no corresponding IPC object currently
           exists, and IPC_CREAT was not specified (and the key was not specified as IPC_PRIVATE,
           described in Section 45.2), then the get call fails with the error ENOENT.
               A process can guarantee that it is the one creating an IPC object by specifying
           the IPC_EXCL flag (analogous to the open() O_EXCL flag). If IPC_EXCL is specified and the
           IPC object corresponding to the given key already exists, then the get call fails with
           the error EEXIST.

           IPC object deletion and object persistence
           The ctl system call (msgctl(), semctl(), shmctl()) for each System V IPC mechanism
           performs a range of control operations for the object. Many of these operations are
           specific to the IPC mechanism, but a few are generic to all IPC mechanisms. An
           example of a generic control operation is IPC_RMID, which is used to delete an object.
           For example, we can use the following call to delete a shared memory object:
                   if (shmctl(id, IPC_RMID, NULL) == -1)
                       errExit("shmctl");

           For message queues and semaphores, deletion of the IPC object is immediate, and
           any information contained within the object is destroyed, regardless of whether any
           other process is still using the object. (This is one of a number of points where the
           operation of System IPC objects is not analogous to files. In Section 18.3, we saw
           that if we remove the last link to a file, then the file is actually removed only after all
           open file descriptors referring to it have been closed.)
               Deletion of shared memory objects occurs differently. Following the shmctl(id,
           IPC_RMID, NULL) call, the shared memory segment is removed only after all pro-
           cesses using the segment detach it (using shmdt()). (This is much closer to the situa-
           tion with file deletion.)
               System V IPC objects have kernel persistence. Once created, an object contin-
           ues to exist until it is explicitly deleted or the system is shut down. This property of
           System V IPC objects can be advantageous. It is possible for a process to create an
           object, modify its state, and then exit, leaving the object to be accessed by some
           process that is started at a later time. It can also be disadvantageous for the follow-
           ing reasons:

           •       There are system-imposed limits on the number of IPC objects of each type. If
                   we fail to remove unused objects, we may eventually encounter application
                   errors as a result of reaching these limits.
           •       When deleting a message queue or semaphore object, a multiprocess application
                   may not be able to easily determine which will be the last process requiring
                   access to the object, and thus when the object can be safely deleted. The problem
                   is that these objects are connectionless—the kernel doesn’t keep a record of
                   which processes have the object open. (This disadvantage doesn’t apply for
                   shared memory segments, because of their different deletion semantics,
                   described above.)

45.2   IPC Keys
       System V IPC keys are integer values represented using the data type key_t. The IPC
       get calls translate a key into the corresponding integer IPC identifier. These calls
       guarantee that if we create a new IPC object, then that object will have a unique
       identifier, and that if we specify the key of an existing object, then we’ll always
       obtain the (same) identifier for that object. (Internally, the kernel maintains data
       structures mapping keys to identifiers for each IPC mechanism, as described in
       Section 45.5.)
            So, how do we provide a unique key—one that guarantees that we won’t acci-
       dentally obtain the identifier of an existing IPC object used by some other applica-
       tion? There are three possibilities:

       •     Randomly choose some integer key value, which is typically placed in a header
             file included by all programs using the IPC object. The difficulty with this
             approach is that we may accidentally choose a value used by another application.
       •     Specify the IPC_PRIVATE constant as the key value to the get call when creating the
             IPC object, which always results in the creation of a new IPC object that is guar-
             anteed to have a unique key.
       •     Employ the ftok() function to generate a (likely unique) key.

       Using either IPC_PRIVATE or ftok() is the usual technique.

       Generating a unique key with IPC_PRIVATE
       When creating a new IPC object, the key may be specified as IPC_PRIVATE, as follows:
             id = msgget(IPC_PRIVATE, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);

       In this case, it is not necessary to specify the IPC_CREAT or IPC_EXCL flags.
           This technique is especially useful in multiprocess applications where the parent
       process creates the IPC object prior to performing a fork(), with the result that the
       child inherits the identifier of the IPC object. We can also use this technique in client-
       server applications (i.e., those involving unrelated processes), but the clients must
       have a means of obtaining the identifiers of the IPC objects created by the server
       (and vice versa). For example, after creating an IPC object, the server could then
       write its identifier to a file that can be read by the clients.

       Generating a unique key with ftok()
       The ftok() (file to key) function returns a key value suitable for use in a subsequent
       call to one of the System V IPC get system calls.

           #include <sys/ipc.h>

           key_t ftok(char *pathname, int proj);
                                             Returns integer key on success, or –1 on error

           This key value is generated from the supplied pathname and proj value using an
           implementation-defined algorithm. SUSv3 makes the following requirements:

           •       Only the least significant 8 bits of proj are employed by the algorithm.
           •       The application must ensure that the pathname refers to an existing file to
                   which stat() can be applied (otherwise, ftok() returns –1).
           •       If different pathnames (links) referring to the same file (i.e., i-node) are sup-
                   plied to ftok() with the same proj value, the same key value must be returned.

           To put things another way, ftok() uses the i-node number rather than the name of
           the file to generate the key value. (Because the ftok() algorithm depends on the i-node
           number, the file should not be removed and re-created during the life of the applica-
           tion, since it is likely that the file will be re-created with a different i-node number.)
           The purpose of the proj value is simply to allow us to generate multiple keys from
           the same file, which is useful when an application needs to create multiple IPC
           objects of the same type. Historically, the proj argument was of type char, and it is
           often specified as such in calls to ftok().
                           SUSv3 leaves the behavior of ftok() unspecified if proj is 0. Under AIX 5.1, ftok()
                           returns –1 if proj is specified as 0. On Linux, this value has no special meaning.
                           Nevertheless, portable applications should avoid specifying proj as 0; this still
                           leaves a choice of 255 other values.
           Normally, the pathname given to ftok() refers to one of the files or directories that
           forms part of, or is created by, the application, and cooperating processes pass the
           same pathname to ftok().
                On Linux, the key returned by ftok() is a 32-bit value, created by taking the least
           significant 8 bits from the proj argument, the least significant 8 bits of the device
           number (i.e., the minor device number) of the device containing the file system in
           which the file resides, and the least significant 16 bits of the i-node number of the
           file referred to by pathname. (The last two pieces of information are obtained by
           calling stat() on pathname.)
                The glibc ftok() algorithm is similar to that employed on other UNIX implemen-
           tations, and suffers a similar limitation: there is a (very small) possibility that two
           different files could yield the same key value. This can occur because there is a chance
           that the least significant bits of an i-node number could be the same for two files on
           different file systems, coupled with the possibility that two different disk devices
           (on a system with multiple disk controllers) could have the same minor device num-
           ber. However, in practice, the possibility of colliding key values for different appli-
           cations is small enough that the use of ftok() for key generation is a viable
           technique.
                A typical usage of ftok() is the following:
                   key_t key;
                   int id;

                   key = ftok("/mydir/myfile", 'x');
                   if (key == -1)
                       errExit("ftok");

           id = msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);
           if (id == -1)
               errExit("msgget");

45.3   Associated Data Structure and Object Permissions
       The kernel maintains an associated data structure for each instance of a System V
       IPC object. The form of this data structure varies according to the IPC mechanism
       (message queue, semaphore, or shared memory) and is defined in the correspond-
       ing header file for the IPC mechanism (see Table 45-1). We discuss mechanism-
       specific details of each of these data structures in the following chapters.
            The associated data structure for an IPC object is initialized when the object is
       created via the appropriate get system call. Once the object has been created, a pro-
       gram can obtain a copy of this data structure using the appropriate ctl system call,
       by specifying an operation type of IPC_STAT. Conversely, some parts of the data
       structure can be modified using the IPC_SET operation.
            As well as data specific to the type of IPC object, the associated data structure
       for all three IPC mechanisms includes a substructure, ipc_perm, that holds informa-
       tion used to determine permissions granted on the object:
           struct ipc_perm {
               key_t          __key;            /* Key, as supplied to 'get' call */
               uid_t          uid;              /* Owner's user ID */
               gid_t          gid;              /* Owner's group ID */
               uid_t          cuid;             /* Creator's user ID */
               gid_t          cgid;             /* Creator's group ID */
               unsigned short mode;             /* Permissions */
               unsigned short __seq;            /* Sequence number */
           };

       SUSv3 mandates all of the ipc_perm fields shown here, except __key and __seq. How-
       ever, most UNIX implementations provide some version of these fields.
            The uid and gid fields specify the ownership of the IPC object. The cuid and
       cgid fields hold the user and group IDs of the process that created the object. Ini-
       tially, the corresponding user and creator ID fields have the same values, which are
       taken from the effective IDs of the calling processes. The creator IDs are immutable,
       but the owner IDs can be changed via the IPC_SET operation. The following code
       demonstrates how to change the uid field for a shared memory segment (the associated
       data structure is of type shmid_ds):
           struct shmid_ds shmds;

           if (shmctl(id, IPC_STAT, &shmds) == -1)      /* Fetch from kernel */
               errExit("shmctl");
           shmds.shm_perm.uid = newuid;                 /* Change owner UID */
           if (shmctl(id, IPC_SET, &shmds) == -1)       /* Update kernel copy */
               errExit("shmctl");

       The mode field of the ipc_perm substructure holds the permissions mask for the IPC
       object. These permissions are initialized using the lower 9 bits of the flags specified

           in the get system call used to create the object, but can be changed subsequently
           using the IPC_SET operation.
               As with files, permissions are broken into three categories—owner (also known
           as user), group, and other—and it is possible to specify different permissions for each
           category. There are, however, some notable differences from the scheme used for files:

           •       Only read and write permissions are meaningful for IPC objects. (For sema-
                   phores, write permission is commonly referred to as alter permission.) Execute
                   permission is meaningless, and is ignored when performing most access
                   checks.
           •       Permission checks are made according to a process’s effective user ID, effective
                   group IDs, and supplementary group IDs. (This contrasts with file-system per-
                   mission checks on Linux, which are performed using the process’s file-system
                   IDs, as described in Section 9.5.)

           The precise rules governing the permissions a process is granted on an IPC object
           are as follows:

           1.      If the process is privileged (CAP_IPC_OWNER), then all permissions are granted on
                   the IPC object.
           2.      If the effective user ID of the process matches either the owner or the creator
                   user ID of the IPC object, then the process is granted the permissions defined
                   for the owner (user) of the object.
           3.      If the effective group ID or any of the supplementary group IDs of the process
                   match either the owner group ID or the creator group ID of the IPC object,
                   then the process is granted the group permissions defined for the object.
           4.      Otherwise, the process is granted the permissions defined for other.
                           In the kernel code, the above tests are constructed so that the test to see
                           whether a process is privileged is performed only if the process is not granted
                           the permissions it needs via one of the other tests. This is done to avoid unnec-
                           essarily setting the ASU process accounting flag, which indicates that the process
                           made use of superuser privileges (Section 28.1).
                                Note that neither the use of the IPC_PRIVATE key value nor the presence of
                           IPC_EXCL flag has any bearing on which processes may access an IPC object;
                           such access is determined solely by the ownership and permissions of the object.

           How read and write permissions are interpreted for an object, and whether they
           are required, depend on the type of object and on the operation being performed.
                When a get call is performed to obtain the identifier of an existing IPC object,
           an initial permission check is made to ascertain whether the permissions specified
           in the flags argument are compatible with those on the existing object. If not, then
           the get call fails with the error EACCES. (Except as otherwise noted, this error code is
           also returned when permissions are denied in each of the cases listed below.) To
           illustrate, consider the example of two different users in the same group, with one
           user creating a message queue using the following call:
                   msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IRGRP);
                                           /* rw-r----- */

       An attempt by the second user to obtain an identifier for this message queue using
       the following call would fail, since the user is not permitted write access to the mes-
       sage queue:
           msgget(key, S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR);

       The second user could bypass this check by specifying 0 for the second argument
       of the msgget() call, in which case an error would occur only when the program
       attempted an operation requiring write permission on the IPC object (e.g., writing
       a message with msgsnd()).
                    The get call represents the one case where execute permission is not ignored.
                    Even though it has no meaning for IPC objects, if execute permission is
                    requested in a get call for an existing object, then a check is made to see if that
                    permission is granted.

       The permissions required for other common operations are as follows:

       •   To retrieve information from the object (e.g., to read a message from a message
           queue, obtain the value of a semaphore, or attach a shared memory segment
           for read access) requires read permission.
       •   To update information within the object (e.g., to write a message to a message
           queue, change the value of a semaphore, or attach a shared memory segment
           for write access) requires write permission.
       •   To obtain a copy of the associated data structure for an IPC object (the IPC_STAT
           ctl operation) requires read permission.
       •   To remove an IPC object (the IPC_RMID ctl operation) or change its associated
           data structure (the IPC_SET ctl operation) requires neither read nor write per-
           mission. Rather, the calling process must either be privileged (CAP_SYS_ADMIN) or
           have an effective user ID matching either the owner user ID or the creator user
           ID of the object (otherwise, the error EPERM results).
                    It is possible to set the permissions on an IPC object so that the owner or creator
                    can no longer use IPC_STAT to obtain the associated data structure containing
                    the object permissions (which means that the object won’t be displayed by the
                    ipcs(1) command described in Section 45.6), although IPC_SET can still be used
                    to change them.

       Various other mechanism-specific operations require read or write permission, or
       the CAP_IPC_OWNER capability. We note the required permissions in the following
       chapters as the operations are described.

45.4   IPC Identifiers and Client-Server Applications
       In client-server applications, the server typically creates the System V IPC objects,
       while the client simply accesses them. In other words, the server performs an IPC
       get call specifying the flag IPC_CREAT, while the client omits this flag in its get call.

                Suppose a client engages in an extended dialogue with a server, with multiple
           IPC operations being performed by each process (e.g., multiple messages
           exchanged, a sequence of semaphore operations, or multiple updates to shared
           memory). What happens if the server process crashes or is deliberately halted and
           then restarted? At this point, it would make no sense to blindly reuse the existing
           IPC object created by the previous server process, since the new server process has
           no knowledge of the historical information associated with the current state of the
           IPC object. (For example, there may be a secondary request within a message
           queue that was sent by a client in response to an earlier message from the old
           server process.)
                In such a scenario, the only option for the server may be to abandon all existing
           clients, delete the IPC objects created by the previous server process, and create new
           instances of the IPC objects. A newly started server handles the possibility that a pre-
           vious instance of the server terminated prematurely by first trying to create an IPC
           object by specifying both the IPC_CREAT and the IPC_EXCL flags within the get call. If
           the get call fails because an object with the specified key already exists, then the
           server assumes the object was created by an old server process; it therefore uses the
           IPC_RMID ctl operation to delete the object, and once more performs a get call to create
           the object. (This may be combined with other steps to ensure that another server
           process is not currently running, such as those described in Section 55.6.) For a
           message queue, these steps might appear as shown in Listing 45-1.

Listing 45-1: Cleanup of IPC objects within a server
           ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– svipc/svmsg_demo_server.c
           #include <sys/types.h>
           #include <sys/ipc.h>
           #include <sys/msg.h>
           #include <sys/stat.h>
           #include "tlpi_hdr.h"

           #define KEY_FILE "/some-path/some-file"
                                           /* Should be an existing file or one
                                              that this program creates */

           int
           main(int argc, char *argv[])
           {
               int msqid;
               key_t key;
               const int MQ_PERMS = S_IRUSR | S_IWUSR | S_IWGRP;       /* rw--w---- */

                   /* Optional code here to check if another server process is
                      already running */

                   /* Generate the key for the message queue */

                   key = ftok(KEY_FILE, 1);
                   if (key == -1)
                       errExit("ftok");

           /* While msgget() fails, try creating the queue exclusively */

           while ((msqid = msgget(key, IPC_CREAT | IPC_EXCL | MQ_PERMS)) == -1) {
               if (errno == EEXIST) {          /* MQ with the same key already
                                                  exists - remove it and try again */
                   msqid = msgget(key, 0);
                   if (msqid == -1)
                       errExit("msgget() failed to retrieve old queue ID");
                   if (msgctl(msqid, IPC_RMID, NULL) == -1)
                       errExit("msgget() failed to delete old queue");
                   printf("Removed old message queue (id=%d)\n", msqid);

               } else {                        /* Some other error --> give up */
                   errExit("msgget() failed");
               }
           }

           /* Upon loop exit, we've successfully created the message queue,
              and we can then carry on to do other work... */

           exit(EXIT_SUCCESS);
       }
       ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– svipc/svmsg_demo_server.c
       Even if a restarted server re-created the IPC objects, there still would be a potential
       problem if supplying the same key to the get call always generated the same identi-
       fier whenever a new IPC object was created. Consider the solution just outlined
       from the point of view of the client. If the IPC objects re-created by the server use
       the same identifiers, then the client would have no way of becoming aware that the
       server has been restarted and that the IPC objects don’t contain the expected his-
       torical information.
            To solve this problem, the kernel employs an algorithm (described in the next
       section) that normally ensures that when a new IPC object is created, the object’s
       identifier will be different, even when the same key is supplied. Consequently, any
       clients of the old server process that attempt to use the old identifier will receive an
       error from the relevant IPC system call.
                    Solutions such as that shown in Listing 45-1 don’t completely solve the problem
                    of identifying a server restart when using System V shared memory, since a
                    shared memory object is deleted only when all processes have detached it from
                    their virtual address space. However, shared memory objects are typically used
                    in conjunction with System V semaphores, which are immediately deleted in
                    response to an IPC_RMID operation. This means that a client process will become
                    aware of a server restart when it tries to access the deleted semaphore object.

45.5   Algorithm Employed by System V IPC get Calls
       Figure 45-1 shows some of the structures used internally by the kernel to represent
       information about System V IPC objects (in this case semaphores, but the details
       are similar for other IPC mechanisms), including the fields used to calculate IPC
       keys. For each IPC mechanism (shared memory, message queue, or semaphore),

           the kernel maintains an associated ipc_ids structure that records various global
           information about all instances of that IPC mechanism. This information includes
           a dynamically sized array of pointers, entries, to the associated data structure for
           each object instance (semid_ds structures in the case of semaphores). The current
           size of the entries array is recorded in the size field, with the max_id field holding the
           index of the highest currently in-use element.
                  ipc_ids
                structure
                (sem_ids)
             size = 128                  sem_perm.__key = 0x4d0731db
             in_use = 2
             max_id = 3                  sem_perm.__seq = 9
             seq = 10
                                                                                 associated data
                                                                                   structures
             entries      0                                                         (semid_ds)
                          1              sem_perm.__key = 0x4b079002
                          2
                          3              sem_perm.__seq = 5

Figure 45-1: Kernel data structures used to represent System V IPC (semaphore) objects

           When an IPC get call is made, the algorithm used on Linux (other systems use simi-
           lar algorithms) is approximately as follows:

           1.      The list of associated data structures (pointed to by elements of the entries
                   array) is searched for one whose key field matches that specified in the get call.
                   a) If no match is found, and IPC_CREAT was not specified, then the error ENOENT
                      is returned.
                   b) If a match is found, but both IPC_CREAT and IPC_EXCL were specified, then the
                      error EEXIST is returned.
                   c)   Otherwise, if a match is found, then the following step is skipped.
           2.      If no match was found, and IPC_CREAT was specified, then a new mechanism-specific
                   associated data structure (semid_ds in Figure 45-1) is allocated and initialized.
                   This also involves updating various fields of the ipc_ids structure, and may
                   involve resizing the entries array. A pointer to the new structure is placed in the
                   first free element of entries. Two substeps are included as part of this initialization:
                   a) The key value supplied in the get call is copied into the xxx_perm.__key field
                      of the newly allocated structure.
                   b) The current value of the seq field of the ipc_ids structure is copied into the
                      xxx_perm.__seq field of the associated data structure, and the seq field is
                      incremented by one.

3.   The identifier for the IPC object is calculated using the following formula:
         identifier = index + xxx_perm.__seq * SEQ_MULTIPLIER

In the formula used to calculate the IPC identifier, index is the index of this object
instance within the entries array, and SEQ_MULTIPLIER is a constant defined with the
value 32,768 (IPCMNI in the kernel source file include/linux/ipc.h). For example,
in Figure 45-1, the identifier generated for the semaphore with the key value
0x4b079002 would be (2 + 5 * 32,768) = 163,842.
    Note the following points about the algorithm employed by the get calls:

•    Even if a new IPC object is created with the same key, it will almost certainly
     have a different identifier, since the identifier is calculated based on the seq
     value saved in the associated data structure, and this value is incremented by
     one during the creation of each object of this type.

             The algorithm employed within the kernel wraps the seq value back to 0 when
             it reaches the value (INT_MAX / IPCMNI)—that is, 2,147,483,647 / 32,768 = 65,535.
             Thus, a new IPC object could have the same identifier as a previous object if
             65,535 objects are created in the interim and the new object reuses the same
             element in the entries array as the previous object (i.e., this element must also
             have been freed in the interim). However, the chances of this occurring are small.

•    The algorithm generates a distinct set of identifier values for each index of the
     entries array.
•    Since the constant IPCMNI defines an upper limit on the number of System V
     objects of each type, the algorithm guarantees that each existing IPC object has
     a unique identifier.
•    Given an identifier value, the corresponding index into the entries array can be
     quickly calculated using this equation:
         index = identifier % SEQ_MULTIPLIER

     Being able to rapidly perform this calculation is necessary for the efficient
     operation of those IPC system calls that are supplied with the identifier of an
     IPC object (i.e., those calls in Table 45-1 other than the get calls).

In passing, it is worth noting that two different errors can result if a process makes
an IPC system call (e.g., msgctl(), semop(), or shmat()) that specifies an identifier that
doesn’t correspond to an existing object. If the corresponding index of entries is
empty, the error EINVAL results. If the index points to an associated data structure,
but the sequence number stored in that structure doesn’t yield the same identifier
value, then it is assumed that an old object pointed to by this array index has been
deleted and the index reused. This scenario is diagnosed with the error EIDRM.

45.6       The ipcs and ipcrm Commands
           The ipcs and ipcrm commands are the System V IPC analogs of the ls and rm file
           commands. Using ipcs, we can obtain information about IPC objects on the system.
           By default, ipcs displays all objects, as in the following example:
                   $ ipcs

                   ------ Shared Memory Segments --------
                   key        shmid     owner     perms      bytes    nattch    status
                   0x6d0731db 262147    mtk       600        8192      2

                   ------ Semaphore Arrays --------
                   key        semid     owner     perms      nsems
                   0x6107c0b8 0         cecilia   660        6
                   0x6107c0b6 32769     britta    660        1

                   ------ Message Queues --------
                   key        msqid     owner     perms      used-bytes   messages
                   0x71075958 229376    cecilia   620        12           2

           On Linux, ipcs(1) displays information only about IPC objects for which we have read
           permission, regardless of whether we own the objects. On some UNIX implementa-
           tions, ipcs shows the same behavior as on Linux. However, on other implementations,
           ipcs displays all objects regardless of whether read permission is granted to the user.
                By default, for each object, ipcs displays the key, the identifier, the owner, and
           the permissions (expressed as an octal number), followed by information specific
           to the object:

           •       For shared memory, ipcs displays the size of the shared memory region, the num-
                   ber of processes that currently have the shared memory region attached to their
                   virtual address space, and status flags. The status flags indicate whether the region
                   has been locked into RAM to prevent swapping (Section 48.7) and whether the
                   region has been marked to be destroyed when all processes have detached it.
           •       For semaphores, ipcs displays the size of the semaphore set.
           •       For message queues, ipcs displays the total number of bytes of data and the
                   number of messages in the queue.

           The ipcs(1) manual page documents various options for displaying other informa-
           tion about IPC objects.
                The ipcrm command deletes an IPC object. The general form of this command
           is one of the following:
                   $ ipcrm -X key
                   $ ipcrm -x id

           In the above, we either specify key as an IPC object key or id as an IPC object identifier,
           and the letter x is replaced by an uppercase or lowercase q (for message queues),
           s (for semaphores), or m (for shared memory). Thus, we could use the following
           command to delete the semaphore set with the identifier 65538:
                   $ ipcrm -s 65538

45.7   Obtaining a List of All IPC Objects
       Linux provides two nonstandard methods of obtaining a list of all IPC objects on
       the system:
       •   files within the /proc/sysvipc directory that list all IPC objects; and
       •   the use of Linux-specific ctl calls.
       We describe the files in /proc/sysvipc directory here, and defer discussion of the ctl
       calls until Section 46.6, where we provide an example program that lists all
       System V message queues on the system.
                    Some other UNIX implementations have their own nonstandard methods of
                    obtaining a list of all IPC identifiers; for example, Solaris provides the msgids(),
                    semids(), and shmids() system calls for this purpose.

       Three read-only files in the /proc/sysvipc directory provide the same information as
       can be obtained via ipcs:
       •   /proc/sysvipc/msg lists all messages queues and their attributes.
       •   /proc/sysvipc/sem lists all semaphore sets and their attributes.
       •   /proc/sysvipc/shm lists all shared memory segments and their attributes.

       Unlike the ipcs command, these files always show all objects of the corresponding
       type, regardless of whether read permission is available on the objects.
           An example of the contents of /proc/sysvipc/sem is the following (with some
       white space removed to fit this example on the page):
           $ cat /proc/sysvipc/sem
           key     semid perms   nsems      uid     gid    cuid   cgid      otime             ctime
             0 16646144    600       4     1000     100    1000    100          0        1010166460

       The three /proc/sysvipc files provide a (nonportable) method for programs and
       scripts to walk through a list of all of the existing IPC objects of a given type.
                    The best that we can achieve by way of a portable approach to obtaining a list
                    of all IPC objects of a given type is to parse the output of ipcs(1).

45.8   IPC Limits
       Since System V IPC objects consume system resources, the kernel places various
       limits on each class of IPC object in order to prevent resources from being
       exhausted. The methods for placing limits on System V IPC objects are not speci-
       fied by SUSv3, but most UNIX implementations (including Linux) follow a similar
       framework for the types of limits that may be placed. As we cover each System V
       IPC mechanism in the following chapters, we discuss the associated limits and note
       differences from other UNIX implementations.
            Although the types of limits that can be placed on each class of IPC object are
       generally similar across various UNIX implementations, the methods of viewing
       and changing these limits are not. The methods described in the following chapters
       are Linux-specific (they generally involve the use of files in the /proc/sys/kernel
       directory); things are done differently on other implementations.
                                                                         Introdu ct i on to System V IPC   935
                        On Linux, the ipcs –l command can be used to list the limits on each of the IPC
                        mechanisms. Programs can employ the Linux-specific IPC_INFO ctl operation to
                        retrieve the same information.

45.9       Summary
           System V IPC is the name given to three IPC mechanisms that first appeared widely
           in System V, and have subsequently been ported to most UNIX implementations
           and incorporated into various standards. The three IPC mechanisms are message
           queues, which allow processes to exchange messages; semaphores, which allow pro-
           cesses to synchronize access to shared resources; and shared memory, which allows
           two or more processes to share the same pages of memory.
                The three IPC mechanisms have many similarities in their APIs and semantics.
           For each IPC mechanism, a get system call creates or opens an object. Given an integer
           key, the get calls return an integer identifier used to refer to the object in subsequent
           system calls. Each IPC mechanism also has a corresponding a ctl call that is used to
           delete an object and to retrieve and modify various attributes (e.g., ownership and
           permissions) in an object’s associated data structure.
                The algorithm used to generate identifiers for new IPC objects is designed to
           minimize the possibility of the same identifier being (immediately) reused if an
           object is deleted, even if the same key is used to create a new object. This enables
           client-server applications to function correctly—a restarted server process is able to
           detect and remove IPC objects created by its predecessor, and this action invali-
           dates the identifiers held by any clients of the previous server process.
                The ipcs command lists the System V IPC objects that currently exist on the
           system. The ipcrm command is used to remove System IPC objects.
                On Linux, files in the /proc/sysvipc directory can be used to obtain information
           about all of the System V IPC objects on the system.
                Each IPC mechanism has an associated set of limits that can be used to avoid
           exhaustion of system resources by preventing the creation of an arbitrary number
           of IPC objects. Various files under the /proc/sys/kernel directory can be used to
           view and modify these limits.

           Further information
           Information about the implementation of System V IPC on Linux can be found in
           [Maxwell, 1999] and [Bovet & Cesati, 2005]. [Goodheart & Cox, 1994] describes
           the implementation of System V IPC for System V Release 4.

45.10 Exercises
  45-1.    Write a program to verify that the algorithm employed by ftok() uses the file’s i-node
           number, minor device number, and proj value, as described in Section 45.2. (It is
           sufficient to print all of these values, as well as the return value from ftok(), in
           hexadecimal, and inspect the results for a few examples.)
  45-2.    Implement ftok().
  45-3.    Verify (by experiment) the statements made in Section 45.5 about the algorithm
           used to generate System V IPC identifiers.

