           C A S T I N G T H E NULL P O I N T E R

Consider the following call to the variadic function execl():
    execl("ls", "ls", "-l", (char *) NULL);

              A variadic function is one that takes a variable number of arguments or argu-
              ments of varying types.

Whether the cast is required before the NULL in cases like this is the source of some
confusion. While we can often get away without the cast, the C standards require it;
failure to include it may lead an application to break on some systems.
     NULL is typically defined as either 0 or as (void *) 0. (The C standards allow other
definitions, but they are essentially equivalent to one of these two possibilities.)
The main reason casts are needed is that NULL is allowed to be defined as 0, so this is
the case we examine first.
     The C preprocessor translates NULL to 0 before the source code is passed to the
compiler. The C standards specify that the integer constant 0 may be used in any
context where a pointer may be used, and the compiler will ensure that this value is
treated as a null pointer. In most cases, everything is fine, and we don’t need to
worry about casts. We can, for example, write code such as the following:
    int *p;

    p = 0;                                     /* Assign null pointer to 'p' */
    p = NULL;                                  /* Same as 'p = 0' */
           The above assignments work because the compiler can determine that a pointer
           value is required on the right-hand side of the assignment, and it will convert
           the value 0 to a null pointer.
               Similarly, for functions with prototypes specifying a fixed argument list, we can
           specify either 0 or NULL for a pointer argument, to indicate that a null pointer
           should be passed to the function:
                 sigaction(SIGINT, &sa, 0);
                 sigaction(SIGINT, &sa, NULL);                /* Equivalent to the preceding */

                          If we are passing a null pointer to an old-style, nonprototyped C function, then
                          all of the arguments given here about the need to appropriately cast 0 or NULL
                          also apply, regardless of whether the argument is part of a variadic argument list.

           Because casting is not required in any of the above examples, one might conclude
           that it is never required. But this is wrong. The need for casting arises when specify-
           ing a null pointer as one of the varying arguments in a call to a variadic function
           such as execl(). To realize why this is necessary, we need to be aware of the following:

           •     The compiler can’t determine the expected types of the varying arguments of a
                 variadic function.
           •     The C standards don’t require that a null pointer is actually represented in the
                 same way as the integer constant 0. (In theory, a null pointer could be repre-
                 sented by any bit pattern that wasn’t the same as a valid pointer.) Nor do the
                 standards even require that a null pointer is the same size as the integer constant 0.
                 All that the standards require is that when the integer constant 0 is found in a
                 context where a pointer is expected, the 0 should be interpreted as a null pointer.

           Consequently, it is wrong to write either of the following:
                 execl(prog, arg, 0);
                 execl(prog, arg, NULL);

           This is an error because the compiler will pass the integer constant 0 to execl(), and
           there is no guarantee that this is equivalent to a null pointer.
                In practice, we can often get away without the cast, since, on many C imple-
           mentations (e.g., Linux/x86-32), the representations of the integer (int) constant 0
           and the null pointer are the same. However, there are implementations where they
           are not—for example, where the size of a null pointer is larger than the size of the
           integer constant 0—so that in the above examples, execl() is likely to receive some
           random bits adjacent to the integer 0, and the resulting value will be interpreted as
           a random (nonnull) pointer. Omitting the cast leads to programs breaking when
           ported to such implementations. (On some of the aforementioned implementa-
           tions, NULL is defined as the long integer constant 0L, and long and void * have the
           same size, which may save wrongly constructed programs that use the second of
           the execl() calls above.) Therefore, we should rewrite the above execl() calls in the
           following ways:
                 execl(prog, arg, (char *) 0);
                 execl(prog, arg, (char *) NULL);

1414   Appendi x C
Casting NULL in the manner of the last call above is generally required, even on
implementations where NULL is defined as (void *) 0. This is because, although the C
standards require that null pointers of different types should test true for compari-
sons on equality, they don’t require that pointers of different types have the same
internal representation (although on most implementations they do). And, as
before, in a variadic function, the compiler can’t cast (void *) 0 to a null pointer of
the appropriate type.
             The C standards make one exception to the rule that pointers of different
             types need not have the same representation: pointers of the types char * and
             void * are required to have the same internal representation. This means that
             passing (void *) 0 instead of (char *) 0 would not be a problem in the example
             case of execl(), but, in the general case, a cast is needed.

                                                                 C a st i n g t h e NULL Pointer   1415
