                     FURTHER SOURCES
                      OF INFORMATION

Aside from the material in this book, many other sources of information about
Linux system programming are available. This appendix provides a short introduc-
tion to some of them.

Manual pages
Manual pages are accessible via the man command. (The command man man
describes how to use man to read manual pages.) The manual pages are divided
into numbered sections that categorize information as follows:

1.   Programs and shell commands: commands executed by users at the shell prompt.
2.   System calls: Linux system calls.
3.   Library functions: standard C library functions (as well as many other library
     functions).
4.   Special files: special files, such as device files.
5.   File formats: formats of files such as the system password (/etc/passwd) and
     group (/etc/group) files.
6.   Games: games.
           7.    Overview, conventions, protocols, and miscellany: overviews of various topics, and
                 various pages on network protocols and sockets programming.
           8.    System administration commands: commands that are for use mainly by the
                 superuser.

           In some cases, there are manual pages in different sections with the same name.
           For example, there is a section 1 manual page for the chmod command and a sec-
           tion 2 manual page for the chmod() system call. To distinguish manual pages with
           the same name, we enclose the section number in parentheses after the name—for
           example, chmod(1) and chmod(2). To display the manual page from a particular section,
           we can insert the section number into the man command:
                 $ man 2 chmod

           The manual pages for system calls and library functions are divided into a number
           of parts, which usually include the following:

           •     Name: the name of the function, accompanied by a one-line description. The
                 following command can be used to obtain a list of all manual pages whose one-
                 line description contains the specified string:
                     $ man -k string

                 This is useful if we can’t remember or don’t know exactly which manual page
                 we’re looking for.
           •     Synopsis: the C prototype of the function. This identifies the type and order of
                 the function’s arguments, as well as the type of value returned by the function.
                 In most cases, a list of header files precedes the function prototype. These
                 header files define macros and C types needed for use with this function, as
                 well as the function prototype itself, and should be included in a program
                 using this function.
           •     Description: a description of what the function does.
           •     Return value: a description of the range of values returned by the function,
                 including how the function informs the caller of an error.
           •     Errors: a list of the possible errno values that are returned in the event of an error.
           •     Conforming to: a description of the various UNIX standards to which the func-
                 tion conforms. This gives us an idea of how portable this function is to other
                 UNIX implementations and also identifies Linux-specific aspects of the function.
           •     Bugs: a description of things that are broken or that don’t work as they should.
                          Although some of the later commercial UNIX implementations have pre-
                          ferred more marketable euphemisms, from early times, the UNIX manual
                          pages called a bug a bug. Linux continues the tradition. Sometimes these “bugs”
                          are philosophical, simply describing ways in which things could be improved, or
                          warning about special or unexpected (but otherwise intended) behaviors.

           •     Notes: miscellaneous additional notes on the function.
           •     See also: a list of manual pages for related functions and commands.

1420   Appendi x E
The manual pages describing the kernel and glibc APIs are available online at
http://www.kernel.org/doc/man-pages/.

GNU info documents
Rather than using the traditional manual page format, the GNU project documents
much of its software using info documents, which are hyperlinked documents that
can be browsed using the info command. A tutorial on the use of info can be
obtained using the command info info.
     Although in many cases the information in manual pages and corresponding
info documents is the same, sometimes the info documentation for the C library
contains additional information not found in the manual pages or vice versa.
             The reasons both manual pages and info documents exist, even though both
             may contain the same information, are somewhat religious. The GNU project
             prefers the info user interface, and so provides all documentation via info.
             However, users and programmers on UNIX systems have had a long history of
             using (and in many cases preferring) manual pages, so there is strong momen-
             tum in favor of upholding this format. The manual pages also tend to include
             more historical information (e.g., information about behavior changes across
             versions) than do the info documents.

The GNU C library ( glibc) manual
The GNU C library includes a manual that describes the use of many of the func-
tions in the library. The manual is available at http://www.gnu.org/. It is also pro-
vided with most distributions in both HTML format and info format (via the
command info libc).

Books
An extensive bibliography can be found at the end of this book, but a few books
deserve special mention.
    At the top of the list are the books by the late W. Richard Stevens. Advanced
Programming in the UNIX Environment ([Stevens, 1992]) provides detailed coverage
of UNIX system programming, focusing on POSIX, System V, and BSD. A recent
revision by Stephen Rago, [Stevens & Rago, 2005] updates the text for modern
standards and implementations, and adds coverage of threads and a chapter on net-
work programming. This book is a good place to look for an alternative viewpoint on
many of the topics covered in this book. The two-volume UNIX Network Programming
([Stevens et al., 2004], [Stevens, 1999]) provides extremely detailed coverage of
network programming and interprocess communication on UNIX systems.
             [Stevens et al., 2004] is a revision by Bill Fenner and Andrew Rudoff of
             [Stevens, 1998], the previous edition of Volume 1 of the UNIX Network
             Programming. While the revised edition covers several new areas, in most cases
             where we make reference to [Stevens et al., 2004], the same material can also
             be found in [Stevens, 1998], albeit under different chapter and section numbers.

Advanced UNIX Programming ([Rochkind, 1985]) was a good, brief, and sometimes
humorous, introduction to UNIX (System V) programming. It is nowadays avail-
able in an updated and extended second edition ([Rochkind, 2004]).

                                                             F ur t h e r S ou r c e s o f I n f or m a t i o n   1421
                The POSIX threading API is thoroughly described in Programming with POSIX
           Threads ([Butenhof, 1996]).
                Linux and the Unix Philosophy ([Gancarz, 2003]) is a brief introduction to the
           philosophy of application design on Linux and UNIX systems.
                Various books provide an introduction to reading and modifying the Linux
           kernel sources, including Linux Kernel Development ([Love, 2010]) and Understanding
           the Linux Kernel ([Bovet & Cesati, 2005]).
                For more general background on UNIX kernels, The Design of the UNIX
           Operating System ([Bach, 1986]) remains very readable and contains material rele-
           vant to Linux. UNIX Internals: The New Frontiers ([Vahalia, 1996]) surveys kernel
           internals for more modern UNIX implementations.
                For writing Linux device drivers, the essential reference is Linux Device Drivers
           ([Corbet et al., 2005]).
                Operating Systems: Design and Implementation ([Tanenbaum & Woodhull, 2006])
           describes operating system implementation using the example of Minix. (See also
           http://www.minix3.org/.)

           Source code of existing applications
           Looking at the source code of existing applications can often provide good exam-
           ples of how to use particular system calls and library functions. On Linux distribu-
           tions employing the RPM Package Manager, we can find the package that contains
           a particular program (such as ls) as follows:
                 $ which ls                       Find pathname of ls program
                 /bin/ls
                 $ rpm -qf /bin/ls                Find out which package created the pathname /bin/ls
                 coreutils-5.0.75

           The corresponding source code package will have a name similar to the above, but
           with the suffix .src.rpm. This package will be on the installation media for the distri-
           bution or be available for download from the distributor’s web site. Once we
           obtain the package, we can install it using the rpm command, and then examine the
           source code, which is typically placed in some directory under /usr/src.
               On systems using the Debian package manager, the process is similar. We can
           determine the package that created a pathname (for the ls program, in this example)
           using the following command:
                 $ dpkg -S /bin/ls
                 coreutils: /bin/ls

           The Linux Documentation Project
           The Linux Documentation Project (http://www.tldp.org/) produces freely available
           documentation on Linux, including HOWTO guides and FAQs (frequently asked
           questions and answers) on various system administration and programming topics.
           The site also offers more extensive electronic books on a range of topics.

           The GNU project
           The GNU project (http://www.gnu.org/) provides an enormous quantity of software
           source code and associated documentation.

1422   Appendi x E
Newsgroups
Usenet newsgroups can often be a good source of answers to specific programming
questions. The following newsgroups are of particular interest:

•   comp.unix.programmer addresses general UNIX programming questions.
•   comp.os.linux.development.apps addresses questions relating to application devel-
    opment specifically on Linux.
•   comp.os.linux.development.system, the Linux system development newsgroup,
    focuses on questions about modifying the kernel and developing device drivers
    and loadable modules.
•   comp.programming.threads discusses programming with threads, especially POSIX
    threads.
•   comp.protocols.tcp-ip discusses the TCP/IP networking protocol suite.

FAQs for many Usenet news groups can be found at http://www.faqs.org/.

              Before posting a question to a newsgroup, check the FAQ for the group (often
              posted regularly within the group itself) and to try a web search to find a solution
              to the question. The http://groups.google.com/ web site provides a browser-
              based interface for searching old Usenet postings.

Linux kernel mailing list
The Linux kernel mailing list (LKML) is the principal broadcast communication
medium for the Linux kernel developers. It provides an idea of what’s going on in
kernel development, and is a forum for submitting kernel bug reports and patches.
(LKML is not a forum for system programming questions.) To subscribe to LKML,
send an email message to majordomo@vger.kernel.org with the following message
body as a single line:

    subscribe linux-kernel

For information about the workings of the list server, send a message body contain-
ing just the word “help” to the same address.
     To send a message to LKML, use the address linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org. The
FAQ and pointers to some searchable archives for this mailing list are available at
http://www.kernel.org/.

Web sites
The following web sites are of particular interest:

•   http://www.kernel.org/, The Linux Kernel Archives, contains the source code for
    all versions of the Linux kernel, past and present.
•   http://www.lwn.net/, Linux Weekly News, provides daily and weekly columns on
    various Linux-related topics. A weekly kernel-development column summa-
    rizes traffic through LKML.

                                                                 F ur t h e r S ou r c e s o f I n f or m a t i o n   1423
           •       http://www.kernelnewbies.org/, Linux Kernel Newbies, is a starting point for pro-
                   grammers who want to learn about and modify the Linux kernel.
           •       http://lxr.linux.no/linux/, Linux Cross-reference, provides browser access to vari-
                   ous versions of the Linux kernel source code. Each identifier in a source file is
                   hyperlinked to make it easy to find the definition and uses of that identifier.

           The kernel source code
           If none of the preceding sources answer our questions, or if we want to confirm that
           documented information is true, then we can read the kernel source code. Although
           parts of the source code can be difficult to understand, reading the code of a particu-
           lar system call in the Linux kernel source (or a library function in the GNU C library
           source) can often prove to be a surprisingly quick way to find the answer to a question.
                If the Linux kernel source code has been installed on the system, it can usually
           be found in the directory /usr/src/linux. Table E-1 provides summary information
           about some of the subdirectories under this directory.

           Table E-1: Subdirectories in the Linux kernel source tree

             Directory         Contents
             Documentation     Documentation of various aspects of the kernel
             arch              Architecture-specific code, organized into subdirectories—for example,
                               alpha, arm, ia64, sparc, and x86
             drivers           Code for device drivers
             fs                File system–specific code, organized into subdirectories—for example,
                               btrfs, ext4, proc (the /proc file system), and vfat
             include           Header files needed by kernel code
             init              Initialization code for the kernel
             ipc               Code for System V IPC and POSIX message queues
             kernel            Code related to processes, program execution, kernel modules, signals,
                               time, and timers
             lib               General-purpose functions used by various parts of the kernel
             mm                Memory-management code
             net               Networking code (TCP/IP, UNIX and Internet domain sockets)
             scripts           Scripts to configure and build the kernel

1424   Appendi x E
