                               SOLUTIONS TO
                            SELECTED EXERCISES

Chapter 5

  5-3.      A solution is provided in the file fileio/atomic_append.c in the source code
            distribution for this book. Here is an example of the results that we see when we
            run this program as suggested:
                $ ls -l f1 f2
                -rw-------    1 mtk       users    2000000 Jan   9 11:14 f1
                -rw-------    1 mtk       users    1999962 Jan   9 11:14 f2

            Because the combination of lseek() plus write() is not atomic, one instance of the
            program sometimes overwrote bytes written by the other instance. As a result, the file
            f2 contains less than 2 million bytes.

  5-4.      A call to dup() can be rewritten as:
                fd = fcntl(oldfd, F_DUPFD, 0);
             A call to dup2() can be rewritten as:
                   if (oldfd == newfd) {                /* oldfd == newfd is a special case */
                       if (fcntl(oldfd, F_GETFL) == -1) {                /* Is oldfd valid? */
                           errno = EBADF;
                           fd = -1;
                       } else {
                           fd = oldfd;
                       }
                   } else {
                       close(newfd);
                       fd = fcntl(oldfd, F_DUPFD, newfd);
                   }

  5-6.       The first point to realize is that, since fd2 is a duplicate of fd1, they both share a
             single open file description, and thus a single file offset. However, because fd3 is
             created via a separate call to open(), it has a separate file offset.

             •     After the first write(), the file contents are Hello,.
             •     Since fd2 shares a file offset with fd1, the second write() call appends to the
                   existing text, yielding Hello, world.
             •     The lseek() call adjusts the single file offset shared by fd1 and fd2 to point to the
                   start of the file, and thus the third write() call overwrites part of the existing text
                   to yield HELLO, world.
             •     The file offset for fd3 has not so far been modified, and so points to the start of
                   the file. Therefore, the final write() call changes the file contents to Gidday world.

             Run the program fileio/multi_descriptors.c in the source code distribution for this
             book to see these results.

Chapter 6

  6-1.       Since the array mbuf is not initialized, it is part of the uninitialized data segment.
             Therefore, no disk space is required to hold this variable. Instead, it is allocated
             (and initialized to 0) when the program is loaded.
  6-2.       A demonstration of the incorrect usage of longjmp() is provided in the file proc/
             bad_longjmp.c in the source code distribution for this book.

  6-3.       Sample implementations of setenv() and unsetenv() are provided in the file proc/
             setenv.c in the source code distribution for this book.

Chapter 8

  8-1.       The two getpwnam() calls are executed before the printf() output string is
             constructed, and—since getpwnam() returns its result in a statically allocated buffer—
             the second call overwrites the result returned by the first call.

Chapter 9

  9-1.       In considering the following, remember that changes to the effective user ID
             always also change the file-system user ID.
                 a) real=2000, effective=2000, saved=2000, file-system=2000
                 b) real=1000, effective=2000, saved=2000, file-system=2000
                 c)   real=1000, effective=2000, saved=0, file-system=2000
                 d) real=1000, effective=0, saved=0, file-system=2000
                 e) real=1000, effective=2000, saved=3000, file-system=2000
  9-2.       Strictly speaking, such a process is unprivileged, since its effective user ID is
             nonzero. However, an unprivileged process can use the setuid(), setreuid(), seteuid(),
             or setresuid() calls to set its effective user ID to the same value as its real user ID or
             saved set-user-ID. Thus, this process could use one of these calls to regain privilege.
  9-4.       The following code shows the steps for each system call.
                 e = geteuid();      /* Save initial value of effective user ID */

                 setuid(getuid());                         /* Suspend privileges */
                 setuid(e);                                /* Resume privileges */
                 /* Can't permanently drop the set-user-ID identity with setuid() */

                 seteuid(getuid());                        /* Suspend privileges */
                 seteuid(e);                               /* Resume privileges */
                 /* Can't permanently drop the set-user-ID identity with seteuid() */

                 setreuid(-1, getuid());                      /* Temporarily drop privileges */
                 setreuid(-1, e);                             /* Resume privileges */
                 setreuid(getuid(), getuid());                /* Permanently drop privileges */

                 setresuid(-1, getuid(), -1);                 /* Temporarily drop privileges */
                 setresuid(-1, e, -1);                        /* Resume privileges */
                 setresuid(getuid(), getuid(), getuid());     /* Permanently drop privileges */

  9-5.       With the exception of setuid(), the answers are the same as for the previous
             exercise, except that we can substitute the value 0 for the variable e. For setuid(), the
             following holds:
                 /* (a) Can't suspend and resume privileges with setuid() */

                 setuid(getuid());            /* (b) Permanently drop privileges */

Chapter 10

  10-1.      The maximum unsigned 32-bit integer value is 4,294,967,295. Divided by 100 clock
             ticks per second, this corresponds to slightly more than 497 days. Divided by
             1 million (CLOCKS_PER_SEC), this corresponds to 71 minutes and 35 seconds.

Chapter 12

  12-1.      A solution is provided in the file sysinfo/procfs_user_exe.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 13

  13-3.      This sequence of statements ensures that the data written to a stdio buffer is flushed
             to the disk. The fflush() call flushes the stdio buffer for fp to the kernel buffer cache.
             The argument given to the subsequent fsync() is the file descriptor underlying fp;
             thus, the call flushes the (recently filled) kernel buffer for that file descriptor to
             disk.
  13-4.      When standard output is sent to a terminal, it is line-buffered, so that the output of
             the printf() call appears immediately, and is followed by the output of write(). When
             standard output is sent to a disk file, it is block-buffered. Consequently, the output of
             the printf() is held in a stdio buffer and is flushed only when the program exits (i.e.,
             after the write() call). (A complete program containing the code of this exercise is
             available in the file filebuff/mix23_linebuff.c in the source code distribution for
             this book.)

Chapter 15

  15-2.      The stat() system call doesn’t change any file timestamps, since all it does is fetch
             information from the file i-node (and there is no last i-node access timestamp).
  15-4.      The GNU C library provides just such a function, named euidaccess(), in the library
             source file sysdeps/posix/euidaccess.c.
  15-5.      In order to do this, we must use two calls to umask(), as follows:
                 mode_t currUmask;

                 currUmask = umask(0);         /* Retrieve current umask, set umask to 0 */
                 umask(currUmask);             /* Restore umask to previous value */

             Note, however, that this solution is not thread-safe, since threads share the process
             umask setting.
  15-7.      A solution is provided in the file files/chiflag.c in the source code distribution for
             this book.

Chapter 18

  18-1.      Using ls –li shows that the executable file has different i-node numbers after each
             compilation. What happens is that the compiler removes (unlinks) any existing file
             with the same name as its target executable, and then creates a new file with the
             same name. It is permissible to unlink an executable file. The name is removed
             immediately, but the file itself remains in existence until the process executing it
             terminates.
  18-2.      The file myfile is created in the subdirectory test. The symlink() call creates a
             relative link in the parent directory. Despite appearances, this is a dangling link,

             since it is interpreted relative to the location of the link file, and thus refers to a
             nonexistent file in the parent directory. Consequently, chmod() fails with the error
             ENOENT (“No such file or directory”). (A complete program containing the code of
             this exercise is available in the file dirs_links/bad_symlink.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.)
  18-4.      A solution is provided in the file dirs_links/list_files_readdir_r.c, which can be
             found in the source code distribution for this book.
  18-7.      A solution is provided in the file dirs_links/file_type_stats.c, which can be found
             in the source code distribution for this book.
  18-9.      Using fchdir() is more efficient. If we are performing the operation repeatedly
             within a loop, then with fchdir() we can perform one call to open() before executing
             the loop, and with chdir() we can place the getcwd() call outside the loop. Then we
             are measuring the difference between repeated calls to fchdir(fd) and chdir(buf).
             Calls to chdir() are more expensive for two reasons: passing the buf argument to the
             kernel requires a larger data transfer between user space and kernel space, and the
             pathname in buf must be resolved to the corresponding directory i-node on each
             call. (Kernel caching of directory entry information reduces the work required for
             the second point, but some work must still be done.)

Chapter 20

  20-2.      A solution is provided in the file signals/ignore_pending_sig.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.
  20-4.      A solution is provided in the file signals/siginterrupt.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 22

  22-2.      As with most UNIX implementations, Linux delivers standard signals before
             realtime signals (SUSv3 doesn’t require this). This makes sense, because some
             standard signals indicate critical conditions (e.g., hardware exceptions) that a
             program should deal with as soon as possible.
  22-3.      Replacing sigsuspend() plus a signal handler with sigwaitinfo() in this program
             provides a 25 to 40 percent speed improvement. (The exact figure varies somewhat
             across kernel versions.)

Chapter 23

  23-2.      A modified program using clock_nanosleep() is provided in the file timers/
             t_clock_nanosleep.c in the source code distribution for this book.

  23-3.      A solution is provided in the file timers/ptmr_null_evp.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 24

  24-1.      The first fork() call creates one new child. Both parent and child carry on to execute
             the second fork(), and thus each creates a further process, making a total of four

             processes. All four processes carry on to execute the next fork(), each creating a
             further child. Consequently, a total of seven new processes are created.
  24-2.      A solution is provided in the file procexec/vfork_fd_test.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.
  24-3.      If we call fork(), and then have the child call raise() to send itself a signal such as
             SIGABRT, this will yield a core dump file that closely mirrors the state of the parent at
             the time of the fork(). The gdb gcore command allows us to perform a similar task for
             a program, without needing to change the source code.
  24-5.      Add a converse kill() call in the parent:
                 if (kill(childPid, SIGUSR1) == -1)
                     errExit("kill")

             And in the child, add a converse sigsuspend() call:
                 sigsuspend(&origMask);             /* Unblock SIGUSR1, wait for signal */

Chapter 25

  25-1.      Assuming a two’s complement architecture, where –1 is represented by a bit
             pattern with all bits on, then the parent will see an exit status of 255 (all bits on in the
             least significant 8 bits, which are all that is passed back to the parent when it calls
             wait()). (The presence of the call exit(–1) in a program is usually a programmer error
             resulting from confusion with the –1 return used to indicate failure of a system
             call.)

Chapter 26

  26-1.      A solution is provided in the file procexec/orphan.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.

Chapter 27

  27-1.      The execvp() function first fails to exec the file xyz in dir1, because execute
             permission is denied. It therefore continues its search in dir2, where it successfully
             execs xyz.
  27-2.      A solution is provided in the file procexec/execlp.c in the source code distribution of
             this book.
  27-3.      The script specifies the cat program as its interpreter. The cat program “interprets”
             a file by printing its contents—in this case with the –n (line numbering) option
             enabled (as though we had entered the command cat –n ourscript). Thus, we would
             see the following:
                       1   #!/bin/cat -n
                       2   Hello world

  27-4.      Two successive fork() calls yield a total of three processes related as parent, child,
             and grandchild. Having created the grandchild process, the child immediately
             exits, and is reaped by the waitpid() call in the parent. As a consequence of being

             orphaned, the grandchild is adopted by init (process ID of 1). The program doesn’t
             need to perform a second wait() call, since init automatically reaps the zombie
             when the grandchild terminates. Therein lies a possible use for this code sequence:
             if we need to create a child for which we can’t later wait, then this sequence can be
             used to ensure that no zombie results. One example of such a requirement is where
             the parent execs some program that is not guaranteed to perform a wait (and we
             don’t want to rely on setting the disposition of SIGCHLD to SIG_IGN, since the
             disposition of an ignored SIGCHLD after an exec() is left unspecified by SUSv3).
  27-5.      The string given to printf() doesn’t include a newline character, and therefore the
             output is not flushed before the execlp() call. The execlp() overwrites the existing
             program’s data segments (as well as the heap and stack), which contain the stdio
             buffers, and thus the unflushed output is lost.
  27-6.      SIGCHLD is delivered to the parent. If the SIGCHLD handler attempts to do a wait(), then
             the call returns an error (ECHILD) indicating that there were no children whose status
             could be returned. (This assumes that the parent had no other terminated
             children. If it did, then the wait() would block; or if waitpid() was used with the
             WNOHANG flag, waitpid() would return 0.) This is exactly the situation that may arise if a
             program establishes a handler for SIGCHLD before calling system().

Chapter 29

  29-1.      There are two possible outcomes (both permitted by SUSv3): the thread deadlocks,
             blocked while trying to join with itself, or the pthread_join() call fails, returning the
             error EDEADLK. On Linux, the latter behavior occurs. Given a thread ID in tid, we can
             prevent such an eventuality using the following code:
                 if (!pthread_equal(tid, pthread_self()))
                    pthread_join(tid, NULL);

  29-2.      After the main thread terminates, threadFunc() will continue working with storage
             on the main thread’s stack, with unpredictable results.

Chapter 31

  31-1.      A solution is provided in the file threads/one_time_init.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 33

  33-2.      The SIGCHLD signal that is generated on child termination is process-directed. It may
             be delivered to any thread (not necessarily the one that called fork()) that is not
             blocking the signal.

Chapter 34

  34-1.      Suppose that the program is part of a shell pipeline:
                 $ ./ourprog | grep 'some string'

             The problem is that grep will be part of the same process group as ourprog, and
             therefore the killpg() call will also terminate the grep process. This is probably not
             desired, and is likely to confuse users. The solution is to use setpgid() to ensure that
             the child processes are placed in their own new group (the process ID of the first
             child could be used as the process group ID of the group), and then signal that process
             group. This also removes the need for the parent to make itself immune to the signal.
  34-5.      If the SIGTSTP signal is unblocked before raising it again, then there is a small
             window of time (between the calls to sigprocmask() and raise()) during which, if the
             user types a second suspend character (Control-Z), the process will be stopped while
             still in the handler. Consequently, two SIGCONT signals will be required to resume the
             process.

Chapter 35

  35-3.      A solution is provided in the file procpri/demo_sched_fifo.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 36

  36-1.      A solution is provided in the file procres/rusage_wait.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.
  36-2.      A solution is provided in the files rusage.c and print_rusage.c in the procres
             subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.

Chapter 37

  37-1.      A solution is provided in the file daemons/t_syslog.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.

Chapter 38

  38-1.      Whenever a file is modified by an unprivileged user, the kernel clears the file’s set-
             user-ID permission bit. The set-group-ID permission bit is similarly cleared if the
             group-execute permission bit is enabled. (As detailed in Section 55.4, the
             combination of having the set-group-ID bit on while the group-execute bit is off has
             nothing to do with set-group-ID programs; instead, it is used to enable mandatory
             locking, and for this reason modifications to such a file don’t disable the set-group-
             ID bit.) Clearing these bits ensures that if the program file is writable by arbitrary
             users, then it can’t be modified and still retain its ability to give privileges to users
             executing the file. A privileged (CAP_FSETID) process can modify a file without the
             kernel clearing these permission bits.

Chapter 44

  44-1.      A solution is provided in the file pipes/change_case.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.
  44-5.      It creates a race condition. Suppose that between the time the server sees end-of-
             file and the time it closes the file reading descriptor, a client opens the FIFO for

             writing (this will succeed without blocking), and then writes data to the FIFO after
             the server has closed the reading descriptor. At this point, the client will receive a
             SIGPIPE signal, since no process has the FIFO open for reading. Alternatively, the
             client might be able to both open the FIFO and write data to it before the server
             closes the reading descriptor. In this case, the client’s data would be lost, and it
             wouldn’t receive a response from the server. As a further exercise, you could try to
             demonstrate these behaviors by making the suggested modification to the server
             and creating a special-purpose client that repeatedly opens the server’s FIFOs,
             sends a message to the server, closes the server’s FIFO, and reads the server’s
             response (if any).
  44-6.      One possible solution would be to set a timer on the open() of the client FIFO using
             alarm(), as described in Section 23.3. This solution suffers from the drawback that
             the server would still be delayed for the period of the timeout. Another possible
             solution would be to open the client FIFO using the O_NONBLOCK flag. If this fails,
             then the server can assume a misbehaving client. This latter solution also requires
             changes to the client, which needs to ensure that it opens its FIFO (also using the
             O_NONBLOCK flag) prior to sending a request to the server. For convenience, the client
             should then turn off the O_NONBLOCK flag for the FIFO file descriptor, so that the
             subsequent read() call blocks. Finally, it is possible to implement a concurrent
             server solution for this application, with the main server process creating a child to
             send the response message to each client. (This would represent a rather resource-
             expensive solution in the case of this simple application.)
                  Other conditions that are not handled by this server remain. For example, it
             doesn’t handle the possibilities of the sequence number overflowing or a misbehaving
             client requesting large groups of sequence numbers in order to produce such over-
             flows. The server also does not handle the possibility that the client specifies a negative
             value for the sequence length. Furthermore, a malicious client could create its
             reply FIFO, and then open the FIFO for reading and writing, and fill it with data
             before sending a request to the server; as a consequence, the server would be able
             to successfully open the reply FIFO, but would block when it tries to write the
             reply. As a further exercise, you could try to devise strategies for dealing with these
             possibilities.
                  In Section 44.8, we also noted another limitation that applies to the server in
             Listing 44-7: if a client sends a message that contains the wrong number of bytes,
             then the server will be out of step when reading all subsequent client messages.
             One simple way to deal with this problem is to discard the use of fixed-length mes-
             sages in favor of the use of a delimiter character.

Chapter 45

  45-2.      A solution is provided in the file svipc/t_ftok.c in the source code distribution for
             this book.

Chapter 46

  46-3.      The value 0 is a valid message queue identifier, but 0 can’t be used as a message
             type.

Chapter 47

  47-5.      A solution is provided in the file svsem/event_flags.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.
  47-6.      A reserve operation can be implemented by reading a byte from the FIFO.
             Conversely, a release operation can be implemented by writing a byte to the
             FIFO. A conditional reserve operation can be implemented as a nonblocking read of
             a byte from the FIFO.

Chapter 48

  48-2.      Since access to the shmp–>cnt value in the for loop increment step is no longer
             protected by the semaphore, there is a race condition between the writer next
             updating this value and the reader fetching it.
  48-4.      A solution is provided in the file svshm/svshm_mon.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.

Chapter 49

  49-1.      A solution is provided in the file mmap/mmcopy.c in the source code distribution for
             this book.

Chapter 50

  50-2.      A solution is provided in the file vmem/madvise_dontneed.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 52

  52-6.      A solution is provided in the file pmsg/mq_notify_sigwaitinfo.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.
  52-7.      It would not be safe to make buffer global. Once message notification is reenabled
             in threadFunc(), there is a chance that a second notification would be generated
             while threadFunc() is still executing. This second notification could initiate a second
             thread that executes threadFunc() at the same time as the first thread. Both threads
             would attempt to use the same global buffer, with unpredictable results. Note that
             the behavior here is implementation-dependent. SUSv3 permits an implementa-
             tion to sequentially deliver notifications to the same thread. However, it is also per-
             missible to deliver notifications in separate threads that execute concurrently, and
             this is what Linux does.

Chapter 53

  53-2.      A solution is provided in the file psem/psem_timedwait.c in the source code distribu-
             tion for this book.

Chapter 55

  55-1.      The following hold for flock() on Linux:
                 a) A series of shared locks can starve a process waiting to place an exclusive lock.
                 b) There are no rules regarding which process is granted the lock. Essentially,
                    the lock is granted to the process that is next scheduled. If that process
                    happens to be one that obtains a shared lock, then all other processes
                    requesting shared locks will also be able to have their requests granted
                    simultaneously.
  55-2.      The flock() system call doesn’t detect deadlock. This is true of most flock()
             implementations, except those that implement flock() in terms of fcntl().
  55-4.      In all except early (1.2 and earlier) Linux kernels, the two types of locking operate
             independently, and have no affect on one another.

Chapter 57

  57-4.      On Linux, the sendto() call fails with the error EPERM. On some other UNIX systems,
             a different error results. Some other UNIX implementations don’t enforce this
             constraint, letting a connected UNIX domain datagram socket receive datagrams
             from a sender other than its peer.

Chapter 59

  59-1.      A solution is provided in the files read_line_buf.h and read_line_buf.c in the sockets
             subdirectory in the source code distribution for this book.
  59-2.      A solution is provided in the files is_seqnum_v2_sv.c, is_seqnum_v2_cl.c, and
             is_seqnum_v2.h in the sockets subdirectory in the source code distribution for this
             book.
  59-3.      A solution is provided in the files unix_sockets.h, unix_sockets.c, us_xfr_v2.h,
             us_xfr_v2_sv.c, and us_xfr_v2_cl.c in the sockets subdirectory in the source code
             distribution for this book.
  59-5.      In the Internet domain, datagrams from a nonpeer socket are silently discarded.

Chapter 60

  60-2.      A solution is provided in the file sockets/is_echo_v2_sv.c in the source code
             distribution for this book.

Chapter 61

  61-1.      Since the send and receive buffers for a TCP socket have a limited size, if the client
             sent a large quantity of data, then it might fill these buffers, at which point a further
             write() would (permanently) block the client before it read any of the server’s
             response.
  61-3.      A solution is provided in the file sockets/sendfile.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.

Chapter 62

  62-1.      The tcgetattr() fails if it is applied to a file descriptor that doesn’t refer to a terminal.
  62-2.      A solution is provided in the file tty/ttyname.c in the source code distribution for
             this book.

Chapter 63

  63-3.      A solution is provided in the file altio/select_mq.c in the source code distribution
             for this book.
  63-4.      A race condition would result. Suppose the following sequence of events: (a) after
             select() has informed the program that the self-pipe has data, it performs the
             appropriate actions in response to the signal; (b) another signal arrives, and the
             handler writes a byte to the self-pipe and returns; and (c) the main program drains
             the self-pipe. As a consequence, the program misses the signal that was delivered in
             step (b).
  63-6.      The epoll_wait() call blocks, even when the interest list is empty. This can be useful
             in a multithreaded program, where one thread might add a descriptor to the epoll
             interest list, while another thread is blocked in an epoll_wait() call.
  63-7.      Successive epoll_wait() calls cycle through the list of ready file descriptors. This is
             useful because it helps prevent file-descriptor starvation, which could occur if
             epoll_wait() always (for example) returned the lowest-numbered ready file
             descriptor, and that file descriptor always had some input available.

Chapter 64

  64-1.      First, the child shell process terminates, followed by the script parent process.
             Since the terminal is operating in raw mode, the Control-D character is not
             interpreted by the terminal driver, but is instead passed as a literal character to
             the script parent process, which writes it to the pseudoterminal master. The
             pseudoterminal slave is operating in canonical mode, so this Control-D character is
             treated as an end-of-file, which causes the child shell’s next read() to return 0, with
             the result that the shell terminates. The termination of the shell closes the only file
             descriptor referring to the pseudoterminal slave. As a consequence, the next read()
             by the parent script process fails with the error EIO (or end-of-file on some other
             UNIX implementations), and this process then terminates.
  64-7.      A solution is provided in the file pty/unbuffer.c in the source code distribution for
             this book.

