 PR E FACE T O T H E T H I R D E DI T I O N

The response to the first and second editions of Python Crash Course has
been overwhelmingly positive. More than one million copies are in print,
including translations in over 10 languages. I’ve received letters and emails
from readers as young as 10, as well as from retirees who want to learn to
program in their free time. Python Crash Course is being used in middle
schools and high schools, and also in college classes. Students who are
assigned more advanced textbooks are using Python Crash Course as a com-
panion text for their classes and finding it a worthwhile supplement. People
are using it to enhance their skills on the job, change careers, and start
working on their own side projects. In short, people are using the book for
the full range of purposes I had hoped they would, and much more.
     The opportunity to write a third edition of Python Crash Course has been
thoroughly enjoyable. Although Python is a mature language, it continues to
evolve as every language does. My main goal in revising the book is to keep
it a well-curated introductory Python course. By reading this book, you’ll
learn everything you need to start working on your own projects, and you’ll
build a solid foundation for all of your future learning as well. I’ve updated
some sections to reflect newer, simpler ways of doing things in Python. I’ve
also clarified some sections where certain details of the language were not
presented as accurately as they could have been. All the projects have been
completely updated using popular, well-maintained libraries that you can
confidently use to build your own projects.
                            The following is a summary of specific changes that have been made in
                        the third edition:

                        •      Chapter 1 now features the text editor VS Code, which is popular
                               among beginner and professional programmers and works well on all
                               operating systems.
                        •      Chapter 2 includes the new methods removeprefix() and removesuffix(),
                               which are helpful when working with files and URLs. This chapter also
                               features Python’s newly improved error messages, which provide much
                               more specific information to help you troubleshoot your code when
                               something goes wrong.
                        •      Chapter 10 uses the pathlib module for working with files. This is a
                               much simpler approach to reading from and writing to files.
                        •      Chapter 11 uses pytest to write automated tests for the code you write.
                               The pytest library has become the industry standard tool for writing
                               tests in Python. It’s friendly enough to use for your first tests, and if you
                               pursue a career as a Python programmer, you’ll use it in professional
                               settings as well.
                        •      The Alien Invasion project in Chapters 12−14 includes a setting to
                               control the frame rate, which makes the game run more consistently
                               across different operating systems. A simpler approach is used to build
                               the fleet of aliens, and the overall organization of the project has been
                               cleaned up as well.
                        •      The data visualization projects in Chapters 15–17 use the most recent
                               features of Matplotlib and Plotly. The Matplotlib visualizations feature
                               updated style settings. The random walk project has a small improvement
                               that increases the accuracy of the plots, which means you’ll see a wider
                               variety of patterns emerge each time you generate a new walk. All the
                               projects featuring Plotly now use the Plotly Express module, which lets
                               you generate your initial visualizations with just a few lines of code. You
                               can easily explore a variety of visualizations before committing to one
                               kind of plot, and then focus on refining individual elements of that plot.
                        •      The Learning Log project in Chapters 18−20 is built using the latest ver-
                               sion of Django and styled using the latest version of Bootstrap. Some parts
                               of the project have been renamed to make it easier to follow the overall
                               organization of the project. The project is now deployed to Platform.sh,
                               a modern hosting service for Django projects. The deployment process
                               is controlled by YAML configuration files, which give you a great deal of
                               control over how your project is deployed. This approach is consistent with
                               how professional programmers deploy modern Django projects.
                        •      Appendix A has been fully updated to recommend current best practices
                               for installing Python on all major operating systems. Appendix B includes
                               detailed instructions for setting up VS Code, and brief descriptions of
                               most of the major text editors and IDEs in current use. Appendix C
                               directs readers to several of the most popular online resources for getting

xxviii   Preface to the Third Edition
    help. Appendix D continues to offer a mini crash course in using Git for
    version control. Appendix E is brand new for the third edition. Even with
    a good set of instructions for deploying the apps you create, there are
    many things that can go wrong. This appendix offers a detailed trouble-
    shooting guide that you can use when the deployment process doesn’t
    work on the first try.
•   The index has been thoroughly updated to allow you to use Python
    Crash Course as a reference for all of your future Python projects.

   Thank you for reading Python Crash Course! If you have any feedback or
questions, please feel free to get in touch; I am @ehmatthes on Twitter.

                                                      Preface to the Third Edition   xxix
              ACKNOW LEDGMENT S

This book would not have been possible without the wonderful and
extremely professional staff at No Starch Press. Bill Pollock invited me to
write an introductory book, and I deeply appreciate that original offer. Liz
Chadwick has worked on all three editions, and the book is better because
of her ongoing involvement. Eva Morrow brought fresh eyes to this new edi-
tion, and her insights have improved the book as well. I appreciate Doug
McNair’s guidance in using proper grammar, without becoming overly for-
mal. Jennifer Kepler has supervised the production work, which turns my
many files into a polished final product.
    There are many people at No Starch Press who have helped make this
book a success but whom I haven’t had the chance to work with directly. No
Starch has a fantastic marketing team, who go beyond just selling books;
they make sure readers find the books that are likely to work well for them
and help them reach their goals. No Starch also has a strong foreign-rights
department. Python Crash Course has reached readers around the world, in
many languages, due to the diligence of this team. To all of these people
whom I haven’t worked with individually, thank you for helping Python
Crash Course find its audience.
    I’d like to thank Kenneth Love, the technical reviewer for all three
editions of Python Crash Course. I met Kenneth at PyCon one year, and
their enthusiasm for the language and the Python community has been a
constant source of professional inspiration ever since. Kenneth, as always,
went beyond simple fact-checking and reviewed the book with the goal of
                    helping newer programmers develop a solid understanding of the Python
                    language and programming in general. They also kept an eye out for areas
                    that worked well enough in previous editions but could be improved upon,
                    given the opportunity for a full rewrite. That said, any inaccuracies that
                    remain are completely my own.
                         I’d also like to express my appreciation to all the readers who have
                    shared their experience of working through Python Crash Course. Learning
                    the basics of programming can change your perspective on the world, and
                    sometimes this has a profound impact on people. It’s deeply humbling to
                    hear these stories, and I appreciate everyone who has shared their experi-
                    ences so openly.
                         I’d like to thank my father for introducing me to programming at a
                    young age and for not being afraid that I’d break his equipment. I’d like
                    to thank my wife, Erin, for supporting and encouraging me through the
                    writing of this book, and through all the work that goes into maintaining it
                    through multiple editions. I’d also like to thank my son, Ever, whose curios-
                    ity continues to inspire me.

xxxii   Acknowledgments
