                     INTRODUCTION

           Every programmer has a story about how
           they learned to write their first program.
         I started programming as a child, when
       my father was working for Digital Equipment
Corporation, one of the pioneering companies of the
modern computing era. I wrote my first program on a
kit computer that my dad had assembled in our base-
ment. The computer consisted of nothing more than
a bare motherboard connected to a keyboard without a case, and its moni-
tor was a bare cathode ray tube. My initial program was a simple number
guessing game, which looked something like this:

I'm thinking of a number! Try to guess the number I'm thinking of: 25
Too low! Guess again: 50
Too high! Guess again: 42
That's it! Would you like to play again? (yes/no) no
Thanks for playing!
                           I’ll always remember how satisfied I felt, watching my family play a
                       game that I created and that worked as I intended it to.
                           That early experience had a lasting impact. There’s real satisfaction in
                       building something with a purpose, that solves a problem. The software I
                       write now meets more significant needs than my childhood efforts did, but
                       the sense of satisfaction I get from creating a program that works is still
                       largely the same.

    Who Is This Book For?
                       The goal of this book is to bring you up to speed with Python as quickly as
                       possible so you can build programs that work—games, data visualizations,
                       and web applications—while developing a foundation in programming that
                       will serve you well for the rest of your life. Python Crash Course is written for
                       people of any age who have never programmed in Python or have never
                       programmed at all. This book is for those who want to learn the basics of
                       programming quickly so they can focus on interesting projects, and those
                       who like to test their understanding of new concepts by solving meaningful
                       problems. Python Crash Course is also perfect for teachers at all levels who
                       want to offer their students a project-based introduction to programming.
                       If you’re taking a college class and want a friendlier introduction to Python
                       than the text you’ve been assigned, this book can make your class easier as
                       well. If you’re looking to change careers, Python Crash Course can help you
                       make the transition into a more satisfying career track. It has worked well
                       for a wide variety of readers, with a broad range of goals.

    What Can You Expect to Learn?
                       The purpose of this book is to make you a good programmer in general
                       and a good Python programmer in particular. You’ll learn efficiently and
                       adopt good habits as you gain a solid foundation in general programming
                       concepts. After working your way through Python Crash Course, you should
                       be ready to move on to more advanced Python techniques, and your next
                       programming language will be even easier to grasp.
                            In Part I of this book, you’ll learn basic programming concepts you
                       need to know to write Python programs. These concepts are the same as
                       those you’d learn when starting out in almost any programming language.
                       You’ll learn about different kinds of data and the ways you can store data in
                       your programs. You’ll build collections of data, such as lists and dictionar-
                       ies, and you’ll work through those collections in efficient ways. You’ll learn
                       to use while loops and if statements to test for certain conditions, so you
                       can run specific sections of code while those conditions are true and run
                       other sections when they’re not—a technique that helps you automate many
                       processes.
                            You’ll learn to accept input from users to make your programs interac-
                       tive, and to keep your programs running as long as the user wants. You’ll
                       explore how to write functions that make parts of your program reusable,

xxxiv   Introduction
        so you only have to write blocks of code that perform certain actions once,
        while using that code as many times as you need. You’ll then extend this
        concept to more complicated behavior with classes, making fairly simple
        programs respond to a variety of situations. You’ll learn to write programs
        that handle common errors gracefully. After working through each of these
        basic concepts, you’ll write a number of increasingly complex programs
        using what you’ve learned. Finally, you’ll take your first step toward interme-
        diate programming by learning how to write tests for your code, so you can
        develop your programs further without worrying about introducing bugs.
        All the information in Part I will prepare you for taking on larger, more
        complex projects.
             In Part II, you’ll apply what you learned in Part I to three projects. You
        can do any or all of these projects, in whichever order works best for you. In
        the first project, in Chapters 12–14, you’ll create a Space Invaders–style shoot-
        ing game called Alien Invasion, which includes several increasingly difficult
        levels of game play. After you’ve completed this project, you should be well
        on your way to being able to develop your own 2D games. Even if you don’t
        aspire to become a game programmer, working through this project is an
        enjoyable way to tie together much of what you’ll learn in Part I.
             The second project, in Chapters 15–17, introduces you to data visualiza-
        tion. Data scientists use a variety of visualization techniques to help make
        sense of the vast amount of information available to them. You’ll work with
        datasets that you generate through code, datasets that you download from
        online sources, and datasets your programs download automatically. After
        you’ve completed this project, you’ll be able to write programs that sift
        through large datasets and make visual representations of many different
        kinds of information.
             In the third project, in Chapters 18–20, you’ll build a small web appli-
        cation called Learning Log. This project allows you to keep an organized
        journal of information you’ve learned about a specific topic. You’ll be able
        to keep separate logs for different topics and allow others to create an
        account and start their own journals. You’ll also learn how to deploy your
        project so anyone can access it online, from anywhere in the world.

Online Resources
        No Starch Press has more information about this book available online at
        https://nostarch.com/python-crash-course-3rd-edition.
             I also maintain an extensive set of supplementary resources at https://
        ehmatthes.github.io/pcc_3e. These resources include the following:

            Setup instructions   The setup instructions online are identical to
            what’s in the book, but they include active links you can click for all the
            different steps. If you’re having any setup issues, refer to this resource.
            Updates  Python, like all languages, is constantly evolving. I maintain
            a thorough set of updates, so if anything isn’t working, check here to
            see whether instructions have changed.

                                                                         Introduction   xxxv
                           Solutions to exercises   You should spend significant time on your own
                           attempting the exercises in the “Try It Yourself” sections. However, if
                           you’re stuck and can’t make any progress, solutions to most of the exer-
                           cises are online.
                           Cheat sheets   A full set of downloadable cheat sheets for quick refer-
                           ence to major concepts is also online.

    Why Python?
                       Every year, I consider whether to continue using Python or move on to a
                       different language, perhaps one that’s newer to the programming world.
                       But I continue to focus on Python for many reasons. Python is an incredibly
                       efficient language: your programs will do more in fewer lines of code than
                       many other languages would require. Python’s syntax will also help you
                       write “clean” code. Your code will be easier to read, easier to debug, and
                       easier to extend and build upon, compared to other languages.
                            People use Python for many purposes: to make games, build web appli-
                       cations, solve business problems, and develop internal tools at all kinds of
                       interesting companies. Python is also used heavily in scientific fields, for
                       academic research and applied work.
                            One of the most important reasons I continue to use Python is because
                       of the Python community, which includes an incredibly diverse and wel-
                       coming group of people. Community is essential to programmers because
                       programming isn’t a solitary pursuit. Most of us, even the most experienced
                       programmers, need to ask advice from others who have already solved simi-
                       lar problems. Having a well-connected and supportive community is critical
                       to helping you solve problems, and the Python community is fully support-
                       ive of people who are learning Python as their first programming language
                       or coming to Python with a background in other languages.
                            Python is a great language to learn, so let’s get started!

xxxvi   Introduction
