                       INTRODUCING LISTS
                     In this chapter and the next you’ll learn
                    what lists are and how to start working with
                   the elements in a list. Lists allow you to store
                sets of information in one place, whether you
        have just a few items or millions of items. Lists are
        one of Python’s most powerful features readily acces-
        sible to new programmers, and they tie together many
        important concepts in programming.

What Is a List?
        A list is a collection of items in a particular order. You can make a list that
        includes the letters of the alphabet, the digits from 0 to 9, or the names of
        all the people in your family. You can put anything you want into a list, and
        the items in your list don’t have to be related in any particular way. Because
                   a list usually contains more than one element, it’s a good idea to make the
                   name of your list plural, such as letters, digits, or names.
                        In Python, square brackets ([]) indicate a list, and individual elements
                   in the list are separated by commas. Here’s a simple example of a list that
                   contains a few kinds of bicycles:

     bicycles.py   bicycles = ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']
                   print(bicycles)

                         If you ask Python to print a list, Python returns its representation of the
                   list, including the square brackets:

                   ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']

                       Because this isn’t the output you want your users to see, let’s learn how
                   to access the individual items in a list.

                   Accessing Elements in a List
                   Lists are ordered collections, so you can access any element in a list by
                   telling Python the position, or index, of the item desired. To access an ele-
                   ment in a list, write the name of the list followed by the index of the item
                   enclosed in square brackets.
                        For example, let’s pull out the first bicycle in the list bicycles:

                   bicycles = ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']
                   print(bicycles[0])

                      When we ask for a single item from a list, Python returns just that ele-
                   ment without square brackets:

                   trek

                        This is the result you want your users to see: clean, neatly formatted
                   output.
                        You can also use the string methods from Chapter 2 on any element in
                   this list. For example, you can format the element 'trek' to look more pre-
                   sentable by using the title() method:

                   bicycles = ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']
                   print(bicycles[0].title())

                       This example produces the same output as the preceding example,
                   except 'Trek' is capitalized.

                   Index Positions Start at 0, Not 1
                   Python considers the first item in a list to be at position 0, not position 1.
                   This is true of most programming languages, and the reason has to do with

34   Chapter 3
how the list operations are implemented at a lower level. If you’re receiving
unexpected results, ask yourself if you’re making a simple but common off-
by-one error.
     The second item in a list has an index of 1. Using this counting sys-
tem, you can get any element you want from a list by subtracting one from
its position in the list. For instance, to access the fourth item in a list, you
request the item at index 3.
     The following asks for the bicycles at index 1 and index 3:

bicycles = ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']
print(bicycles[1])
print(bicycles[3])

    This code returns the second and fourth bicycles in the list:

cannondale
specialized

     Python has a special syntax for accessing the last element in a list. If you
ask for the item at index -1, Python always returns the last item in the list:

bicycles = ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']
print(bicycles[-1])

    This code returns the value 'specialized'. This syntax is quite useful,
because you’ll often want to access the last items in a list without knowing
exactly how long the list is. This convention extends to other negative index
values as well. The index -2 returns the second item from the end of the list,
the index -3 returns the third item from the end, and so forth.

Using Individual Values from a List
You can use individual values from a list just as you would any other vari-
able. For example, you can use f-strings to create a message based on a
value from a list.
    Let’s try pulling the first bicycle from the list and composing a message
using that value:

bicycles = ['trek', 'cannondale', 'redline', 'specialized']
message = f"My first bicycle was a {bicycles[0].title()}."

print(message)

    We build a sentence using the value at bicycles[0] and assign it to the
variable message. The output is a simple sentence about the first bicycle in
the list:

My first bicycle was a Trek.

                                                                 Introducing Lists   35
                                                       TRY IT YOURSELF

                          Try these short programs to get some firsthand experience with Python’s lists.
                          You might want to create a new folder for each chapter’s exercises, to keep
                          them organized.
                          3-1. Names: Store the names of a few of your friends in a list called names. Print
                          each person’s name by accessing each element in the list, one at a time.
                          3-2. Greetings: Start with the list you used in Exercise 3-1, but instead of just
                          printing each person’s name, print a message to them. The text of each mes-
                          sage should be the same, but each message should be personalized with the
                          person’s name.
                          3-3. Your Own List: Think of your favorite mode of transportation, such as a
                          motorcycle or a car, and make a list that stores several examples. Use your list
                          to print a series of statements about these items, such as “I would like to own a
                          Honda motorcycle.”

       Modifying, Adding, and Removing Elements
                      Most lists you create will be dynamic, meaning you’ll build a list and then
                      add and remove elements from it as your program runs its course. For
                      example, you might create a game in which a player has to shoot aliens out
                      of the sky. You could store the initial set of aliens in a list and then remove
                      an alien from the list each time one is shot down. Each time a new alien
                      appears on the screen, you add it to the list. Your list of aliens will increase
                      and decrease in length throughout the course of the game.

                      Modifying Elements in a List
                      The syntax for modifying an element is similar to the syntax for accessing
                      an element in a list. To change an element, use the name of the list followed
                      by the index of the element you want to change, and then provide the new
                      value you want that item to have.
                            For example, say we have a list of motorcycles and the first item in the
                      list is 'honda'. We can change the value of this first item after the list has
                      been created:

     motorcycles.py   motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
                      print(motorcycles)

                      motorcycles[0] = 'ducati'
                      print(motorcycles)

36      Chapter 3
    Here we define the list motorcycles, with 'honda' as the first element.
Then we change the value of the first item to 'ducati'. The output shows
that the first item has been changed, while the rest of the list stays the same:

['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
['ducati', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

    You can change the value of any item in a list, not just the first item.

Adding Elements to a List
You might want to add a new element to a list for many reasons. For
example, you might want to make new aliens appear in a game, add new
data to a visualization, or add new registered users to a website you’ve
built. Python provides several ways to add new data to existing lists.

Appending Elements to the End of a List
The simplest way to add a new element to a list is to append the item to the
list. When you append an item to a list, the new element is added to the end
of the list. Using the same list we had in the previous example, we’ll add the
new element 'ducati' to the end of the list:

motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
print(motorcycles)

motorcycles.append('ducati')
print(motorcycles)

    Here the append() method adds 'ducati' to the end of the list, without
affecting any of the other elements in the list:

['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki', 'ducati']

     The append() method makes it easy to build lists dynamically. For example,
you can start with an empty list and then add items to the list using a series
of append() calls. Using an empty list, let’s add the elements 'honda', 'yamaha',
and 'suzuki' to the list:

motorcycles = []

motorcycles.append('honda')
motorcycles.append('yamaha')
motorcycles.append('suzuki')

print(motorcycles)

   The resulting list looks exactly the same as the lists in the previous
examples:

['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

                                                                 Introducing Lists   37
                      Building lists this way is very common, because you often won’t know
                 the data your users want to store in a program until after the program is
                 running. To put your users in control, start by defining an empty list that
                 will hold the users’ values. Then append each new value provided to the list
                 you just created.

                 Inserting Elements into a List
                 You can add a new element at any position in your list by using the insert()
                 method. You do this by specifying the index of the new element and the
                 value of the new item:

                 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

                 motorcycles.insert(0, 'ducati')
                 print(motorcycles)

                       In this example, we insert the value 'ducati' at the beginning of the
                 list. The insert() method opens a space at position 0 and stores the value
                 'ducati' at that location:

                 ['ducati', 'honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

                     This operation shifts every other value in the list one position to the
                 right.

                 Removing Elements from a List
                 Often, you’ll want to remove an item or a set of items from a list. For example,
                 when a player shoots down an alien from the sky, you’ll most likely want to
                 remove it from the list of active aliens. Or when a user decides to cancel
                 their account on a web application you created, you’ll want to remove that
                 user from the list of active users. You can remove an item according to its
                 position in the list or according to its value.

                 Removing an Item Using the del Statement
                 If you know the position of the item you want to remove from a list, you can
                 use the del statement:

                 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
                 print(motorcycles)

                 del motorcycles[0]
                 print(motorcycles)

                      Here we use the del statement to remove the first item, 'honda', from the
                 list of motorcycles:

                 ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
                 ['yamaha', 'suzuki']

38   Chapter 3
      You can remove an item from any position in a list using the del state-
  ment if you know its index. For example, here’s how to remove the second
  item, 'yamaha', from the list:

  motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
  print(motorcycles)

  del motorcycles[1]
  print(motorcycles)

      The second motorcycle is deleted from the list:

  ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
  ['honda', 'suzuki']

      In both examples, you can no longer access the value that was removed
  from the list after the del statement is used.

  Removing an Item Using the pop() Method
  Sometimes you’ll want to use the value of an item after you remove it from a
  list. For example, you might want to get the x and y position of an alien that
  was just shot down, so you can draw an explosion at that position. In a web
  application, you might want to remove a user from a list of active members
  and then add that user to a list of inactive members.
        The pop() method removes the last item in a list, but it lets you work
  with that item after removing it. The term pop comes from thinking of a
  list as a stack of items and popping one item off the top of the stack. In this
  analogy, the top of a stack corresponds to the end of a list.
        Let’s pop a motorcycle from the list of motorcycles:

1 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
  print(motorcycles)

2 popped_motorcycle = motorcycles.pop()
3 print(motorcycles)
4 print(popped_motorcycle)

      We start by defining and printing the list motorcycles 1. Then we pop a
  value from the list, and assign that value to the variable popped_motorcycle 2.
  We print the list 3 to show that a value has been removed from the list.
  Then we print the popped value 4 to prove that we still have access to the
  value that was removed.
      The output shows that the value 'suzuki' was removed from the end of
  the list and is now assigned to the variable popped_motorcycle:

  ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
  ['honda', 'yamaha']
  suzuki

                                                                  Introducing Lists   39
                      How might this pop() method be useful? Imagine that the motorcycles
                 in the list are stored in chronological order, according to when we owned
                 them. If this is the case, we can use the pop() method to print a statement
                 about the last motorcycle we bought:

                 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

                 last_owned = motorcycles.pop()
                 print(f"The last motorcycle I owned was a {last_owned.title()}.")

                    The output is a simple sentence about the most recent motorcycle we
                 owned:

                 The last motorcycle I owned was a Suzuki.

                 Popping Items from Any Position in a List
                 You can use pop() to remove an item from any position in a list by including
                 the index of the item you want to remove in parentheses:

                 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

                 first_owned = motorcycles.pop(0)
                 print(f"The first motorcycle I owned was a {first_owned.title()}.")

                     We start by popping the first motorcycle in the list, and then we print a
                 message about that motorcycle. The output is a simple sentence describing
                 the first motorcycle I ever owned:

                 The first motorcycle I owned was a Honda.

                     Remember that each time you use pop(), the item you work with is no
                 longer stored in the list.
                     If you’re unsure whether to use the del statement or the pop() method,
                 here’s a simple way to decide: when you want to delete an item from a list
                 and not use that item in any way, use the del statement; if you want to use an
                 item as you remove it, use the pop() method.

                 Removing an Item by Value
                 Sometimes you won’t know the position of the value you want to remove
                 from a list. If you only know the value of the item you want to remove, you
                 can use the remove() method.
                     For example, say we want to remove the value 'ducati' from the list of
                 motorcycles:

                 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki', 'ducati']
                 print(motorcycles)

                 motorcycles.remove('ducati')
                 print(motorcycles)

40   Chapter 3
            Here the remove() method tells Python to figure out where 'ducati'
         appears in the list and remove that element:

         ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki', 'ducati']
         ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

            You can also use the remove() method to work with a value that’s being
         removed from a list. Let’s remove the value 'ducati' and print a reason for
         removing it from the list:

       1 motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki', 'ducati']
         print(motorcycles)

       2 too_expensive = 'ducati'
       3 motorcycles.remove(too_expensive)
         print(motorcycles)
       4 print(f"\nA {too_expensive.title()} is too expensive for me.")

              After defining the list 1, we assign the value 'ducati' to a variable
         called too_expensive 2. We then use this variable to tell Python which value
         to remove from the list 3. The value 'ducati' has been removed from
         the list 4 but is still accessible through the variable too_expensive, allow-
         ing us to print a statement about why we removed 'ducati' from the list of
         motorcycles:

         ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki', 'ducati']
         ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']

         A Ducati is too expensive for me.

NOTE     The remove() method deletes only the first occurrence of the value you specify. If there’s
         a possibility the value appears more than once in the list, you’ll need to use a loop
         to make sure all occurrences of the value are removed. You’ll learn how to do this in
         Chapter 7.

                                          TRY IT YOURSELF

             The following exercises are a bit more complex than those in Chapter 2, but
             they give you an opportunity to use lists in all of the ways described.
             3-4. Guest List: If you could invite anyone, living or deceased, to dinner, who
             would you invite? Make a list that includes at least three people you’d like to
             invite to dinner. Then use your list to print a message to each person, inviting
             them to dinner.
                                                                                    (continued)

                                                                                   Introducing Lists   41
                     3-5. Changing Guest List: You just heard that one of your guests can’t make the
                     dinner, so you need to send out a new set of invitations. You’ll have to think of
                     someone else to invite.
                    •    Start with your program from Exercise 3-4. Add a print() call at the end of
                         your program, stating the name of the guest who can’t make it.
                    •    Modify your list, replacing the name of the guest who can’t make it with the
                         name of the new person you are inviting.
                    •    Print a second set of invitation messages, one for each person who is still in
                         your list.

                     3-6. More Guests: You just found a bigger dinner table, so now more space is
                     available. Think of three more guests to invite to dinner.
                    •    Start with your program from Exercise 3-4 or 3-5. Add a print() call to the
                         end of your program, informing people that you found a bigger table.
                    •    Use insert() to add one new guest to the beginning of your list.
                    •    Use insert() to add one new guest to the middle of your list.
                    •    Use append() to add one new guest to the end of your list.
                    •    Print a new set of invitation messages, one for each person in your list.

                     3-7. Shrinking Guest List: You just found out that your new dinner table won’t
                     arrive in time for the dinner, and now you have space for only two guests.
                    •    Start with your program from Exercise 3-6. Add a new line that prints a
                         message saying that you can invite only two people for dinner.
                    •    Use pop() to remove guests from your list one at a time until only two
                         names remain in your list. Each time you pop a name from your list, print a
                         message to that person letting them know you’re sorry you can’t invite them
                         to dinner.
                    •    Print a message to each of the two people still on your list, letting them
                         know they’re still invited.
                    •    Use del to remove the last two names from your list, so you have an empty
                         list. Print your list to make sure you actually have an empty list at the end of
                         your program.

     Organizing a List
                 Often, your lists will be created in an unpredictable order, because you
                 can’t always control the order in which your users provide their data.
                 Although this is unavoidable in most circumstances, you’ll frequently want
                 to present your information in a particular order. Sometimes you’ll want

42   Chapter 3
            to preserve the original order of your list, and other times you’ll want to
            change the original order. Python provides a number of different ways to
            organize your lists, depending on the situation.

            Sorting a List Permanently with the sort() Method
            Python’s sort() method makes it relatively easy to sort a list. Imagine we
            have a list of cars and want to change the order of the list to store them
            alphabetically. To keep the task simple, let’s assume that all the values in
            the list are lowercase:

cars.py     cars = ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']
            cars.sort()
            print(cars)

                The sort() method changes the order of the list permanently. The cars
            are now in alphabetical order, and we can never revert to the original order:

            ['audi', 'bmw', 'subaru', 'toyota']

                You can also sort this list in reverse-alphabetical order by passing the
            argument reverse=True to the sort() method. The following example sorts
            the list of cars in reverse-alphabetical order:

            cars = ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']
            cars.sort(reverse=True)
            print(cars)

                Again, the order of the list is permanently changed:

            ['toyota', 'subaru', 'bmw', 'audi']

            Sorting a List Temporarily with the sorted() Function
            To maintain the original order of a list but present it in a sorted order, you
            can use the sorted() function. The sorted() function lets you display your list
            in a particular order, but doesn’t affect the actual order of the list.
                 Let’s try this function on the list of cars.

            cars = ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']

          1 print("Here is the original list:")
            print(cars)

          2 print("\nHere is the sorted list:")
            print(sorted(cars))

          3 print("\nHere is the original list again:")
            print(cars)

                                                                            Introducing Lists   43
                         We first print the list in its original order 1 and then in alphabetical
                   order 2. After the list is displayed in the new order, we show that the list is
                   still stored in its original order 3:
                   Here is the original list:
                   ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']

                   Here is the sorted list:
                   ['audi', 'bmw', 'subaru', 'toyota']

                 1 Here is the original list again:
                   ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']

                       Notice that the list still exists in its original order 1 after the sorted()
                   function has been used. The sorted() function can also accept a reverse=True
                   argument if you want to display a list in reverse-alphabetical order.

       NOTE        Sorting a list alphabetically is a bit more complicated when all the values are not in
                   lowercase. There are several ways to interpret capital letters when determining a sort
                   order, and specifying the exact order can be more complex than we want to deal with
                   at this time. However, most approaches to sorting will build directly on what you
                   learned in this section.

                   Printing a List in Reverse Order
                   To reverse the original order of a list, you can use the reverse() method. If
                   we originally stored the list of cars in chronological order according to when
                   we owned them, we could easily rearrange the list into reverse-chronological
                   order:
                   cars = ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']
                   print(cars)

                   cars.reverse()
                   print(cars)

                       Notice that reverse() doesn’t sort backward alphabetically; it simply
                   reverses the order of the list:
                   ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']
                   ['subaru', 'toyota', 'audi', 'bmw']

                         The reverse() method changes the order of a list permanently, but you
                   can revert to the original order anytime by applying reverse() to the same
                   list a second time.

                   Finding the Length of a List
                   You can quickly find the length of a list by using the len() function. The list
                   in this example has four items, so its length is 4:
                   >>> cars = ['bmw', 'audi', 'toyota', 'subaru']
                   >>> len(cars)

44   Chapter 3
           You’ll find len() useful when you need to identify the number of aliens
       that still need to be shot down in a game, determine the amount of data
       you have to manage in a visualization, or figure out the number of regis-
       tered users on a website, among other tasks.

NOTE   Python counts the items in a list starting with one, so you shouldn’t run into any
       off-by-one errors when determining the length of a list.

                                          TRY IT YOURSELF

           3-8. Seeing the World: Think of at least five places in the world you’d like
           to visit.
           •   Store the locations in a list. Make sure the list is not in alphabetical order.
           •   Print your list in its original order. Don’t worry about printing the list neatly;
               just print it as a raw Python list.
           •   Use sorted() to print your list in alphabetical order without modifying the
               actual list.
           •   Show that your list is still in its original order by printing it.
           •   Use sorted() to print your list in reverse-alphabetical order without chang-
               ing the order of the original list.
           •   Show that your list is still in its original order by printing it again.
           •   Use reverse() to change the order of your list. Print the list to show that its
               order has changed.
           •   Use reverse() to change the order of your list again. Print the list to show
               it’s back to its original order.
           •   Use sort() to change your list so it’s stored in alphabetical order. Print the
               list to show that its order has been changed.
           •   Use sort() to change your list so it’s stored in reverse-alphabetical order.
               Print the list to show that its order has changed.

           3-9. Dinner Guests: Working with one of the programs from Exercises 3-4
           through 3-7 (pages 41–42), use len() to print a message indicating the number
           of people you’re inviting to dinner.
           3-10. Every Function: Think of things you could store in a list. For example, you
           could make a list of mountains, rivers, countries, cities, languages, or anything
           else you’d like. Write a program that creates a list containing these items and
           then uses each function introduced in this chapter at least once.

                                                                                     Introducing Lists   45
       Avoiding Index Errors When Working with Lists
                      There’s one type of error that’s common to see when you’re working with
                      lists for the first time. Let’s say you have a list with three items, and you ask
                      for the fourth item:

     motorcycles.py   motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
                      print(motorcycles[3])

                          This example results in an index error:

                      Traceback (most recent call last):
                        File "motorcycles.py", line 2, in <module>
                          print(motorcycles[3])
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~^^^
                      IndexError: list index out of range

                            Python attempts to give you the item at index 3. But when it searches
                      the list, no item in motorcycles has an index of 3. Because of the off-by-one
                      nature of indexing in lists, this error is typical. People think the third item
                      is item number 3, because they start counting at 1. But in Python the third
                      item is number 2, because it starts indexing at 0.
                            An index error means Python can’t find an item at the index you
                      requested. If an index error occurs in your program, try adjusting the
                      index you’re asking for by one. Then run the program again to see if the
                      results are correct.
                            Keep in mind that whenever you want to access the last item in a list,
                      you should use the index -1. This will always work, even if your list has
                      changed size since the last time you accessed it:

                      motorcycles = ['honda', 'yamaha', 'suzuki']
                      print(motorcycles[-1])

                          The index -1 always returns the last item in a list, in this case the value
                      'suzuki':

                      suzuki

                           The only time this approach will cause an error is when you request the
                      last item from an empty list:

                      motorcycles = []
                      print(motorcycles[-1])

                          No items are in motorcycles, so Python returns another index error:

                      Traceback (most recent call last):
                        File "motorcyles.py", line 3, in <module>
                          print(motorcycles[-1])
                                ~~~~~~~~~~~^^^^
                      IndexError: list index out of range

46      Chapter 3
          If an index error occurs and you can’t figure out how to resolve it, try
      printing your list or just printing the length of your list. Your list might look
      much different than you thought it did, especially if it has been managed
      dynamically by your program. Seeing the actual list, or the exact number of
      items in your list, can help you sort out such logical errors.

                                       TRY IT YOURSELF

          3-11. Intentional Error: If you haven’t received an index error in one of your pro-
          grams yet, try to make one happen. Change an index in one of your programs
          to produce an index error. Make sure you correct the error before closing the
          program.

Summary
      In this chapter, you learned what lists are and how to work with the indi-
      vidual items in a list. You learned how to define a list and how to add and
      remove elements. You learned how to sort lists permanently and temporar-
      ily for display purposes. You also learned how to find the length of a list and
      how to avoid index errors when you’re working with lists.
           In Chapter 4 you’ll learn how to work with items in a list more efficiently.
      By looping through each item in a list using just a few lines of code you’ll be
      able to work efficiently, even when your list contains thousands or millions
      of items.

                                                                                Introducing Lists   47
