                     WORKING WITH LISTS
                                        4
                      In Chapter 3 you learned how to make a
                      simple list, and you learned to work with the
                    individual elements in a list. In this chapter
                  you’ll learn how to loop through an entire list
        using just a few lines of code, regardless of how long the
        list is. Looping allows you to take the same action, or set
        of actions, with every item in a list. As a result, you’ll be
        able to work efficiently with lists of any length, including
        those with thousands or even millions of items.

Looping Through an Entire List
        You’ll often want to run through all entries in a list, performing the same
        task with each item. For example, in a game you might want to move every
        element on the screen by the same amount. In a list of numbers, you
        might want to perform the same statistical operation on every element.
                    Or perhaps you’ll want to display each headline from a list of articles on a
                    website. When you want to do the same action with every item in a list, you
                    can use Python’s for loop.
                        Say we have a list of magicians’ names, and we want to print out each
                    name in the list. We could do this by retrieving each name from the list indi-
                    vidually, but this approach could cause several problems. For one, it would
                    be repetitive to do this with a long list of names. Also, we’d have to change
                    our code each time the list’s length changed. Using a for loop avoids both of
                    these issues by letting Python manage these issues internally.
                        Let’s use a for loop to print out each name in a list of magicians:

     magicians.py   magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
                    for magician in magicians:
                        print(magician)

                        We begin by defining a list, just as we did in Chapter 3. Then we define
                    a for loop. This line tells Python to pull a name from the list magicians,
                    and associate it with the variable magician. Next, we tell Python to print the
                    name that’s just been assigned to magician. Python then repeats these last
                    two lines, once for each name in the list. It might help to read this code as
                    “For every magician in the list of magicians, print the magician’s name.”
                    The output is a simple printout of each name in the list:

                    alice
                    david
                    carolina

                    A Closer Look at Looping
                    Looping is important because it’s one of the most common ways a computer
                    automates repetitive tasks. For example, in a simple loop like we used in
                    magicians.py, Python initially reads the first line of the loop:

                    for magician in magicians:

                        This line tells Python to retrieve the first value from the list magicians
                    and associate it with the variable magician. This first value is 'alice'. Python
                    then reads the next line:

                        print(magician)

                        Python prints the current value of magician, which is still 'alice'. Because
                    the list contains more values, Python returns to the first line of the loop:

                    for magician in magicians:

                        Python retrieves the next name in the list, 'david', and associates that
                    value with the variable magician. Python then executes the line:

                        print(magician)

                    Python prints the current value of magician again, which is now 'david'.
               Python repeats the entire loop once more with the last value in the list,
               'carolina'. Because no more values are in the list, Python moves on to the
               next line in the program. In this case nothing comes after the for loop, so
               the program ends.
                    When you’re using loops for the first time, keep in mind that the set of
               steps is repeated once for each item in the list, no matter how many items
               are in the list. If you have a million items in your list, Python repeats these
               steps a million times—and usually very quickly.
                    Also keep in mind when writing your own for loops that you can choose
               any name you want for the temporary variable that will be associated with
               each value in the list. However, it’s helpful to choose a meaningful name
               that represents a single item from the list. For example, here’s a good way to
               start a for loop for a list of cats, a list of dogs, and a general list of items:

               for cat in cats:
               for dog in dogs:
               for item in list_of_items:

                   These naming conventions can help you follow the action being done
               on each item within a for loop. Using singular and plural names can help
               you identify whether a section of code is working with a single element from
               the list or the entire list.

               Doing More Work Within a for Loop
               You can do just about anything with each item in a for loop. Let’s build on
               the previous example by printing a message to each magician, telling them
               that they performed a great trick:

magicians.py   magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
               for magician in magicians:
                   print(f"{magician.title()}, that was a great trick!")

                   The only difference in this code is where we compose a message to each
               magician, starting with that magician’s name. The first time through the
               loop the value of magician is 'alice', so Python starts the first message with the
               name 'Alice'. The second time through, the message will begin with 'David',
               and the third time through, the message will begin with 'Carolina'.
                   The output shows a personalized message for each magician in the list:

               Alice, that was a great trick!
               David, that was a great trick!
               Carolina, that was a great trick!

                    You can also write as many lines of code as you like in the for loop. Every
               indented line following the line for magician in magicians is considered inside
               the loop, and each indented line is executed once for each value in the list.
               Therefore, you can do as much work as you like with each value in the list.

                     Let’s add a second line to our message, telling each magician that we’re
                 looking forward to their next trick:

                 magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
                 for magician in magicians:
                     print(f"{magician.title()}, that was a great trick!")
                     print(f"I can't wait to see your next trick, {magician.title()}.\n")

                     Because we have indented both calls to print(), each line will be exe-
                 cuted once for every magician in the list. The newline ("\n") in the second
                 print() call inserts a blank line after each pass through the loop. This cre-
                 ates a set of messages that are neatly grouped for each person in the list:

                 Alice, that was a great trick!
                 I can't wait to see your next trick, Alice.

                 David, that was a great trick!
                 I can't wait to see your next trick, David.

                 Carolina, that was a great trick!
                 I can't wait to see your next trick, Carolina.

                     You can use as many lines as you like in your for loops. In practice,
                 you’ll often find it useful to do a number of different operations with each
                 item in a list when you use a for loop.

                 Doing Something After a for Loop
                 What happens once a for loop has finished executing? Usually, you’ll want
                 to summarize a block of output or move on to other work that your pro-
                 gram must accomplish.
                      Any lines of code after the for loop that are not indented are executed
                 once without repetition. Let’s write a thank you to the group of magicians
                 as a whole, thanking them for putting on an excellent show. To display this
                 group message after all of the individual messages have been printed, we
                 place the thank you message after the for loop, without indentation:

                 magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
                 for magician in magicians:
                     print(f"{magician.title()}, that was a great trick!")
                     print(f"I can't wait to see your next trick, {magician.title()}.\n")

                 print("Thank you, everyone. That was a great magic show!")

                       The first two calls to print() are repeated once for each magician in the
                 list, as you saw earlier. However, because the last line is not indented, it’s
                 printed only once:

                 Alice, that was a great trick!
                 I can't wait to see your next trick, Alice.

                 David, that was a great trick!

                 I can't wait to see your next trick, David.

                 Carolina, that was a great trick!
                 I can't wait to see your next trick, Carolina.

                 Thank you, everyone. That was a great magic show!

                      When you’re processing data using a for loop, you’ll find that this is a
                 good way to summarize an operation that was performed on an entire data-
                 set. For example, you might use a for loop to initialize a game by running
                 through a list of characters and displaying each character on the screen.
                 You might then write some additional code after this loop that displays a
                 Play Now button after all the characters have been drawn to the screen.

  Avoiding Indentation Errors
                 Python uses indentation to determine how a line, or group of lines, is related
                 to the rest of the program. In the previous examples, the lines that printed
                 messages to individual magicians were part of the for loop because they
                 were indented. Python’s use of indentation makes code very easy to read.
                 Basically, it uses whitespace to force you to write neatly formatted code with
                 a clear visual structure. In longer Python programs, you’ll notice blocks of
                 code indented at a few different levels. These indentation levels help you
                 gain a general sense of the overall program’s organization.
                      As you begin to write code that relies on proper indentation, you’ll
                 need to watch for a few common indentation errors. For example, people
                 sometimes indent lines of code that don’t need to be indented or forget
                 to indent lines that need to be indented. Seeing examples of these errors
                 now will help you avoid them in the future and correct them when they do
                 appear in your own programs.
                      Let’s examine some of the more common indentation errors.

                 Forgetting to Indent
                 Always indent the line after the for statement in a loop. If you forget, Python
                 will remind you:

magicians.py     magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
                 for magician in magicians:
               1 print(magician)

                      The call to print() 1 should be indented, but it’s not. When Python
                 expects an indented block and doesn’t find one, it lets you know which line
                 it had a problem with:

                   File "magicians.py", line 3
                     print(magician)
                     ^
                 IndentationError: expected an indented block after 'for' statement on line 2

                            You can usually resolve this kind of indentation error by indenting the
                        line or lines immediately after the for statement.

                        Forgetting to Indent Additional Lines
                        Sometimes your loop will run without any errors but won’t produce the
                        expected result. This can happen when you’re trying to do several tasks
                        in a loop and you forget to indent some of its lines.
                             For example, this is what happens when we forget to indent the second
                        line in the loop that tells each magician we’re looking forward to their next
                        trick:

                        magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
                        for magician in magicians:
                            print(f"{magician.title()}, that was a great trick!")
                      1 print(f"I can't wait to see your next trick, {magician.title()}.\n")

                            The second call to print() 1 is supposed to be indented, but because
                        Python finds at least one indented line after the for statement, it doesn’t
                        report an error. As a result, the first print() call is executed once for each
                        name in the list because it is indented. The second print() call is not
                        indented, so it is executed only once after the loop has finished running.
                        Because the final value associated with magician is 'carolina', she is the only
                        one who receives the “looking forward to the next trick” message:

                        Alice, that was a great trick!
                        David, that was a great trick!
                        Carolina, that was a great trick!
                        I can't wait to see your next trick, Carolina.

                            This is a logical error. The syntax is valid Python code, but the code does
                        not produce the desired result because a problem occurs in its logic. If you
                        expect to see a certain action repeated once for each item in a list and it’s
                        executed only once, determine whether you need to simply indent a line or
                        a group of lines.

                        Indenting Unnecessarily
                        If you accidentally indent a line that doesn’t need to be indented, Python
                        informs you about the unexpected indent:

     hello_world.py     message = "Hello Python world!"
                            print(message)

                           We don’t need to indent the print() call, because it isn’t part of a loop;
                        hence, Python reports that error:

                          File "hello_world.py", line 2
                            print(message)
                            ^
                        IndentationError: unexpected indent

                        You can avoid unexpected indentation errors by indenting only when
                   you have a specific reason to do so. In the programs you’re writing at this
                   point, the only lines you should indent are the actions you want to repeat
                   for each item in a for loop.

                   Indenting Unnecessarily After the Loop
                   If you accidentally indent code that should run after a loop has finished,
                   that code will be repeated once for each item in the list. Sometimes this
                   prompts Python to report an error, but often this will result in a logical
                   error.
                        For example, let’s see what happens when we accidentally indent the
                   line that thanked the magicians as a group for putting on a good show:

magicians.py       magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
                   for magician in magicians:
                       print(f"{magician.title()}, that was a great trick!")
                       print(f"I can't wait to see your next trick, {magician.title()}.\n")

               1       print("Thank you everyone, that was a great magic show!")

                       Because the last line 1 is indented, it’s printed once for each person in
                   the list:

                   Alice, that was a great trick!
                   I can't wait to see your next trick, Alice.

                   Thank you everyone, that was a great magic show!
                   David, that was a great trick!
                   I can't wait to see your next trick, David.

                   Thank you everyone, that was a great magic show!
                   Carolina, that was a great trick!
                   I can't wait to see your next trick, Carolina.

                   Thank you everyone, that was a great magic show!

                       This is another logical error, similar to the one in “Forgetting to Indent
                   Additional Lines” on page 54. Because Python doesn’t know what you’re
                   trying to accomplish with your code, it will run all code that is written in
                   valid syntax. If an action is repeated many times when it should be executed
                   only once, you probably need to unindent the code for that action.

                   Forgetting the Colon
                   The colon at the end of a for statement tells Python to interpret the next
                   line as the start of a loop.

                 magicians = ['alice', 'david', 'carolina']
               1 for magician in magicians
                     print(magician)

                     If you accidentally forget the colon 1, you’ll get a syntax error because
                 Python doesn’t know exactly what you’re trying to do:

                   File "magicians.py", line 2
                     for magician in magicians
                                                  ^
                 SyntaxError: expected ':'

                      Python doesn’t know if you simply forgot the colon, or if you meant
                 to write additional code to set up a more complex loop. If the interpreter
                 can identify a possible fix it will suggest one, like adding a colon at the end
                 of a line, as it does here with the response expected ':'. Some errors have
                 easy, obvious fixes, thanks to the suggestions in Python’s tracebacks. Some
                 errors are much harder to resolve, even when the eventual fix only involves
                 a single character. Don’t feel bad when a small fix takes a long time to find;
                 you are absolutely not alone in this experience.

                                                  TRY IT YOURSELF

                     4-1. Pizzas: Think of at least three kinds of your favorite pizza. Store these
                     pizza names in a list, and then use a for loop to print the name of each pizza.
                    •    Modify your for loop to print a sentence using the name of the pizza,
                         instead of printing just the name of the pizza. For each pizza, you should
                         have one line of output containing a simple statement like I like pep-
                         peroni pizza.
                    •    Add a line at the end of your program, outside the for loop, that states
                         how much you like pizza. The output should consist of three or more lines
                         about the kinds of pizza you like and then an additional sentence, such as
                         I really love pizza!

                     4-2. Animals: Think of at least three different animals that have a common char-
                     acteristic. Store the names of these animals in a list, and then use a for loop to
                     print out the name of each animal.
                    •    Modify your program to print a statement about each animal, such as A
                         dog would make a great pet.
                    •    Add a line at the end of your program, stating what these animals have in
                         common. You could print a sentence, such as Any of these animals would
                         make a great pet!

     Making Numerical Lists
                 Many reasons exist to store a set of numbers. For example, you’ll need to
                 keep track of the positions of each character in a game, and you might want

                   to keep track of a player’s high scores as well. In data visualizations, you’ll
                   almost always work with sets of numbers, such as temperatures, distances,
                   population sizes, or latitude and longitude values, among other types of
                   numerical sets.
                        Lists are ideal for storing sets of numbers, and Python provides a variety
                   of tools to help you work efficiently with lists of numbers. Once you under-
                   stand how to use these tools effectively, your code will work well even when
                   your lists contain millions of items.

                   Using the range() Function
                   Python’s range() function makes it easy to generate a series of numbers.
                   For example, you can use the range() function to print a series of numbers
                   like this:

first_numbers.py   for value in range(1, 5):
                       print(value)

                      Although this code looks like it should print the numbers from 1 to 5, it
                   doesn’t print the number 5:

                   1
                   2
                   3
                   4

                       In this example, range() prints only the numbers 1 through 4. This is
                   another result of the off-by-one behavior you’ll see often in programming
                   languages. The range() function causes Python to start counting at the first
                   value you give it, and it stops when it reaches the second value you provide.
                   Because it stops at that second value, the output never contains the end
                   value, which would have been 5 in this case.
                       To print the numbers from 1 to 5, you would use range(1, 6):

                   for value in range(1, 6):
                       print(value)

                       This time the output starts at 1 and ends at 5:

                   1
                   2
                   3
                   4
                   5

                       If your output is different from what you expect when you’re using
                   range(), try adjusting your end value by 1.
                       You can also pass range() only one argument, and it will start the
                   sequence of numbers at 0. For example, range(6) would return the numbers
                   from 0 through 5.

                     Using range() to Make a List of Numbers
                     If you want to make a list of numbers, you can convert the results of range()
                     directly into a list using the list() function. When you wrap list() around a
                     call to the range() function, the output will be a list of numbers.
                          In the example in the previous section, we simply printed out a series of
                     numbers. We can use list() to convert that same set of numbers into a list:

                     numbers = list(range(1, 6))
                     print(numbers)

                         This is the result:

                     [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]

                          We can also use the range() function to tell Python to skip numbers in a
                     given range. If you pass a third argument to range(), Python uses that value
                     as a step size when generating numbers.
                          For example, here’s how to list the even numbers between 1 and 10:

even_numbers.py      even_numbers = list(range(2, 11, 2))
                     print(even_numbers)

                         In this example, the range() function starts with the value 2 and then
                     adds 2 to that value. It adds 2 repeatedly until it reaches or passes the end
                     value, 11, and produces this result:

                     [2, 4, 6, 8, 10]

                         You can create almost any set of numbers you want to using the range()
                     function. For example, consider how you might make a list of the first 10
                     square numbers (that is, the square of each integer from 1 through 10). In
                     Python, two asterisks (**) represent exponents. Here’s how you might put
                     the first 10 square numbers into a list:

         square      squares = []
     _numbers.py     for value in range(1, 11):
                   1     square = value ** 2
                   2     squares.append(square)

                     print(squares)

                         We start with an empty list called squares. Then, we tell Python to loop
                     through each value from 1 to 10 using the range() function. Inside the loop,
                     the current value is raised to the second power and assigned to the variable
                     square 1. Each new value of square is then appended to the list squares 2.
                     Finally, when the loop has finished running, the list of squares is printed:

                     [1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100]

                To write this code more concisely, omit the temporary variable square
             and append each new value directly to the list:

             squares = []
             for value in range(1,11):
                 squares.append(value**2)

             print(squares)

                 This line does the same work as the lines inside the for loop in the pre-
             vious listing. Each value in the loop is raised to the second power and then
             immediately appended to the list of squares.
                 You can use either of these approaches when you’re making more com-
             plex lists. Sometimes using a temporary variable makes your code easier to
             read; other times it makes the code unnecessarily long. Focus first on writ-
             ing code that you understand clearly, and does what you want it to do. Then
             look for more efficient approaches as you review your code.

             Simple Statistics with a List of Numbers
             A few Python functions are helpful when working with lists of numbers. For
             example, you can easily find the minimum, maximum, and sum of a list of
             numbers:

             >>> digits = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0]
             >>> min(digits)
             0
             >>> max(digits)
             9
             >>> sum(digits)
             45

 NOTE        The examples in this section use short lists of numbers that fit easily on the page. They
             would work just as well if your list contained a million or more numbers.

             List Comprehensions
             The approach described earlier for generating the list squares consisted of
             using three or four lines of code. A list comprehension allows you to generate
             this same list in just one line of code. A list comprehension combines the
             for loop and the creation of new elements into one line, and automatically
             appends each new element. List comprehensions are not always presented
             to beginners, but I’ve included them here because you’ll most likely see
             them as soon as you start looking at other people’s code.
                  The following example builds the same list of square numbers you saw
             earlier but uses a list comprehension:

squares.py   squares = [value**2 for value in range(1, 11)]
             print(squares)

                     To use this syntax, begin with a descriptive name for the list, such as
                 squares. Next, open a set of square brackets and define the expression for
                 the values you want to store in the new list. In this example the expression is
                 value**2, which raises the value to the second power. Then, write a for loop
                 to generate the numbers you want to feed into the expression, and close the
                 square brackets. The for loop in this example is for value in range(1, 11),
                 which feeds the values 1 through 10 into the expression value**2. Note that
                 no colon is used at the end of the for statement.
                     The result is the same list of square numbers you saw earlier:

                 [1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, 81, 100]

                     It takes practice to write your own list comprehensions, but you’ll find
                 them worthwhile once you become comfortable creating ordinary lists.
                 When you’re writing three or four lines of code to generate lists and it
                 begins to feel repetitive, consider writing your own list comprehensions.

                                                  TRY IT YOURSELF

                     4-3. Counting to Twenty: Use a for loop to print the numbers from 1 to 20,
                     inclusive.
                     4-4. One Million: Make a list of the numbers from one to one million, and then
                     use a for loop to print the numbers. (If the output is taking too long, stop it by
                     pressing CTRL-C or by closing the output window.)
                     4-5. Summing a Million: Make a list of the numbers from one to one million, and
                     then use min() and max() to make sure your list actually starts at one and ends
                     at one million. Also, use the sum() function to see how quickly Python can add
                     a million numbers.
                     4-6. Odd Numbers: Use the third argument of the range() function to make a list
                     of the odd numbers from 1 to 20. Use a for loop to print each number.
                     4-7. Threes: Make a list of the multiples of 3, from 3 to 30. Use a for loop to
                     print the numbers in your list.
                     4-8. Cubes: A number raised to the third power is called a cube. For example,
                     the cube of 2 is written as 2**3 in Python. Make a list of the first 10 cubes (that
                     is, the cube of each integer from 1 through 10), and use a for loop to print out
                     the value of each cube.
                     4-9. Cube Comprehension: Use a list comprehension to generate a list of the first
                     10 cubes.

Working with Part of a List
              In Chapter 3 you learned how to access single elements in a list, and in this
              chapter you’ve been learning how to work through all the elements in a
              list. You can also work with a specific group of items in a list, called a slice in
              Python.

              Slicing a List
              To make a slice, you specify the index of the first and last elements you want
              to work with. As with the range() function, Python stops one item before the
              second index you specify. To output the first three elements in a list, you
              would request indices 0 through 3, which would return elements 0, 1, and 2.
                  The following example involves a list of players on a team:

 players.py   players = ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence', 'eli']
              print(players[0:3])

                  This code prints a slice of the list. The output retains the structure of
              the list, and includes the first three players in the list:

              ['charles', 'martina', 'michael']

                  You can generate any subset of a list. For example, if you want the sec-
              ond, third, and fourth items in a list, you would start the slice at index 1 and
              end it at index 4:

              players = ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence', 'eli']
              print(players[1:4])

                  This time the slice starts with 'martina' and ends with 'florence':

              ['martina', 'michael', 'florence']

                   If you omit the first index in a slice, Python automatically starts your
              slice at the beginning of the list:

              players = ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence', 'eli']
              print(players[:4])

                  Without a starting index, Python starts at the beginning of the list:

              ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence']

                  A similar syntax works if you want a slice that includes the end of a list.
              For example, if you want all items from the third item through the last item,
              you can start with index 2 and omit the second index:

              players = ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence', 'eli']
              print(players[2:])

                       Python returns all items from the third item through the end of the list:

                   ['michael', 'florence', 'eli']

                        This syntax allows you to output all of the elements from any point in
                   your list to the end, regardless of the length of the list. Recall that a nega-
                   tive index returns an element a certain distance from the end of a list;
                   therefore, you can output any slice from the end of a list. For example, if
                   we want to output the last three players on the roster, we can use the slice
                   players[-3:]:

                   players = ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence', 'eli']
                   print(players[-3:])

                        This prints the names of the last three players and will continue to work
                   as the list of players changes in size.

        NOTE       You can include a third value in the brackets indicating a slice. If a third value is
                   included, this tells Python how many items to skip between items in the specified
                   range.

                   Looping Through a Slice
                   You can use a slice in a for loop if you want to loop through a subset of the
                   elements in a list. In the next example, we loop through the first three play-
                   ers and print their names as part of a simple roster:

                   players = ['charles', 'martina', 'michael', 'florence', 'eli']

                   print("Here are the first three players on my team:")
                 1 for player in players[:3]:
                       print(player.title())

                       Instead of looping through the entire list of players, Python loops
                   through only the first three names 1:

                   Here are the first three players on my team:
                   Charles
                   Martina
                   Michael

                        Slices are very useful in a number of situations. For instance, when
                   you’re creating a game, you could add a player’s final score to a list every
                   time that player finishes playing. You could then get a player’s top three
                   scores by sorting the list in decreasing order and taking a slice that includes
                   just the first three scores. When you’re working with data, you can use slices
                   to process your data in chunks of a specific size. Or, when you’re building
                   a web application, you could use slices to display information in a series of
                   pages with an appropriate amount of information on each page.

             Copying a List
             Often, you’ll want to start with an existing list and make an entirely new list
             based on the first one. Let’s explore how copying a list works and examine
             one situation in which copying a list is useful.
                 To copy a list, you can make a slice that includes the entire original list
             by omitting the first index and the second index ([:]). This tells Python to
             make a slice that starts at the first item and ends with the last item, produc-
             ing a copy of the entire list.
                 For example, imagine we have a list of our favorite foods and want to
             make a separate list of foods that a friend likes. This friend likes everything
             in our list so far, so we can create their list by copying ours:

foods.py     my_foods = ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake']
           1 friend_foods = my_foods[:]

             print("My favorite foods are:")
             print(my_foods)

             print("\nMy friend's favorite foods are:")
             print(friend_foods)

                  First, we make a list of the foods we like called my_foods. Then we make
             a new list called friend_foods. We make a copy of my_foods by asking for a
             slice of my_foods without specifying any indices 1, and assign the copy to
             friend_foods. When we print each list, we see that they both contain the
             same foods:

             My favorite foods are:
             ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake']

             My friend's favorite foods are:
             ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake']

                 To prove that we actually have two separate lists, we’ll add a new food
             to each list and show that each list keeps track of the appropriate person’s
             favorite foods:

             my_foods = ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake']
           1 friend_foods = my_foods[:]

           2 my_foods.append('cannoli')
           3 friend_foods.append('ice cream')

             print("My favorite foods are:")
             print(my_foods)

             print("\nMy friend's favorite foods are:")
             print(friend_foods)

                     We copy the original items in my_foods to the new list friend_foods, as we
                 did in the previous example 1. Next, we add a new food to each list: we add
                 'cannoli' to my_foods 2, and we add 'ice cream' to friend_foods 3. We then
                 print the two lists to see whether each of these foods is in the appropriate list:

                 My favorite foods are:
                 ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake', 'cannoli']

                 My friend's favorite foods are:
                 ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake', 'ice cream']

                     The output shows that 'cannoli' now appears in our list of favorite foods
                 but 'ice cream' does not. We can see that 'ice cream' now appears in our
                 friend’s list but 'cannoli' does not. If we had simply set friend_foods equal to
                 my_foods, we would not produce two separate lists. For example, here’s what
                 happens when you try to copy a list without using a slice:

                 my_foods = ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake']

                 # This doesn't work:
                 friend_foods = my_foods

                 my_foods.append('cannoli')
                 friend_foods.append('ice cream')

                 print("My favorite foods are:")
                 print(my_foods)

                 print("\nMy friend's favorite foods are:")
                 print(friend_foods)

                     Instead of assigning a copy of my_foods to friend_foods, we set friend_foods
                 equal to my_foods. This syntax actually tells Python to associate the new vari-
                 able friend_foods with the list that is already associated with my_foods, so now
                 both variables point to the same list. As a result, when we add 'cannoli' to
                 my_foods, it will also appear in friend_foods. Likewise 'ice cream' will appear
                 in both lists, even though it appears to be added only to friend_foods.
                     The output shows that both lists are the same now, which is not what we
                 wanted:

                 My favorite foods are:
                 ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake', 'cannoli', 'ice cream']

                 My friend's favorite foods are:
                 ['pizza', 'falafel', 'carrot cake', 'cannoli', 'ice cream']

       NOTE      Don’t worry about the details in this example for now. If you’re trying to work with
                 a copy of a list and you see unexpected behavior, make sure you are copying the list
                 using a slice, as we did in the first example.

                                          TRY IT YOURSELF

             4-10. Slices: Using one of the programs you wrote in this chapter, add several
             lines to the end of the program that do the following:
             •   Print the message The first three items in the list are:. Then use a slice to
                 print the first three items from that program’s list.
             •   Print the message Three items from the middle of the list are:. Then use a
                 slice to print three items from the middle of the list.
             •   Print the message The last three items in the list are:. Then use a slice to
                 print the last three items in the list.

             4-11. My Pizzas, Your Pizzas: Start with your program from Exercise 4-1 (page 56).
             Make a copy of the list of pizzas, and call it friend_pizzas. Then, do the
             following:
             •   Add a new pizza to the original list.
             •   Add a different pizza to the list friend_pizzas.
             •   Prove that you have two separate lists. Print the message My favorite piz-
                 zas are:, and then use a for loop to print the first list. Print the message My
                 friend’s favorite pizzas are:, and then use a for loop to print the second list.
                 Make sure each new pizza is stored in the appropriate list.

             4-12. More Loops: All versions of foods.py in this section have avoided using
             for loops when printing, to save space. Choose a version of foods.py, and
             write two for loops to print each list of foods.

Tuples
         Lists work well for storing collections of items that can change throughout the
         life of a program. The ability to modify lists is particularly important when
         you’re working with a list of users on a website or a list of characters in a game.
         However, sometimes you’ll want to create a list of items that cannot change.
         Tuples allow you to do just that. Python refers to values that cannot change as
         immutable, and an immutable list is called a tuple.

         Defining a Tuple
         A tuple looks just like a list, except you use parentheses instead of square
         brackets. Once you define a tuple, you can access individual elements by
         using each item’s index, just as you would for a list.

                     For example, if we have a rectangle that should always be a certain size, we
                 can ensure that its size doesn’t change by putting the dimensions into a tuple:

 dimensions.py   dimensions = (200, 50)
                 print(dimensions[0])
                 print(dimensions[1])

                     We define the tuple dimensions, using parentheses instead of square
                 brackets. Then we print each element in the tuple individually, using the
                 same syntax we’ve been using to access elements in a list:

                 200
                 50

                       Let’s see what happens if we try to change one of the items in the tuple
                 dimensions:

                 dimensions = (200, 50)
                 dimensions[0] = 250

                     This code tries to change the value of the first dimension, but Python
                 returns a type error. Because we’re trying to alter a tuple, which can’t be
                 done to that type of object, Python tells us we can’t assign a new value to
                 an item in a tuple:

                 Traceback (most recent call last):
                   File "dimensions.py", line 2, in <module>
                     dimensions[0] = 250
                 TypeError: 'tuple' object does not support item assignment

                     This is beneficial because we want Python to raise an error when a line
                 of code tries to change the dimensions of the rectangle.

       NOTE      Tuples are technically defined by the presence of a comma; the parentheses make them
                 look neater and more readable. If you want to define a tuple with one element, you
                 need to include a trailing comma:
                          my_t = (3,)

                     It doesn’t often make sense to build a tuple with one element, but this can happen
                 when tuples are generated automatically.

                 Looping Through All Values in a Tuple
                 You can loop over all the values in a tuple using a for loop, just as you did
                 with a list:

                 dimensions = (200, 50)
                 for dimension in dimensions:
                     print(dimension)

      Python returns all the elements in the tuple, just as it would for a list:
200
50

Writing Over a Tuple
Although you can’t modify a tuple, you can assign a new value to a variable
that represents a tuple. For example, if we wanted to change the dimensions
of this rectangle, we could redefine the entire tuple:
dimensions = (200, 50)
print("Original dimensions:")
for dimension in dimensions:
    print(dimension)

dimensions = (400, 100)
print("\nModified dimensions:")
for dimension in dimensions:
    print(dimension)

    The first four lines define the original tuple and print the initial dimen-
sions. We then associate a new tuple with the variable dimensions, and print
the new values. Python doesn’t raise any errors this time, because reassign-
ing a variable is valid:
Original dimensions:
200
50

Modified dimensions:
400
100

    When compared with lists, tuples are simple data structures. Use them
when you want to store a set of values that should not be changed through-
out the life of a program.

                                    TRY IT YOURSELF

      4-13. Buffet: A buffet-style restaurant offers only five basic foods. Think of five
      simple foods, and store them in a tuple.
      •   Use a for loop to print each food the restaurant offers.
      •   Try to modify one of the items, and make sure that Python rejects the
          change.
      •   The restaurant changes its menu, replacing two of the items with different
          foods. Add a line that rewrites the tuple, and then use a for loop to print
          each of the items on the revised menu.

     Styling Your Code
                 Now that you’re writing longer programs, it’s a good idea to learn how to
                 style your code consistently. Take the time to make your code as easy as pos-
                 sible to read. Writing easy-to-read code helps you keep track of what your
                 programs are doing and helps others understand your code as well.
                      Python programmers have agreed on a number of styling conventions
                 to ensure that everyone’s code is structured in roughly the same way. Once
                 you’ve learned to write clean Python code, you should be able to understand
                 the overall structure of anyone else’s Python code, as long as they follow the
                 same guidelines. If you’re hoping to become a professional programmer at
                 some point, you should begin following these guidelines as soon as possible
                 to develop good habits.

                 The Style Guide
                 When someone wants to make a change to the Python language, they write
                 a Python Enhancement Proposal (PEP). One of the oldest PEPs is PEP 8, which
                 instructs Python programmers on how to style their code. PEP 8 is fairly
                 lengthy, but much of it relates to more complex coding structures than what
                 you’ve seen so far.
                      The Python style guide was written with the understanding that code
                 is read more often than it is written. You’ll write your code once and then
                 start reading it as you begin debugging. When you add features to a pro-
                 gram, you’ll spend more time reading your code. When you share your
                 code with other programmers, they’ll read your code as well.
                      Given the choice between writing code that’s easier to write or code
                 that’s easier to read, Python programmers will almost always encourage you
                 to write code that’s easier to read. The following guidelines will help you
                 write clear code from the start.

                 Indentation
                 PEP 8 recommends that you use four spaces per indentation level. Using
                 four spaces improves readability while leaving room for multiple levels of
                 indentation on each line.
                      In a word processing document, people often use tabs rather than
                 spaces to indent. This works well for word processing documents, but the
                 Python interpreter gets confused when tabs are mixed with spaces. Every
                 text editor provides a setting that lets you use the TAB key but then converts
                 each tab to a set number of spaces. You should definitely use your TAB key,
                 but also make sure your editor is set to insert spaces rather than tabs into
                 your document.
                      Mixing tabs and spaces in your file can cause problems that are very
                 difficult to diagnose. If you think you have a mix of tabs and spaces, you
                 can convert all tabs in a file to spaces in most editors.

       Line Length
       Many Python programmers recommend that each line should be less than
       80 characters. Historically, this guideline developed because most com-
       puters could fit only 79 characters on a single line in a terminal window.
       Currently, people can fit much longer lines on their screens, but other rea-
       sons exist to adhere to the 79-character standard line length.
           Professional programmers often have several files open on the same
       screen, and using the standard line length allows them to see entire lines
       in two or three files that are open side by side onscreen. PEP 8 also rec-
       ommends that you limit all of your comments to 72 characters per line,
       because some of the tools that generate automatic documentation for
       larger projects add formatting characters at the beginning of each com-
       mented line.
           The PEP 8 guidelines for line length are not set in stone, and some
       teams prefer a 99-character limit. Don’t worry too much about line length
       in your code as you’re learning, but be aware that people who are working
       collaboratively almost always follow the PEP 8 guidelines. Most editors allow
       you to set up a visual cue, usually a vertical line on your screen, that shows
       you where these limits are.

NOTE   Appendix B shows you how to configure your text editor so it always inserts four
       spaces each time you press the TAB key and shows a vertical guideline to help you follow
       the 79-character limit.

       Blank Lines
       To group parts of your program visually, use blank lines. You should use
       blank lines to organize your files, but don’t do so excessively. By following
       the examples provided in this book, you should strike the right balance.
       For example, if you have five lines of code that build a list and then another
       three lines that do something with that list, it’s appropriate to place a blank
       line between the two sections. However, you should not place three or four
       blank lines between the two sections.
           Blank lines won’t affect how your code runs, but they will affect the
       readability of your code. The Python interpreter uses horizontal inden-
       tation to interpret the meaning of your code, but it disregards vertical
       spacing.

       Other Style Guidelines
       PEP 8 has many additional styling recommendations, but most of the
       guidelines refer to more complex programs than what you’re writing at this
       point. As you learn more complex Python structures, I’ll share the relevant
       parts of the PEP 8 guidelines.

                                                 TRY IT YOURSELF

                     4-14. PEP 8: Look through the original PEP 8 style guide at https://python.org/
                     dev/peps/pep-0008. You won’t use much of it now, but it might be interesting
                     to skim through it.
                     4-15. Code Review: Choose three of the programs you’ve written in this chapter
                     and modify each one to comply with PEP 8.
                    •    Use four spaces for each indentation level. Set your text editor to insert four
                         spaces every time you press the TAB key, if you haven’t already done so
                         (see Appendix B for instructions on how to do this).
                    •    Use less than 80 characters on each line, and set your editor to show a
                         vertical guideline at the 80th character position.
                    •    Don’t use blank lines excessively in your program files.

     Summary
                 In this chapter, you learned how to work efficiently with the elements in a
                 list. You learned how to work through a list using a for loop, how Python
                 uses indentation to structure a program, and how to avoid some common
                 indentation errors. You learned to make simple numerical lists, as well as a
                 few operations you can perform on numerical lists. You learned how to slice
                 a list to work with a subset of items and how to copy lists properly using a
                 slice. You also learned about tuples, which provide a degree of protection
                 to a set of values that shouldn’t change, and how to style your increasingly
                 complex code to make it easy to read.
                       In Chapter 5, you’ll learn to respond appropriately to different condi-
                 tions by using if statements. You’ll learn to string together relatively complex
                 sets of conditional tests to respond appropriately to exactly the kind of situa-
                 tion or information you’re looking for. You’ll also learn to use if statements
                 while looping through a list to take specific actions with selected elements
                 from a list.

