  USER INPUT AND WHILE LOOPS
           Most programs are written to solve an end
           user’s problem. To do so, you usually need
          to get some information from the user. For
       example, say someone wants to find out whether
they’re old enough to vote. If you write a program to
answer this question, you need to know the user’s age
before you can provide an answer. The program will need to ask the user
to enter, or input, their age; once the program has this input, it can com-
pare it to the voting age to determine if the user is old enough and then
report the result.
    In this chapter you’ll learn how to accept user input so your program
can then work with it. When your program needs a name, you’ll be able
to prompt the user for a name. When your program needs a list of names,
you’ll be able to prompt the user for a series of names. To do this, you’ll use
the input() function.
    You’ll also learn how to keep programs running as long as users want
them to, so they can enter as much information as they need to; then, your
                    program can work with that information. You’ll use Python’s while loop to
                    keep programs running as long as certain conditions remain true.
                        With the ability to work with user input and the ability to control how
                    long your programs run, you’ll be able to write fully interactive programs.

      How the input() Function Works
                    The input() function pauses your program and waits for the user to enter
                    some text. Once Python receives the user’s input, it assigns that input to a
                    variable to make it convenient for you to work with.
                        For example, the following program asks the user to enter some text,
                    then displays that message back to the user:

        parrot.py   message = input("Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you: ")
                    print(message)

                        The input() function takes one argument: the prompt that we want to
                    display to the user, so they know what kind of information to enter. In this
                    example, when Python runs the first line, the user sees the prompt Tell me
                    something, and I will repeat it back to you: . The program waits while the
                    user enters their response and continues after the user presses ENTER. The
                    response is assigned to the variable message, then print(message) displays the
                    input back to the user:

                    Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you: Hello everyone!
                    Hello everyone!

        NOTE        Some text editors won’t run programs that prompt the user for input. You can use these
                    editors to write programs that prompt for input, but you’ll need to run these programs
                    from a terminal. See “Running Python Programs from a Terminal” on page 11.

                    Writing Clear Prompts
                    Each time you use the input() function, you should include a clear, easy-to-
                    follow prompt that tells the user exactly what kind of information you’re
                    looking for. Any statement that tells the user what to enter should work. For
                    example:

       greeter.py   name = input("Please enter your name: ")
                    print(f"\nHello, {name}!")

                         Add a space at the end of your prompts (after the colon in the preced-
                    ing example) to separate the prompt from the user’s response and to make
                    it clear to your user where to enter their text. For example:

                    Please enter your name: Eric
                    Hello, Eric!

114    Chapter 7
                   Sometimes you’ll want to write a prompt that’s longer than one line.
               For example, you might want to tell the user why you’re asking for certain
               input. You can assign your prompt to a variable and pass that variable to the
               input() function. This allows you to build your prompt over several lines,
               then write a clean input() statement.

greeter.py     prompt = "If you share your name, we can personalize the messages you see."
               prompt += "\nWhat is your first name? "

               name = input(prompt)
               print(f"\nHello, {name}!")

                   This example shows one way to build a multiline string. The first line
               assigns the first part of the message to the variable prompt. In the second
               line, the operator += takes the string that was assigned to prompt and adds
               the new string onto the end.
                   The prompt now spans two lines, again with space after the question
               mark for clarity:

               If you share your name, we can personalize the messages you see.
               What is your first name? Eric

               Hello, Eric!

               Using int() to Accept Numerical Input
               When you use the input() function, Python interprets everything the user
               enters as a string. Consider the following interpreter session, which asks for
               the user’s age:

               >>> age = input("How old are you? ")
               How old are you? 21
               >>> age
               '21'

                    The user enters the number 21, but when we ask Python for the value of
               age, it returns '21', the string representation of the numerical value entered.
               We know Python interpreted the input as a string because the number is
               now enclosed in quotes. If all you want to do is print the input, this works
               well. But if you try to use the input as a number, you’ll get an error:

               >>> age = input("How old are you? ")
               How old are you? 21
             1 >>> age >= 18
               Traceback (most recent call last):
                 File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
             2 TypeError: '>=' not supported between instances of 'str' and 'int'

                   When you try to use the input to do a numerical comparison 1, Python
               produces an error because it can’t compare a string to an integer: the string
               '21' that’s assigned to age can’t be compared to the numerical value 18 2.

                                                                       User Input and while Loops   115
                           We can resolve this issue by using the int() function, which converts
                       the input string to a numerical value. This allows the comparison to run
                       successfully:

                       >>> age = input("How old are you? ")
                       How old are you? 21
                     1 >>> age = int(age)
                       >>> age >= 18
                       True

                            In this example, when we enter 21 at the prompt, Python interprets the
                       number as a string, but the value is then converted to a numerical represen-
                       tation by int() 1. Now Python can run the conditional test: it compares age
                       (which now represents the numerical value 21) and 18 to see if age is greater
                       than or equal to 18. This test evaluates to True.
                            How do you use the int() function in an actual program? Consider a
                       program that determines whether people are tall enough to ride a roller
                       coaster:

  rollercoaster.py     height = input("How tall are you, in inches? ")
                       height = int(height)

                       if height >= 48:
                           print("\nYou're tall enough to ride!")
                       else:
                           print("\nYou'll be able to ride when you're a little older.")

                           The program can compare height to 48 because height = int(height)
                       converts the input value to a numerical representation before the compari-
                       son is made. If the number entered is greater than or equal to 48, we tell
                       the user that they’re tall enough:

                       How tall are you, in inches? 71

                       You're tall enough to ride!

                           When you use numerical input to do calculations and comparisons, be
                       sure to convert the input value to a numerical representation first.

                       The Modulo Operator
                       A useful tool for working with numerical information is the modulo operator (%),
                       which divides one number by another number and returns the remainder:

                       >>> 4 % 3
                       >>> 5 % 3
                       >>> 6 % 3
                       >>> 7 % 3

116   Chapter 7
                      The modulo operator doesn’t tell you how many times one number fits
                 into another; it only tells you what the remainder is.
                      When one number is divisible by another number, the remainder is 0,
                 so the modulo operator always returns 0. You can use this fact to determine
                 if a number is even or odd:

even_or_odd.py   number = input("Enter a number, and I'll tell you if it's even or odd: ")
                 number = int(number)

                 if number % 2 == 0:
                     print(f"\nThe number {number} is even.")
                 else:
                     print(f"\nThe number {number} is odd.")

                       Even numbers are always divisible by two, so if the modulo of a number
                 and two is zero (here, if number % 2 == 0) the number is even. Otherwise,
                 it’s odd.

                 Enter a number, and I'll tell you if it's even or odd: 42

                 The number 42 is even.

                                                  TRY IT YOURSELF

                     7-1. Rental Car: Write a program that asks the user what kind of rental car they
                     would like. Print a message about that car, such as “Let me see if I can find you
                     a Subaru.”
                     7-2. Restaurant Seating: Write a program that asks the user how many people
                     are in their dinner group. If the answer is more than eight, print a message say-
                     ing they’ll have to wait for a table. Otherwise, report that their table is ready.
                     7-3. Multiples of Ten: Ask the user for a number, and then report whether the
                     number is a multiple of 10 or not.

   Introducing while Loops
                 The for loop takes a collection of items and executes a block of code once
                 for each item in the collection. In contrast, the while loop runs as long as, or
                 while, a certain condition is true.

                 The while Loop in Action
                 You can use a while loop to count up through a series of numbers. For example,
                 the following while loop counts from 1 to 5:

   counting.py   current_number = 1
                 while current_number <= 5:

                                                                                 User Input and while Loops   117
                       print(current_number)
                       current_number += 1

                        In the first line, we start counting from 1 by assigning current_number the
                   value 1. The while loop is then set to keep running as long as the value of
                   current_number is less than or equal to 5. The code inside the loop prints the
                   value of current_number and then adds 1 to that value with current_number += 1.
                   (The += operator is shorthand for current_number = current_number + 1.)
                        Python repeats the loop as long as the condition current_number <= 5
                   is true. Because 1 is less than 5, Python prints 1 and then adds 1, making
                   the current number 2. Because 2 is less than 5, Python prints 2 and adds 1
                   again, making the current number 3, and so on. Once the value of current
                   _number is greater than 5, the loop stops running and the program ends:

                       The programs you use every day most likely contain while loops. For
                   example, a game needs a while loop to keep running as long as you want
                   to keep playing, and so it can stop running as soon as you ask it to quit.
                   Programs wouldn’t be fun to use if they stopped running before we told
                   them to or kept running even after we wanted to quit, so while loops are
                   quite useful.

                   Letting the User Choose When to Quit
                   We can make the parrot.py program run as long as the user wants by putting
                   most of the program inside a while loop. We’ll define a quit value and then
                   keep the program running as long as the user has not entered the quit value:

       parrot.py   prompt = "\nTell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:"
                   prompt += "\nEnter 'quit' to end the program. "

                   message = ""
                   while message != 'quit':
                       message = input(prompt)
                       print(message)

                       We first define a prompt that tells the user their two options: entering
                   a message or entering the quit value (in this case, 'quit'). Then we set up a
                   variable message to keep track of whatever value the user enters. We define
                   message as an empty string, "", so Python has something to check the first
                   time it reaches the while line. The first time the program runs and Python
                   reaches the while statement, it needs to compare the value of message to
                   'quit', but no user input has been entered yet. If Python has nothing to
                   compare, it won’t be able to continue running the program. To solve this

118   Chapter 7
problem, we make sure to give message an initial value. Although it’s just an
empty string, it will make sense to Python and allow it to perform the com-
parison that makes the while loop work. This while loop runs as long as the
value of message is not 'quit'.
     The first time through the loop, message is just an empty string, so Python
enters the loop. At message = input(prompt), Python displays the prompt and
waits for the user to enter their input. Whatever they enter is assigned to
message and printed; then, Python reevaluates the condition in the while
statement. As long as the user has not entered the word 'quit', the prompt
is displayed again and Python waits for more input. When the user finally
enters 'quit', Python stops executing the while loop and the program ends:

Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:
Enter 'quit' to end the program. Hello everyone!
Hello everyone!

Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:
Enter 'quit' to end the program. Hello again.
Hello again.

Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:
Enter 'quit' to end the program. quit
quit

    This program works well, except that it prints the word 'quit' as if it
were an actual message. A simple if test fixes this:

prompt = "\nTell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:"
prompt += "\nEnter 'quit' to end the program. "

message = ""
while message != 'quit':
    message = input(prompt)

    if message != 'quit':
        print(message)

   Now the program makes a quick check before displaying the message
and only prints the message if it does not match the quit value:

Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:
Enter 'quit' to end the program. Hello everyone!
Hello everyone!

Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:
Enter 'quit' to end the program. Hello again.
Hello again.

Tell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:
Enter 'quit' to end the program. quit

                                                         User Input and while Loops   119
                    Using a Flag
                    In the previous example, we had the program perform certain tasks while
                    a given condition was true. But what about more complicated programs in
                    which many different events could cause the program to stop running?
                         For example, in a game, several different events can end the game.
                    When the player runs out of ships, their time runs out, or the cities they
                    were supposed to protect are all destroyed, the game should end. It needs
                    to end if any one of these events happens. If many possible events might
                    occur to stop the program, trying to test all these conditions in one while
                    statement becomes complicated and difficult.
                         For a program that should run only as long as many conditions are
                    true, you can define one variable that determines whether or not the entire
                    program is active. This variable, called a flag, acts as a signal to the pro-
                    gram. We can write our programs so they run while the flag is set to True
                    and stop running when any of several events sets the value of the flag to
                    False. As a result, our overall while statement needs to check only one condi-
                    tion: whether the flag is currently True. Then, all our other tests (to see if an
                    event has occurred that should set the flag to False) can be neatly organized
                    in the rest of the program.
                         Let’s add a flag to parrot.py from the previous section. This flag, which
                    we’ll call active (though you can call it anything), will monitor whether or
                    not the program should continue running:

                    prompt = "\nTell me something, and I will repeat it back to you:"
                    prompt += "\nEnter 'quit' to end the program. "

                    active = True
                  1 while active:
                        message = input(prompt)

                        if message == 'quit':
                            active = False
                        else:
                            print(message)

                         We set the variable active to True so the program starts in an active
                    state. Doing so makes the while statement simpler because no comparison is
                    made in the while statement itself; the logic is taken care of in other parts of
                    the program. As long as the active variable remains True, the loop will con-
                    tinue running 1.
                         In the if statement inside the while loop, we check the value of message
                    once the user enters their input. If the user enters 'quit', we set active to
                    False, and the while loop stops. If the user enters anything other than 'quit',
                    we print their input as a message.
                         This program has the same output as the previous example where we
                    placed the conditional test directly in the while statement. But now that we

120   Chapter 7
              have a flag to indicate whether the overall program is in an active state, it
              would be easy to add more tests (such as elif statements) for events that
              should cause active to become False. This is useful in complicated programs
              like games, in which there may be many events that should each make the
              program stop running. When any of these events causes the active flag to
              become False, the main game loop will exit, a Game Over message can be
              displayed, and the player can be given the option to play again.

              Using break to Exit a Loop
              To exit a while loop immediately without running any remaining code in
              the loop, regardless of the results of any conditional test, use the break state-
              ment. The break statement directs the flow of your program; you can use it
              to control which lines of code are executed and which aren’t, so the program
              only executes code that you want it to, when you want it to.
                   For example, consider a program that asks the user about places they’ve
              visited. We can stop the while loop in this program by calling break as soon
              as the user enters the 'quit' value:

cities.py     prompt = "\nPlease enter the name of a city you have visited:"
              prompt += "\n(Enter 'quit' when you are finished.) "

            1 while True:
                  city = input(prompt)

                  if city == 'quit':
                      break
                  else:
                      print(f"I'd love to go to {city.title()}!")

                  A loop that starts with while True 1 will run forever unless it reaches a
              break statement. The loop in this program continues asking the user to enter
              the names of cities they’ve been to until they enter 'quit'. When they enter
              'quit', the break statement runs, causing Python to exit the loop:

             Please enter the name of a city you have visited:
             (Enter 'quit' when you are finished.) New York
             I'd love to go to New York!

             Please enter the name of a city you have visited:
             (Enter 'quit' when you are finished.) San Francisco
             I'd love to go to San Francisco!

             Please enter the name of a city you have visited:
             (Enter 'quit' when you are finished.) quit

NOTE         You can use the break statement in any of Python’s loops. For example, you could use
             break to quit a for loop that’s working through a list or a dictionary.

                                                                         User Input and while Loops   121
                       Using continue in a Loop
                       Rather than breaking out of a loop entirely without executing the rest of its
                       code, you can use the continue statement to return to the beginning of the
                       loop, based on the result of a conditional test. For example, consider a loop
                       that counts from 1 to 10 but prints only the odd numbers in that range:

      counting.py      current_number = 0
                       while current_number < 10:
                     1     current_number += 1
                           if current_number % 2 == 0:
                               continue

                           print(current_number)

                           First, we set current_number to 0. Because it’s less than 10, Python enters
                       the while loop. Once inside the loop, we increment the count by 1 1, so
                       current_number is 1. The if statement then checks the modulo of current_number
                       and 2. If the modulo is 0 (which means current_number is divisible by 2), the
                       continue statement tells Python to ignore the rest of the loop and return to
                       the beginning. If the current number is not divisible by 2, the rest of the
                       loop is executed and Python prints the current number:

                       Avoiding Infinite Loops
                       Every while loop needs a way to stop running so it won’t continue to run for-
                       ever. For example, this counting loop should count from 1 to 5:

       counting.py     x = 1
                       while x <= 5:
                           print(x)
                           x += 1

                           However, if you accidentally omit the line x += 1, the loop will run
                       forever:

                       # This loop runs forever!
                       x = 1
                       while x <= 5:
                           print(x)

122     Chapter 7
            Now the value of x will start at 1 but never change. As a result, the con-
       ditional test x <= 5 will always evaluate to True and the while loop will run
       forever, printing a series of 1s, like this:

       --snip--

            Every programmer accidentally writes an infinite while loop from time
       to time, especially when a program’s loops have subtle exit conditions. If
       your program gets stuck in an infinite loop, press CTRL-C or just close the
       terminal window displaying your program’s output.
            To avoid writing infinite loops, test every while loop and make sure the loop
       stops when you expect it to. If you want your program to end when the user
       enters a certain input value, run the program and enter that value. If the
       program doesn’t end, scrutinize the way your program handles the value that
       should cause the loop to exit. Make sure at least one part of the program can
       make the loop’s condition False or cause it to reach a break statement.

NOTE   VS Code, like many editors, displays output in an embedded terminal window. To
       cancel an infinite loop, make sure you click in the output area of the editor before
       pressing CTRL-C.

                                        TRY IT YOURSELF

           7-4. Pizza Toppings: Write a loop that prompts the user to enter a series of
           pizza toppings until they enter a 'quit' value. As they enter each topping, print
           a message saying you’ll add that topping to their pizza.
           7-5. Movie Tickets: A movie theater charges different ticket prices depending on
           a person’s age. If a person is under the age of 3, the ticket is free; if they are
           between 3 and 12, the ticket is $10; and if they are over age 12, the ticket is
           $15. Write a loop in which you ask users their age, and then tell them the cost
           of their movie ticket.
           7-6. Three Exits: Write different versions of either Exercise 7-4 or 7-5 that do
           each of the following at least once:
           •   Use a conditional test in the while statement to stop the loop.
           •   Use an active variable to control how long the loop runs.
           •   Use a break statement to exit the loop when the user enters a 'quit' value.

           7-7. Infinity: Write a loop that never ends, and run it. (To end the loop, press
           CTRL-C or close the window displaying the output.)

                                                                        User Input and while Loops   123
      Using a while Loop with Lists and Dictionaries
                       So far, we’ve worked with only one piece of user information at a time. We
                       received the user’s input and then printed the input or a response to it.
                       The next time through the while loop, we’d receive another input value and
                       respond to that. But to keep track of many users and pieces of information,
                       we’ll need to use lists and dictionaries with our while loops.
                            A for loop is effective for looping through a list, but you shouldn’t mod-
                       ify a list inside a for loop because Python will have trouble keeping track of
                       the items in the list. To modify a list as you work through it, use a while loop.
                       Using while loops with lists and dictionaries allows you to collect, store, and
                       organize lots of input to examine and report on later.

                       Moving Items from One List to Another
                       Consider a list of newly registered but unverified users of a website. After
                       we verify these users, how can we move them to a separate list of confirmed
                       users? One way would be to use a while loop to pull users from the list of
                       unconfirmed users as we verify them and then add them to a separate list of
                       confirmed users. Here’s what that code might look like:

      confirmed      # Start with users that need to be verified,
       _users.py     # and an empty list to hold confirmed users.
                   1 unconfirmed_users = ['alice', 'brian', 'candace']
                     confirmed_users = []

                     # Verify each user until there are no more unconfirmed users.
                     # Move each verified user into the list of confirmed users.
                   2 while unconfirmed_users:
                   3     current_user = unconfirmed_users.pop()

                           print(f"Verifying user: {current_user.title()}")
                   4       confirmed_users.append(current_user)

                       # Display all confirmed users.
                       print("\nThe following users have been confirmed:")
                       for confirmed_user in confirmed_users:
                           print(confirmed_user.title())

                            We begin with a list of unconfirmed users 1 (Alice, Brian, and Candace)
                       and an empty list to hold confirmed users. The while loop runs as long as
                       the list unconfirmed_users is not empty 2. Within this loop, the pop() method
                       removes unverified users one at a time from the end of unconfirmed_users 3.
                       Because Candace is last in the unconfirmed_users list, her name will be the
                       first to be removed, assigned to current_user, and added to the confirmed_users
                       list 4. Next is Brian, then Alice.
                            We simulate confirming each user by printing a verification message
                       and then adding them to the list of confirmed users. As the list of uncon-
                       firmed users shrinks, the list of confirmed users grows. When the list of

124    Chapter 7
                   unconfirmed users is empty, the loop stops and the list of confirmed users
                   is printed:

                   Verifying user: Candace
                   Verifying user: Brian
                   Verifying user: Alice

                   The following users have been confirmed:
                   Candace
                   Brian
                   Alice

                   Removing All Instances of Specific Values from a List
                   In Chapter 3, we used remove() to remove a specific value from a list. The
                   remove() function worked because the value we were interested in appeared
                   only once in the list. But what if you want to remove all instances of a value
                   from a list?
                       Say you have a list of pets with the value 'cat' repeated several times. To
                   remove all instances of that value, you can run a while loop until 'cat' is no
                   longer in the list, as shown here:

         pets.py   pets = ['dog', 'cat', 'dog', 'goldfish', 'cat', 'rabbit', 'cat']
                   print(pets)

                   while 'cat' in pets:
                       pets.remove('cat')

                   print(pets)

                         We start with a list containing multiple instances of 'cat'. After printing
                   the list, Python enters the while loop because it finds the value 'cat' in the list
                   at least once. Once inside the loop, Python removes the first instance of 'cat',
                   returns to the while line, and then reenters the loop when it finds that 'cat' is
                   still in the list. It removes each instance of 'cat' until the value is no longer in
                   the list, at which point Python exits the loop and prints the list again:

                   ['dog', 'cat', 'dog', 'goldfish', 'cat', 'rabbit', 'cat']
                   ['dog', 'dog', 'goldfish', 'rabbit']

                   Filling a Dictionary with User Input
                   You can prompt for as much input as you need in each pass through a while
                   loop. Let’s make a polling program in which each pass through the loop
                   prompts for the participant’s name and response. We’ll store the data we
                   gather in a dictionary, because we want to connect each response with a
                   particular user:

mountain_poll.py   responses = {}
                   # Set a flag to indicate that polling is active.
                   polling_active = True

                                                                              User Input and while Loops   125
                    while polling_active:
                        # Prompt for the person's name and response.
                  1     name = input("\nWhat is your name? ")
                        response = input("Which mountain would you like to climb someday? ")

                          # Store the response in the dictionary.
                  2       responses[name] = response

                          # Find out if anyone else is going to take the poll.
                  3       repeat = input("Would you like to let another person respond? (yes/ no) ")
                          if repeat == 'no':
                              polling_active = False

                    # Polling is complete. Show the results.
                    print("\n--- Poll Results ---")
                  4 for name, response in responses.items():
                        print(f"{name} would like to climb {response}.")

                          The program first defines an empty dictionary (responses) and sets a flag
                      (polling_active) to indicate that polling is active. As long as polling_active is
                      True, Python will run the code in the while loop.
                          Within the loop, the user is prompted to enter their name and a moun-
                      tain they’d like to climb 1. That information is stored in the responses
                      dictionary 2, and the user is asked whether or not to keep the poll run-
                      ning 3. If they enter yes, the program enters the while loop again. If they
                      enter no, the polling_active flag is set to False, the while loop stops running,
                      and the final code block 4 displays the results of the poll.
                          If you run this program and enter sample responses, you should see
                      output like this:

                      What is your name? Eric
                      Which mountain would you like to climb someday? Denali
                      Would you like to let another person respond? (yes/ no) yes

                      What is your name? Lynn
                      Which mountain would you like to climb someday? Devil's Thumb
                      Would you like to let another person respond? (yes/ no) no

                      --- Poll Results ---
                      Eric would like to climb Denali.
                      Lynn would like to climb Devil's Thumb.

126   Chapter 7
                                       TRY IT YOURSELF

          7-8. Deli: Make a list called sandwich_orders and fill it with the names of various
          sandwiches. Then make an empty list called finished_sandwiches. Loop through
          the list of sandwich orders and print a message for each order, such as I made
          your tuna sandwich. As each sandwich is made, move it to the list of finished
          sandwiches. After all the sandwiches have been made, print a message listing
          each sandwich that was made.
          7-9. No Pastrami: Using the list sandwich_orders from Exercise 7-8, make sure
          the sandwich 'pastrami' appears in the list at least three times. Add code
          near the beginning of your program to print a message saying the deli has
          run out of pastrami, and then use a while loop to remove all occurrences of
          'pastrami' from sandwich_orders. Make sure no pastrami sandwiches end up
          in finished_sandwiches.
          7-10. Dream Vacation: Write a program that polls users about their dream vaca-
          tion. Write a prompt similar to If you could visit one place in the world, where
          would you go? Include a block of code that prints the results of the poll.

Summary
      In this chapter, you learned how to use input() to allow users to provide
      their own information in your programs. You learned to work with both
      text and numerical input and how to use while loops to make your programs
      run as long as your users want them to. You saw several ways to control the
      flow of a while loop by setting an active flag, using the break statement, and
      using the continue statement. You learned how to use a while loop to move
      items from one list to another and how to remove all instances of a value
      from a list. You also learned how while loops can be used with dictionaries.
           In Chapter 8 you’ll learn about functions. Functions allow you to break
      your programs into small parts, each of which does one specific job. You
      can call a function as many times as you want, and you can store your
      functions in separate files. By using functions, you’ll be able to write more
      efficient code that’s easier to troubleshoot and maintain and that can be
      reused in many different programs.

                                                                      User Input and while Loops   127
