                       PART II
                                    PROJECTS

        Congratulations! You now know enough about Python
        to start building interactive and meaningful projects.
        Creating your own projects will teach you new skills
        and solidify your understanding of the concepts intro-
        duced in Part I.
            Part II contains three kinds of projects, and you can choose to do any
        or all of these projects in whichever order you like. Here’s a brief descrip-
        tion of each project to help you decide which to dig into first.

Alien Invasion: Making a Game with Python
        In the Alien Invasion project (Chapters 12, 13, and 14), you’ll use the
        Pygame package to develop a 2D game. The goal of the game is to shoot
        down a fleet of aliens as they drop down the screen, in levels that increase
        in speed and difficulty. At the end of the project, you’ll have learned skills
        that will enable you to develop your own 2D games in Pygame.

Data Visualization
        The Data Visualization projects start in Chapter 15, where you’ll learn to
        generate data and create a series of functional and beautiful visualizations
        of that data using Matplotlib and Plotly. Chapter 16 teaches you to access
        data from online sources and feed it into a visualization package to cre-
        ate plots of weather data and a map of global earthquake activity. Finally,
        Chapter 17 shows you how to write a program to automatically download
                           and visualize data. Learning to make visualizations allows you to explore
                           the field of data science, which is one of the highest-demand areas of pro-
                           gramming today.

      Web Applications
                           In the Web Application project (Chapters 18, 19, and 20), you’ll use the
                           Django package to create a simple web application that allows users to keep
                           a journal about different topics they’ve been learning about. Users will cre-
                           ate an account with a username and password, enter a topic, and then make
                           entries about what they’re learning. You’ll also deploy your app to a remote
                           server so anyone in the world can access it.
                               After completing this project, you’ll be able to start building your own
                           simple web applications, and you’ll be ready to delve into more thorough
                           resources on building applications with Django.

226    Part II: Projects
