                                        A
                        I N S TA L L AT I O N A N D
                        TROUBLESHOOTING

                   There are many versions of Python avail-
                   able and numerous ways to set it up on
                 each operating system. If the approach in
               Chapter 1 didn’t work, or if you want to install
       a different version of Python than the one currently
       installed, the instructions in this appendix can help.

Python on Windows
       The instructions in Chapter 1 show you how to install Python using the
       official installer at https://python.org. If you couldn’t get Python to run after
       using the installer, the troubleshooting instructions in this section should
       help you get Python up and running.

       Using py Instead of python
       If you run a recent Python installer and then issue the command python in
       a terminal, you should see the Python prompt for a terminal session (>>>).
                    When Windows doesn’t recognize the python command, it will either open
                    the Microsoft Store because it thinks Python isn’t installed, or you’ll get a
                    message such as “Python was not found.” If the Microsoft Store opens, close
                    it; it’s better to use the official Python installer from https://python.org than
                    the one that Microsoft maintains.
                          The simplest solution, without making any changes to your system, is to
                    try the py command. This is a Windows utility that finds the latest version of
                    Python installed on your system and runs that interpreter. If this command
                    works and you want to use it, simply use py anywhere you see the python or
                    python3 command in this book.

                    Rerunning the Installer
                    The most common reason python doesn’t work is that people forget to select
                    the Add Python to PATH option when running the installer; this is an
                    easy mistake to make. The PATH variable is a system setting that tells Python
                    where to look for commonly used programs. In this case, Windows doesn’t
                    know how to find the Python interpreter.
                         The simplest fix in this situation is to run the installer again. If there’s a
                    newer installer available from https://python.org, download the new installer
                    and run it, making sure to check the Add Python to PATH box.
                         If you already have the latest installer, run it again and select the Modify
                    option. You’ll see a list of optional features; keep the default options selected
                    on this screen. Then click Next and check the Add Python to Environment
                    Variables box. Finally, click Install. The installer will recognize that Python is
                    already installed, and it will add the location of the Python interpreter to the
                    PATH variable. Make sure you close any open terminals, because they’ll still be
                    using the old PATH variable. Open a new terminal window and issue the com-
                    mand python again; you should see a Python prompt (>>>).

      Python on macOS
                    The installation instructions in Chapter 1 use the official Python installer
                    at https://python.org. The official installer has been working well for years
                    now, but there are a few things that can get you off track. This section will
                    help if anything isn’t working in a straightforward manner.

                    Accidentally Installing Apple’s Version of Python
                    If you run the python3 command and Python is not yet installed on your
                    system, you’ll most likely see a message that the command line developer tools
                    need to be installed. The best approach at this point is to close the pop-up
                    showing this message, download the Python installer from https://python.org,
                    and run the installer.
                         If you choose to install the command line developer tools at this point,
                    macOS will install Apple’s version of Python along with the developer tools.
                    The only issue with this is that Apple’s version of Python is usually some-
                    what behind the latest official version of Python. However, you can still
                    download and run the official installer from https://python.org, and python3

464    Appendix A
       will then point to the newer version. Don’t worry about having the devel-
       oper tools installed; there are some useful tools in there, including the Git
       version control system discussed in Appendix D.

       Python 2 on Older Versions of macOS
       On older versions of macOS, before Monterey (macOS 12), an outdated ver-
       sion of Python 2 was installed by default. On these systems, the command
       python points to the outdated system interpreter. If you’re using a version of
       macOS with Python 2 installed, make sure you use the python3 command,
       and you’ll always be using the version of Python you installed.

Python on Linux
       Python is included by default on almost every Linux system. However, if the
       default version on your system is earlier than Python 3.9, you should install
       the latest version. You can also install the latest version if you want the most
       recent features, like Python’s improved error messages. The following instruc-
       tions should work for most apt-based systems.

       Using the Default Python Installation
       If you want to use the version of Python that python3 points to, make sure
       you have these three additional packages installed:

       $ sudo apt install python3-dev python3-pip python3-venv

           These packages include tools that are useful for developers and tools
       that let you install third-party packages, like the ones used in the projects
       section of this book.

       Installing the Latest Version of Python
       We’ll use a package called deadsnakes, which makes it easy to install multiple
       versions of Python. Enter the following commands:

       $ sudo add-apt-repository ppa:deadsnakes/ppa
       $ sudo apt update
       $ sudo apt install python3.11

           These commands will install Python 3.11 onto your system.
           Enter the following command to start a terminal session that runs
       Python 3.11:

       $ python3.11
       >>>

           Anywhere you see the command python in this book, use python3.11
       instead. You’ll also want to use this command when you run programs
       from the terminal.

                                                            Installation and Troubleshooting   465
                        You’ll need to install two more packages to make the most of your Python
                    installation:

                    $ sudo apt install python3.11-dev python3.11-venv

                        These packages include modules you’ll need when installing and run-
                    ning third-party packages, like the ones used in the projects in the second
                    half of the book.

        NOTE        The deadsnakes package has been actively maintained for a long time. When newer
                    versions of Python come out, you can use these same commands, replacing python3.11
                    with the latest version currently available.

      Checking Which Version of Python You’re Using
                    If you’re having any issues running Python or installing additional pack-
                    ages, it can be helpful to know exactly which version of Python you’re using.
                    You may have multiple versions of Python installed and not be clear about
                    which version is currently being used.
                         Issue the following command in a terminal:

                    $ python --version
                    Python 3.11.0

                        This tells you exactly which version the command python is currently
                    pointing to. The shorter command python -V will give the same output.

      Python Keywords and Built-in Functions
                    Python comes with its own set of keywords and built-in functions. It’s impor-
                    tant to be aware of these when you’re naming things in Python: your names
                    cannot be the same as these keywords and shouldn’t be the same as the
                    function names, or you’ll overwrite the functions.
                        In this section, we’ll list Python’s keywords and built-in function names,
                    so you’ll know which names to avoid.

                    Python Keywords
                    Each of the following keywords has a specific meaning, and you’ll see an
                    error if you try to use any of them as a variable name.

                    False      await       else       import      pass
                    None       break       except     in          raise
                    True       class       finally    is          return
                    and        continue    for        lambda      try
                    as         def         from       nonlocal    while
                    assert     del         global     not         with
                    async      elif        if         or          yield

466    Appendix A
Python Built-in Functions
You won’t get an error if you use one of the following readily available built-
in functions as a variable name, but you’ll override the behavior of that
function:

abs()           complex()     hash()         min()            slice()
aiter()         delattr()     help()         next()           sorted()
all()           dict()        hex()          object()         staticmethod()
any()           dir()         id()           oct()            str()
anext()         divmod()      input()        open()           sum()
ascii()         enumerate()   int()          ord()            super()
bin()           eval()        isinstance()   pow()            tuple()
bool()          exec()        issubclass()   print()          type()
breakpoint()    filter()      iter()         property()       vars()
bytearray()     float()       len()          range()          zip()
bytes()         format()      list()         repr()           __import__()
callable()      frozenset()   locals()       reversed()
chr()           getattr()     map()          round()
classmethod()   globals()     max()          set()
compile()       hasattr()     memoryview()   setattr()

                                                     Installation and Troubleshooting   467
