          TEX T EDITORS AND IDES
                                B
            Programmers spend a lot of time writing,
            reading, and editing code, and using a text
           editor or an IDE (integrated development
        environment) to make this work as efficient as
possible is essential. A good editor will do simple tasks,
like highlighting your code’s structure so you can catch
common bugs as you’re working. But it won’t do so
much that it distracts you from your thinking. Editors also have useful fea-
tures like automatic indenting, markers to show appropriate line length,
and keyboard shortcuts for common operations.
    An IDE is a text editor with a number of other tools included, like inter-
active debuggers and code introspection. An IDE examines your code as
you enter it and tries to learn about the project you’re building. For example,
when you start typing the name of a function, an IDE might show you all
the arguments that function accepts. This behavior can be very helpful
when everything works and you understand what you’re seeing. But it can
                    also be overwhelming as a beginner and difficult to troubleshoot when you
                    aren’t sure why your code isn’t working in the IDE.
                         These days, the lines have blurred between text editors and IDEs. Most
                    popular editors have some features that used to be exclusive to IDEs. Likewise,
                    most IDEs can be configured to run in a lighter mode that’s less distracting as
                    you work, but lets you use the more advanced features when you need them.
                         If you already have an editor or IDE installed that you like, and if it’s
                    already configured to work with a recent version of Python that’s installed
                    on your system, then I encourage you to stick with what you already know.
                    Exploring different editors can be fun, but it’s also a way to avoid the work
                    of learning a new language.
                         If you don’t already have an editor or IDE installed, I recommend
                    VS Code for a number of reasons:
                    •   It’s free, and it’s released under an open source license.
                    •   It can be installed on all major operating systems.
                    •   It’s beginner-friendly but also powerful enough that many professional
                        programmers use it as their main editor.
                    •   It finds the versions of Python you have installed, and it typically does
                        not require any configuration to run your first programs.
                    •   It has an integrated terminal, so your output appears in the same win-
                        dow as your code.
                    •   A Python extension is available that makes the editor highly efficient
                        for writing and maintaining Python code.
                    •   It’s highly customizable, so you can tune it to match the way you work
                        with code.
                         In this appendix, you’ll learn how to start configuring VS Code so that
                    it works well for you. You’ll also learn some shortcuts that let you work more
                    efficiently. Being a fast typist is not as important as many people think in
                    programming, but understanding your editor and knowing how to use it
                    efficiently is quite helpful.
                         With all that said, VS Code doesn’t work for everyone. If it doesn’t work
                    well on your system for some reason, or if it’s distracting you as you work,
                    there are a number of other editors that you might find more appealing.
                    This appendix includes a brief description of some of the other editors and
                    IDEs you should consider.

      Working Efficiently with VS Code
                    In Chapter 1, you installed VS Code and added the Python extension as
                    well. This section will show you some further configurations you can make,
                    plus shortcuts for working efficiently with your code.

                    Configuring VS Code
                    There are a few ways to change the default configuration settings for VS Code.
                    Some changes can be made through the interface, and some will require

470    Appendix B
       changes in configuration files. These changes will sometimes take effect for
       everything you do in VS Code, while others will affect only the files within
       the folder that contains the configuration file.
            For example, if you have a configuration file in your python_work folder,
       those settings will only affect the files in that folder (and its subfolders).
       This is a good feature, because it means you can have project-specific set-
       tings that override your global settings.

       Using Tabs and Spaces
       If you use a mix of tabs and spaces in your code, it can cause problems in
       your programs that are difficult to diagnose. When working in a .py file with
       the Python extension installed, VS Code is configured to insert four spaces
       whenever you press the TAB key. If you’re writing only your own code and
       you have the Python extension installed, you’ll likely never have an issue
       with tabs and spaces.
            However, your installation of VS Code may not be configured correctly.
       Also, at some point, you may end up working on a file that has only tabs or a
       mix of tabs and spaces. If you suspect any issue with tabs and spaces, look at
       the status bar at the bottom of the VS Code window and click either Spaces
       or Tab Size. A drop-down menu will appear that lets you switch between
       using tabs and using spaces. You can also change the default indentation
       level and convert all indentation in the file to either tabs or spaces.
            If you’re looking at some code and you’re not sure whether the indenta-
       tion consists of tabs or spaces, highlight several lines of code. This will make
       the invisible whitespace characters visible. Each space will show up as a dot,
       and each tab will show up as an arrow.

NOTE   In programming, spaces are preferred over tabs because spaces can be interpreted
       unambiguously by all tools that work with a code file. The width of tabs can be inter-
       preted differently by different tools, which leads to errors that can be extremely difficult
       to diagnose.

       Changing the Color Theme
       VS Code uses a dark theme by default. If you want to change this, click File
       (Code in the menu bar on macOS), then click Preferences and choose
       Color Theme. A drop-down list will appear, and it will let you choose a
       theme that works well for you.

       Setting the Line Length Indicator
       Most editors allow you to set up a visual cue, usually a vertical line, to show
       where your lines should end. In the Python community, the convention is to
       limit lines to 79 characters or less.
           To set this feature, click Code and then Preferences, and then choose
       Settings. In the dialog that appears, enter rulers. You’ll see a setting for

                                                                            Text Editors and IDEs   471
                      Editor: Rulers; click the link labeled Edit in settings.json. In the file that
                      appears, add the following to the editor.rulers setting:

      settings.json       "editor.rulers": [
                          80,
                          ]

                            This will add a vertical line in the editing window at the 80-character
                      position. You can have more than one vertical line; for example, if you want
                      an additional line at 120 characters, the value for your setting would be
                      [80, 120]. If you don’t see the vertical lines, make sure you saved the settings
                      file; you may also need to quit and reopen VS Code for the changes to take
                      effect on some systems.

                      Simplifying the Output
                      By default, VS Code shows the output of your programs in an embedded
                      terminal window. This output includes the commands that are being used
                      to run the file. For many situations, this is ideal, but it might be more dis-
                      tracting than you want when you’re first learning Python.
                          To simplify the output, close all the tabs that are open in VS Code and
                      then quit VS Code. Launch VS Code again and open the folder that con-
                      tains the Python files you’re working on; this could just be the python_work
                      folder where hello_world.py is saved.
                          Click the Run/Debug icon (which looks like a triangle with a small
                      bug), and then click Create a launch.json File. Select the Python options in
                      the prompts that appear. In the launch.json file that opens, make the follow-
                      ing change:

      launch.json     {
                          --snip--
                          "configurations": [
                              {
                                   --snip--
                                   "console": "internalConsole",
                                   "justMyCode": true
                              }
                          ]
                      }

                          Here, we’re changing the console setting from integratedTerminal to
                      internalConsole. After saving the settings file, open a .py file such as hello
                      _world.py, and run it by pressing CTRL-F5. In the output pane of VS Code, click
                      Debug Console if it’s not already selected. You should see only your program’s
                      output, and the output should be refreshed every time you run a program.

         NOTE         The Debug Console is read-only. It won’t work for files that use the input() function,
                      which you’ll start using in Chapter 7. When you need to run these programs, you can
                      either change the console setting back to the default integratedTerminal, or you can
                      run these programs in a separate terminal window as described in “Running Python
                      Programs from a Terminal” on page 11.

472    Appendix B
Exploring Further Customizations
You can customize VS Code in many ways to help you work more efficiently. To
start exploring the customizations available, click Code and then Preferences,
and then choose Settings. You’ll see a list titled Commonly Used; click any of
the subheadings to see some common ways you can modify your installation
of VS Code. Take some time to see if there are any that make VS Code work
better for you, but don’t get so lost in configuring your editor that you put off
learning how to use Python!

VS Code Shortcuts
All editors and IDEs offer efficient ways to do common tasks that everyone
needs to do when writing and maintaining code. For example, you can eas-
ily indent a single line of code or an entire block of code; you can just as
easily move a block of lines up or down in a file.
     There are too many shortcuts to describe fully here. This section will
share just a few that you’ll likely find helpful as you’re writing your first
Python files. If you end up using a different editor than VS Code, make sure
you learn how to do these same tasks efficiently in the editor you’ve chosen.

Indenting and Unindenting Code Blocks
To indent an entire block of code, highlight it and press CTRL-], or ⌘-] on
macOS. To unindent a block of code, highlight it and press CTRL-[, or ⌘-[
on macOS.

Commenting Out Blocks of Code
To temporarily disable a block of code, you can highlight the block and
comment it so Python will ignore it. Highlight the section of code you want
to ignore and press CTRL-/, or ⌘-/ on macOS. The selected lines will
be commented out with a hash mark (#) indented at the same level as the
line of code, to indicate these are not regular comments. When you want
to uncomment the block of code, highlight the block and reissue the same
command.

Moving Lines Up or Down
As your programs grow more complex, you may find that you want to move a
block of code up or down within a file. To do so, highlight the code you want
to move and press ALT-up arrow, or Option-up arrow on macOS. The same
key combination with the down arrow will move the block down in the file.
    If you’re moving a single line up or down, you can click anywhere in
that line; you don’t need to highlight the whole line to move it.

Hiding the File Explorer
The integrated file explorer in VS Code is really convenient. However, it can
be distracting when you’re writing code and can take up valuable space on
a smaller screen. The command CTRL-B, or ⌘-B on macOS, toggles the
visibility of the file explorer pane.

                                                             Text Editors and IDEs   473
                    Finding Additional Shortcuts
                    Working efficiently in an editing environment takes practice, but it also
                    takes intention. When you’re learning to work with code, try to notice the
                    things you do repeatedly. Any action you take in your editor likely has a
                    shortcut; if you’re clicking menu items to carry out editing tasks, look for
                    the shortcuts for those actions. If you’re switching between your keyboard
                    and mouse frequently, look for the navigation shortcuts that keep you from
                    reaching for your mouse so often.
                        You can see all the keyboard shortcuts in VS Code by clicking Code and
                    then Preferences, and then choosing Keyboard Shortcuts. You can use the
                    search bar to find a particular shortcut, or you can scroll through the list to
                    find shortcuts that might help you work more efficiently.
                        Remember, it’s better to focus on the code that you’re working on, and
                    avoid spending too much time on the tools you’re using.

      Other Text Editors and IDEs
                    You’ll hear about and see people using a number of other text editors. Most
                    of them can be configured to help you in the same way you’ve customized
                    VS Code. Here’s a small selection of text editors you might hear about.

                    IDLE
                    IDLE is a text editor that’s included with Python. It’s a little less intuitive to
                    work with than other, more modern editors. However, you’ll see references
                    to it in other tutorials aimed at beginners, so you might want to give it a try.

                    Geany
                    Geany is a simple text editor that displays all of your output in a separate ter-
                    minal window, which helps you become comfortable using terminals. Geany
                    has a very minimalist interface, but it’s powerful enough that a significant
                    number of experienced programmers still use it.
                        If you find VS Code too distracting and full of too many features, con-
                    sider using Geany instead.

                    Sublime Text
                    Sublime Text is another minimalist editor that you should consider using if
                    you find VS Code too busy. Sublime Text has a really clean interface and is
                    known for working well even on very large files. It’s an editor that will get
                    out of your way and let you focus on the code you’re writing.
                        Sublime Text has an unlimited free trial, but it’s not free or open
                    source. If you decide you like it and can afford to purchase a full license,
                    you should do so. The purchase is a one-time fee; it’s not a software
                    subscription.

474    Appendix B
Emacs and Vim
Emacs and Vim are two popular editors favored by many experienced pro-
grammers, because they’re designed so you can use them without your
hands ever having to leave the keyboard. This makes writing, reading, and
modifying code very efficient, once you learn how the editor works. It also
means both editors have a fairly steep learning curve. Vim is included on
most Linux and macOS machines, and both Emacs and Vim can be run
entirely inside a terminal. For this reason, they’re often used to write code
on servers through remote terminal sessions.
    Programmers will often recommend that you give them a try, but many
proficient programmers forget how much new programmers are already
trying to learn. It’s good to be aware of these editors, but you should hold
off on using them until you’re comfortable working with code in a more
user-friendly editor that lets you focus on learning to program, rather than
learning to use an editor.

PyCharm
PyCharm is a popular IDE among Python programmers because it was built
to work specifically with Python. The full version requires a paid subscrip-
tion, but a free version called the PyCharm Community Edition is also
available, and many developers find it useful.
    If you try PyCharm, be aware that, by default, it sets up an isolated envi-
ronment for each of your projects. This is usually a good thing, but it can
lead to unexpected behavior if you don’t understand what it’s doing for you.

Jupyter Notebooks
Jupyter Notebook is a different kind of tool than traditional text editors or
IDEs, in that it’s a web app primarily built of blocks; each block is either a
code block or a text block. The text blocks are rendered in Markdown, so
you can include simple formatting in your text blocks.
      Jupyter Notebooks were developed to support the use of Python in
scientific applications, but they have since expanded to become useful in
a wide variety of situations. Rather than just writing comments inside a .py
file, you can write clear text with simple formatting, such as headers, bul-
leted lists, and hyperlinks in between sections of code. Every code block can
be run independently, allowing you to test small pieces of your program, or
you can run all the code blocks at once. Each code block has its own output
area, and you can toggle the output areas on or off as needed.
      Jupyter Notebooks can be confusing at times because of the interactions
between different cells. If you define a function in one cell, that function is
available to other cells as well. This is beneficial most of the time, but it can
be confusing in longer notebooks and if you don’t fully understand how the
Notebook environment works.
      If you’re doing any scientific or data-focused work in Python, you’ll
almost certainly see Jupyter Notebooks at some point.

                                                             Text Editors and IDEs   475
