                                         C
                               GET TING HELP

                   Everyone gets stuck at some point when
                  they’re learning to program. So, one of
                 the most important skills to learn as a pro-
               grammer is how to get unstuck efficiently. This
         appendix outlines several ways to help you get going
         again when programming gets confusing.

First Steps
         When you’re stuck, your first step should be to assess your situation. Before
         you ask for help from anyone else, answer the following three questions
         clearly:
         •    What are you trying to do?
         •    What have you tried so far?
         •    What results have you been getting?
                        Make your answers as specific as possible. For the first question, explicit
                   statements like “I’m trying to install the latest version of Python on my new
                   Windows laptop” are detailed enough for others in the Python community
                   to help you. Statements like “I’m trying to install Python” don’t provide
                   enough information for others to offer much help.
                        Your answer to the second question should provide enough detail so
                   you won’t be advised to repeat what you’ve already tried: “I went to https://
                   python.org/downloads and clicked the Download button for my system. Then
                   I ran the installer” is more helpful than “I went to the Python website and
                   downloaded something.”
                        For the third question, it’s helpful to know the exact error messages
                   you received, so you can use them to search online for a solution or provide
                   them when asking for help.
                        Sometimes, just answering these three questions before you ask for help
                   from others allows you to see something you’re missing, and helps get you
                   unstuck without having to go any further. Programmers even have a name
                   for this: rubber duck debugging. The idea is that if you clearly explain your
                   situation to a rubber duck (or any inanimate object) and ask it a specific
                   question, you’ll often be able to answer your own question. Some program-
                   ming teams even keep a real rubber duck around to encourage people to
                   “talk to the duck.”

                   Try It Again
                   Just going back to the start and trying again can be enough to solve many
                   problems. Say you’re trying to write a for loop based on an example in this
                   book. You might have only missed something simple, like a colon at the end
                   of the for line. Going through the steps again might help you avoid repeat-
                   ing the same mistake.

                   Take a Break
                   If you’ve been working on the same problem for a while, taking a break is
                   one of the best tactics you can try. When we work on the same task for long
                   periods of time, our brains start to zero in on only one solution. We lose
                   sight of the assumptions we’ve made, and taking a break helps us get a fresh
                   perspective on the problem. It doesn’t need to be a long break, just some-
                   thing that gets you out of your current mindset. If you’ve been sitting for a
                   long time, do something physical: take a short walk, go outside for a bit, or
                   perhaps drink a glass of water or eat a light snack.
                        If you’re getting frustrated, it might be worth putting your work away
                   for the day. A good night’s sleep almost always makes a problem more
                   approachable.

                   Refer to This Book’s Resources
                   The online resources for this book, available at https://ehmatthes.github.io/pcc_3e,
                   include a number of helpful sections about setting up your system and work-
                   ing through each chapter. If you haven’t done so already, take a look at these
                   resources and see if there’s anything that helps your situation.

478   Appendix C
Searching Online
        Chances are good that someone else has had the same problem you’re
        having and has written about it online. Good searching skills and specific
        inquiries will help you find existing resources to solve the issue you’re fac-
        ing. For example, if you’re struggling to install the latest version of Python
        on a new Windows system, searching for install python windows and limiting
        the results to resources from the last year might direct you to a clear answer.
             Searching the exact error message can be extremely helpful too. For
        example, say you get the following error when you try to run a Python pro-
        gram from a terminal on a new Windows system:

        > python hello_world.py
        Python was not found; run without arguments to install from the Microsoft
          Store...

             Searching for the full phrase, “Python was not found; run without argu-
        ments to install from the Microsoft Store,” will probably yield some good
        advice.
             When you start searching for programming-related topics, a few sites
        will appear repeatedly. I’ll describe some of these sites briefly, so you’ll
        know how helpful they’re likely to be.

        Stack Overflow
        Stack Overflow (https://stackoverflow.com) is one of the most popular question-
        and-answer sites for programmers, and it will often appear in the first page
        of results on Python-related searches. Members post questions when they’re
        stuck, and other members try to give helpful responses. Users can vote for
        the responses they find most helpful, so the best answers are usually the
        first ones you’ll find.
             Many basic Python questions have very clear answers on Stack Overflow,
        because the community has refined them over time. Users are encouraged
        to post updates, too, so responses tend to stay relatively current. At the
        time of this writing, almost two million Python-related questions have been
        answered on Stack Overflow.
             There’s one expectation you should be aware of before posting on
        Stack Overflow. Questions are meant to be the shortest example of the
        kind of issue you’re facing. If you post 5–20 lines of code that generate the
        error you’re facing, and if you address the questions mentioned in “First
        Steps” on page 477 earlier in this appendix, someone will probably help
        you. If you share a link to a project with multiple large files, people will be
        very unlikely to help. There’s a great guide to writing up a good question
        at https://stackoverflow.com/help/how-to-ask. The suggestions in this guide are
        applicable to getting help in any community of programmers.

        The Official Python Documentation
        The official Python documentation (https://docs.python.org) is a bit more
        hit-or-miss for beginners, because its purpose is more to document the

                                                                        Getting Help   479
                    language than to provide explanations. The examples in the official docu-
                    mentation should work, but you might not understand everything shown.
                    Still, it’s a good resource to check when it comes up in your searches, and it
                    will become more useful to you as you continue building your understand-
                    ing of Python.

                    Official Library Documentation
                    If you’re using a specific library, such as Pygame, Matplotlib, or Django,
                    links to the official documentation for it will often appear in searches. For
                    example, https://docs.djangoproject.com is very helpful when working with
                    Django. If you’re planning to work with any of these libraries, it’s a good
                    idea to become familiar with their official documentation.

                    r/learnpython
                    Reddit is made up of a number of subforums called subreddits. The r/learnpython
                    subreddit (https://reddit.com/r/learnpython) is very active and supportive. You
                    can read others’ questions and post your own as well. You will often get mul-
                    tiple perspectives about the questions you raise, which can be really helpful
                    in gaining a deeper understanding of the topic you’re working on.

                    Blog Posts
                    Many programmers maintain blogs and share posts about the parts of the
                    language they’re working with. You should look for a date on the blog posts
                    you find, to see how applicable the information is likely to be for the version
                    of Python you’re using.

      Discord
                    Discord is an online chat environment with a Python community where you
                    can ask for help and follow Python-related discussions.
                        To check it out, head to https://pythondiscord.com and click the Discord
                    link at the upper right. If you already have a Discord account, you can log in
                    with your existing account. If you don’t have an account, enter a username
                    and follow the prompts to complete your Discord registration.
                        If this is your first time visiting the Python Discord, you’ll need to accept
                    the rules for the community before participating fully. Once you’ve done
                    that, you can join any of the channels that interest you. If you’re looking for
                    help, be sure to post in one of the Python Help channels.

480    Appendix C
Slack
        Slack is another online chat environment. It is often used for internal com-
        pany communications, but there are also many public groups you can join.
        If you want to check out Python Slack groups, start with https://pyslackers.com.
        Click the Slack link at the top of the page, then enter your email address to
        get an invitation.
             Once you’re in the Python Developers workspace, you’ll see a list of
        channels. Click Channels and then choose the topics that interest you. You
        might want to start with the #help and #django channels.

                                                                          Getting Help   481
