                TROUBLESHOOTING
                                  E
                  DE PLOY ME N T S

            Deploying an app is tremendously satisfy-
            ing when it works, especially if you’ve never
           done it before. However, there are many
       obstacles that can arise in the deployment pro-
cess, and unfortunately, some of these issues can be
difficult to identify and address. This appendix will
help you understand modern approaches to deploy-
ment and give you specific ways to troubleshoot the
deployment process when things aren’t working.
     If the additional information in this appendix isn’t enough to help you
get through the deployment process successfully, see the online resources at
https://ehmatthes.github.io/pcc_3e; the updates there will almost certainly help
you carry out a successful deployment.
      Understanding Deployments
                    When you’re trying to troubleshoot a particular deployment attempt, it’s
                    helpful to have a clear understanding of how a typical deployment works.
                    Deployment refers to the process of taking a project that works on your local
                    system, and copying that project to a remote server in a way that allows it
                    to respond to requests from any user on the internet. The remote environ-
                    ment differs from a typical local system in a number of important ways: it’s
                    probably not the same operating system (OS) as the one you’re using, and
                    it’s most likely one of many virtual servers on a single physical server.
                         When you deploy a project, or push it to the remote server, the following
                    steps need to be taken:
                    •   Create a virtual server on a physical machine at a datacenter.
                    •   Establish a connection between the local system and the remote server.
                    •   Copy the project’s code to the remote server.
                    •   Identify all of the project’s dependencies and install them on the
                        remote server.
                    •   Set up a database and run any existing migrations.
                    •   Copy static files (CSS, JavaScript files, and media files) to a place where
                        they can be served efficiently.
                    •   Start a server to handle incoming requests.
                    •   Start routing incoming requests to the project, once it’s ready to handle
                        requests.
                         When you consider all that goes into a deployment, it’s no wonder
                    deployments often fail. Fortunately, once you gain an understanding of
                    what should be happening, you’ll stand a better chance of identifying what
                    went wrong. If you can identify what went wrong, you might be able to iden-
                    tify a fix that will make the next deployment attempt successful.
                         You can develop locally on one kind of OS and push to a server running
                    a different OS. It’s important to know what kind of system you’re pushing to,
                    because that can inform some of your troubleshooting work. At the time of
                    this writing, a basic remote server on Platform.sh runs Debian Linux; most
                    remote servers are Linux-based systems.

      Basic Troubleshooting
                    Some troubleshooting steps are specific to each OS, but we’ll get to that in
                    a moment. First, let’s consider the steps everyone should try when trouble-
                    shooting a deployment.
                         Your best resource is the output generated during the attempted
                    push. This output can look intimidating; if you’re new to deploying apps,
                    it can look highly technical, and there’s usually a lot of it. The good news
                    is you don’t need to understand everything in the output. You should have
                    two goals when skimming log output: identify any deployment steps that
                    worked, and identify any steps that didn’t. If you can do this, you might be

    able to figure out what to change in your project, or in your deployment
    process, to make your next push successful.

    Follow Onscreen Suggestions
    Sometimes, the platform you’re pushing to will generate a message that has
    a clear suggestion for how to address the issue. For example, here’s the mes-
    sage you’ll see if you create a Platform.sh project before initializing a Git
    repository, and then try to push the project:

  $ platform push
1 Enter a number to choose a project:
    [0] ll_project (votohz445ljyg)
   > 0

2     [RootNotFoundException]
      Project root not found. This can only be run from inside a project
        directory.

3    To set the project for this Git repository, run:
        platform project:set-remote [id]

        We’re trying to push a project, but the local project hasn’t been associ-
    ated with a remote project yet. So, the Platform.sh CLI asks which remote
    project we want to push to 1. We enter 0, to select the only project listed.
    But next, we see a RootNotFoundException 2. This happens because Platform.sh
    looks for a .git directory when it inspects the local project, to figure out
    how to connect the local project with the remote project. In this case, since
    there was no .git directory when the remote project was created, that con-
    nection was never established. The CLI suggests a fix 3; it’s telling us that
    we can specify the remote project that should be associated with this local
    project, using the project:set-remote command.
        Let’s try this suggestion:

    $ platform project:set-remote votohz445ljyg
    Setting the remote project for this repository to: ll_project (votohz445ljyg)

    The remote project for this repository is
        now set to: ll_project (votohz445ljyg)

        In the previous output, the CLI showed the ID of this remote project,
    votohz4451jyg. So we run the command that’s suggested, using this ID, and
    the CLI is able to make the connection between the local project and the
    remote project.
        Now let’s try to push the project again:

    $ platform push
    Are you sure you want to push to the main (production) branch? [Y/n] y
    Pushing HEAD to the existing environment main
    --snip--

        This was a successful push; following the onscreen suggestion worked.

                       You should be careful about running commands that you don’t fully
                   understand. However, if you have good reason to believe that a command
                   can do little harm, and if you trust the source of the recommendation, it
                   might be reasonable to try the suggestions offered by the tools you’re using.

       NOTE        Keep in mind there are individuals who will tell you to run commands that will wipe
                   your system or expose your system to remote exploitation. Following the suggestions of
                   a tool provided by a company or organization you trust is different from following the
                   suggestions of random people online. Anytime you’re dealing with remote connections,
                   proceed with an abundance of caution.

                   Read the Log Output
                   As mentioned earlier, the log output that you see when you run a command
                   like platform push can be both informative and intimidating. Read through
                   the following snippet of log output, taken from a different attempt at using
                   platform push, and see if you can spot the issue:

                   --snip--
                   Collecting soupsieve==2.3.2.post1
                     Using cached soupsieve-2.3.2.post1-py3-none-any.whl (37 kB)
                   Collecting sqlparse==0.4.2
                     Using cached sqlparse-0.4.2-py3-none-any.whl (42 kB)
                   Installing collected packages: platformshconfig, sqlparse,...
                   Successfully installed Django-4.1 asgiref-3.5.2 beautifulsoup4-4.11.1...
                   W: ERROR: Could not find a version that satisfies the requirement gunicorrn
                   W: ERROR: No matching distribution found for gunicorrn

                   130 static files copied to '/app/static'.

                   Executing pre-flight checks...
                   --snip--

                        When a deployment attempt fails, a good strategy is to look through
                   the log output and see if you can spot anything that looks like warnings or
                   errors. Warnings are fairly common; they’re often messages about upcom-
                   ing changes in a project’s dependencies, to help developers address issues
                   before they cause actual failures.
                        A successful push may have warnings, but it shouldn’t have any errors.
                   In this case, Platform.sh couldn’t find a way to install the requirement
                   gunicorrn. This is a typo in the requirements_remote.txt file, which was sup-
                   posed to include gunicorn (with one r). It’s not always easy to spot the root
                   issue in log output, especially when the problem causes a bunch of cascad-
                   ing errors and warnings. Just like when reading a traceback on your local
                   system, it’s a good idea to look closely at the first few errors that are listed,
                   and also the last few errors. Most of the errors in between tend to be inter-
                   nal packages complaining that something went wrong, and passing mes-
                   sages about the error to other internal packages. The actual error we can
                   fix is usually one of the first or last errors listed.

             Sometimes, you’ll be able to spot the error, and other times, you’ll have
         no idea what the output means. It’s certainly worth a try, and using log out-
         put to successfully diagnose an error is a tremendously satisfying feeling. As
         you spend more time looking through log output, you’ll get better at identi-
         fying the information that’s most meaningful to you.

OS-Specific Troubleshooting
         You can develop on any operating system you like and push to any host
         you like. The tools for pushing projects have developed enough that they’ll
         modify your project as needed to run correctly on the remote system.
         However, there are some OS-specific issues that can arise.
             In the Platform.sh deployment process, one of the most likely sources
         of difficulties is installing the CLI. Here’s the command to do so:

         $ curl -fsS https://platform.sh/cli/installer | php

              The command starts with curl, a tool that lets you request remote
         resources, accessed through a URL, within a terminal. Here, it’s being used
         to download the CLI installer from a Platform.sh server. The -fsS section of
         the command is a set of flags that modify how curl runs. The f flag tells curl
         to suppress most error messages, so the CLI installer can handle them instead
         of reporting them all to you. The s flag tells curl to run silently; it lets the CLI
         installer decide what information to show in the terminal. The S flag tells curl
         to show an error message if the overall command fails. The | php at the end
         of the command tells your system to run the downloaded installer file using a
         PHP interpreter, because the Platform.sh CLI is written in PHP.
              This means your system needs curl and PHP in order to install the
         Platform.sh CLI. To use the CLI, you’ll also need Git, and a terminal that
         can run Bash commands. Bash is a language that’s available in most server
         environments. Most modern systems have plenty of room for multiple tools
         like this to be installed.
              The following sections will help you address these requirements for
         your OS. If you don’t already have Git installed, see the instructions for
         installing Git on page 484 in Appendix D and then go to the section here
         that’s applicable to your OS.

  NOTE   An excellent tool for understanding terminal commands like the one shown here is
         https://explainshell.com. Enter the command you’re trying to understand, and
         the site will show you the documentation for all the parts of your command. Try it
         out with the command used to install the Platform.sh CLI.

         Deploying from Windows
         Windows has seen a resurgence in popularity with programmers in recent
         years. Windows has integrated many different elements of other operating
         systems, providing users with a number of options for how to do local devel-
         opment work and interact with remote systems.

                       One of the most significant difficulties in deploying from Windows is
                   that the core Windows operating system is not the same as what a Linux-
                   based remote server uses. A base Windows system has a different set of tools
                   and languages than a base Linux system, so to carry out deployment work
                   from Windows, you’ll need to choose how to integrate Linux-based tool sets
                   into your local environment.

                   Windows Subsystem for Linux
                   One popular approach is to use Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL), an envi-
                   ronment that allows Linux to run directly on Windows. If you have WSL
                   set up, using the Platform.sh CLI on Windows becomes as easy as using it
                   on Linux. The CLI won’t know it’s running on Windows; it will just see the
                   Linux environment you’re using it in.
                        Setting up WSL is a two-step process: you first install WSL, and then
                   choose a Linux distribution to install into the WSL environment. Setting up
                   a WSL environment is more than can be described here; if you’re interested
                   in this approach and don’t already have it set up, see the documentation at
                   https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/about. Once you have WSL set up,
                   you can follow the instructions in the Linux section of this appendix to con-
                   tinue your deployment work.

                   Git Bash
                   Another approach to building a local environment that you can deploy
                   from uses Git Bash, a terminal environment that’s compatible with Bash
                   but runs on Windows. Git Bash is installed along with Git when you use
                   the installer from https://git-scm.com. This approach can work, but it isn’t as
                   streamlined as WSL. In this approach, you’ll have to use a Windows termi-
                   nal for some steps and a Git Bash terminal for others.
                       First you’ll need to install PHP. You can do this with XAMPP, a package
                   that bundles PHP with a few other developer-focused tools. Go to https://
                   apachefriends.org and click the button to download XAMPP for Windows.
                   Open the installer and run it; if you see a warning about User Account
                   Control (UAC) restrictions, click OK. Accept all of the installer’s defaults.
                       When the installer finishes running, you’ll need to add PHP to your
                   system’s path; this will tell Windows where to look when you want to run
                   PHP. In the Start menu, enter path and click Edit the System Environment
                   Variables; click the button labeled Environment Variables. You should see
                   the variable Path highlighted; click Edit under this pane. Click New to add
                   a new path to the current list of paths. Assuming you kept the default set-
                   tings when running the XAMPP installer, add C:\xampp\php in the box that
                   appears, then click OK. When you’re finished, close all of the system dia-
                   logs that are still open.
                       With these requirements taken care of, you can install the Platform.sh
                   CLI. You’ll need to use a Windows terminal with administrator privileges;
                   enter command into the Start menu, and under the Command Prompt app,

click Run as administrator. In the terminal that appears, enter the follow-
ing command:

> curl -fsS https://platform.sh/cli/installer | php

    This will install the Platform.sh CLI, as described earlier.
    Finally, you’ll work in Git Bash. To open a Git Bash terminal, go to the
Start menu and search for git bash. Click the Git Bash app that appears;
you should see a terminal window open. You can use traditional Linux-
based commands like ls in this terminal, as well as Windows-based com-
mands like dir. To make sure the installation was successful, issue the
platform list command. You should see a list of all the commands in the
Platform.sh CLI. From this point forward, carry out all of your deployment
work using the Platform.sh CLI inside a Git Bash terminal window.

Deploying from macOS
The macOS operating system is not based on Linux, but they were both
developed on similar principles. What this means, practically, is that a lot of
the commands and workflows that you use on macOS will work in a remote
server environment as well. You might need to install some developer-focused
resources in order to have all of these tools available in your local macOS
environment. If you get a prompt to install the command line developer tools at
any point in your work, click Install to approve the installation.
     The most likely difficulty when installing the Platform.sh CLI is mak-
ing sure PHP is installed. If you see a message that the php command is not
found, you’ll need to install PHP. One of the easiest ways to install PHP is
by using the Homebrew package manager, which facilitates the installation
of a wide variety of packages that programmers depend on. If you don’t
already have Homebrew installed, visit https://brew.sh and follow the instruc-
tions to install it.
     Once Homebrew is installed, use the following command to install PHP:

$ brew install php

    This will take a while to run, but once it has completed, you should be
able to successfully install the Platform.sh CLI.

Deploying from Linux
Because most server environments are Linux-based, you should have very
little difficulty installing and using the Platform.sh CLI. If you try to install
the CLI on a system with a fresh installation of Ubuntu, it will tell you
exactly which packages you need:

$ curl -fsS https://platform.sh/cli/installer | php
Command 'curl' not found, but can be installed with:
sudo apt install curl
Command 'php' not found, but can be installed with:
sudo apt install php-cli

                        The actual output will have more information about a few other pack-
                    ages that would work, plus some version information. The following com-
                    mand will install curl and PHP:

                    $ sudo apt install curl php-cli

                        After running this command, the Platform.sh CLI installation com-
                    mand should run successfully. Since your local environment is quite similar
                    to most Linux-based hosting environments, much of what you learn about
                    working in your terminal will carry over to working in a remote environ-
                    ment as well.

      Other Deployment Approaches
                    If Platform.sh doesn’t work for you, or if you want to try a different approach,
                    there are many hosting platforms to choose from. Some work similarly to the
                    process described in Chapter 20, and some have a much different approach
                    to carrying out the steps described at the beginning of this appendix:
                    •   Platform.sh allows you to use a browser to carry out the steps we used
                        the CLI for. If you like browser-based interfaces better than terminal-
                        based workflows, you may prefer this approach.
                    •   There are a number of other hosting providers that offer both CLI- and
                        browser-based approaches. Some of these providers offer terminals
                        within their browser, so you don’t have to install anything on your
                        system.
                    •   Some providers allow you to push your project to a remote code hosting
                        site like GitHub, and then connect your GitHub repository to the host-
                        ing site. The host then pulls your code from GitHub, instead of requir-
                        ing you to push your code from your local system directly to the host.
                        Platform.sh supports this kind of workflow as well.
                    •   Some providers offer an array of services that you select from, in
                        order to put together an infrastructure that works for your project.
                        This typically requires you to have a deeper understanding of the
                        deployment process, and what a remote server needs in order to
                        serve a project. These hosts include Amazon Web Services (AWS) and
                        Microsoft’s Azure platform. It can be much harder to track your costs
                        in these kinds of platforms, because each service can accrue charges
                        independently.
                    •   Many people host their projects on a virtual private server (VPS). In this
                        approach, you rent a virtual server that acts just like a remote computer,
                        log in to the server, install the software needed to run your project, copy
                        your code over, set the right connections, and allow your server to start
                        accepting requests.
                        New hosting platforms and approaches appear on a regular basis; find
                    one that looks appealing to you, and invest the time to learn that provider’s
                    deployment process. Maintain your project long enough so that you get to

know what works well with your provider’s approach and what doesn’t. No
hosting platform is going to be perfect; you’ll need to make an ongoing
judgement call about whether the provider you’re currently using is good
enough for your use case.
     I’ll offer one last word of caution about choosing a deployment plat-
form and an overall approach to deployment. Some people will enthusiasti-
cally steer you toward overly complex deployment approaches and services
that are meant to make your project highly reliable and capable of serving
millions of users simultaneously. Many programmers spend lots of time,
money, and energy building out a complex deployment strategy, only to
find that hardly anyone is using their project. Most Django projects can be
set up on a small hosting plan and tuned to serve thousands of requests per
minute. If your project is getting anything less than this level of traffic, take
the time to configure your deployment to work well on a minimal platform
before investing in infrastructure that’s meant for some of the largest sites
in the world.
     Deployment is incredibly challenging at times, but just as satisfying
when your live project works well. Enjoy the challenge, and ask for help
when you need it.

