                                                                               Preface
Emulation and fuzzing are among the many techniques that can be used to improve cybersecurity;
however, utilizing these efficiently can be tricky. Fuzzing Against the Machine is your hands-on guide
to understanding how these powerful tools and techniques work. Using a variety of real-world use
cases and practical examples, this book will help you grasp the fundamental concepts of fuzzing and
emulation along with advanced vulnerability research, providing you with the tools and skills needed
to find security flaws in your software.
The book begins by introducing you to two open source fuzzer engines: QEMU, which allows you
to run software for whatever architecture you can think of, and American Fuzzy Lop (AFL) and its
improved version, AFL++. You’ll learn how to combine these powerful tools to create your own
emulation and fuzzing environment and then use it to discover vulnerabilities in various systems, such
as iOS, Android, and Samsung’s Mobile Baseband software, Shannon. After reading the introductions
and setting up your environment, you’ll be able to dive into whichever chapter you want, although
the topics gradually become more advanced as the book progresses.
By the end of this book, you’ll have gained the skills, knowledge, and practice required to find flaws
in any firmware by emulating and fuzzing it with QEMU and several fuzzing engines.

Who this book is for
This book is for security researchers, security professionals, embedded firmware engineers, and embedded
software professionals. Learners interested in emulation, as well as software engineers interested in
vulnerability research and exploitation, software testing, and embedded software development, will
also find it useful. The book assumes basic knowledge of programming (C and Python); operating
systems (Linux and macOS); and the use of the Linux shell, compilation, and debugging.
The main intended audience of this book is early-career cybersecurity researchers or students that
would like to get hands-on with the fuzzing of embedded software.
If that is not the case and you are just curious about the topic, you are also welcome to keep reading
through. Please, also refer to the To get the most out of this book section that follows.

What this book covers
Chapter 1, Who This Book is For, enumerates prerequisites for understanding the content of this book
and introduces the tools used in the rest of the chapters.
xvi   Preface

      Chapter 2, History of Emulation, explains a number of key concepts such as emulation, virtualization,
      and containerization, and introduces the role of emulation in cybersecurity.
      Chapter 3, QEMU from the Ground, presents QEMU as the system emulator of choice for this book,
      including previous success stories, but also giving a brief introduction to some of its internals.
      Chapter 4, QEMU Execution Modes and Fuzzing, details both QEMU user mode and full-system
      emulation mode, while also introducing static and dynamic fuzzing.
      Chapter 5, A Famous Refrain – AFL+QEMU = CVEs, demonstrates the use of QEMU in conjunction
      with AFL to search for a vulnerability that was reported in 2011 in VLC, a well-known media player.
      Chapter 6, Modifying QEMU for Basic Instrumentation, illustrates how Avatar2 can be used as an
      interface to extend QEMU, for example, to emulate new peripherals such as a UART serial interface.
      Chapter 7, Real-Life Case Study – Samsung Exynos Baseband, dives into the CVE-2020-25279, a
      vulnerability found in modern Samsung phones such as the Galaxy S10.
      Chapter 8, Case Study – OpenWrt Full-System Fuzzing, contains a study of the TriforceAFL project, the
      compilation of the OpenWRT system, and the fuzzing of system calls through TriforceAFL’s driver.
      Chapter 9, Case Study – OpenWrt System Fuzzing for ARM, describes the use of a previously seen
      project (TriforceAFL) for fuzzing OpenWRT built for the ARM architecture, focusing also on the
      changes required to make it work in this particular architecture.
      Chapter 10, Finally Here – iOS Full-System Fuzzing, focuses on the use of QEMU and a modified
      version of TriforceAFL for emulating and fuzzing on iOS. The chapter also provides an overview of
      the changes required to both the emulator and the fuzzer.
      Chapter 11, Deus Ex Machina – Fuzzing Android Libraries, elaborates on the use of the open source
      project sloth for fuzzing libraries targeting the Android system, understanding the changes proposed
      by this project to the QEMU emulator.
      Chapter 12, Conclusion and Final Remarks, summarizes the research findings, their implications, and
      future directions while emphasizing the importance of the research problem and offering closing
      thoughts on the significance of the study’s contributions.

      To get the most out of this book
      In order not to miss any detail in the text, you should already have some knowledge in the following areas:

         • General knowledge of operating systems and, ideally, the specifics of POSIX-compliant systems
         • The C and Python programming languages
         • Some basic knowledge of embedded devices and/or electronics
                                                                                                 Preface    xvii

This book assumes that you have the following tools installed on your system (see the following table):

 Software/hardware covered in the book                Other requirements/instructions
 QEMU                                                 [Refer to Chapter 1]
 AFL/AFL++                                            [Refer to Chapter 1]
 Ghidra                                               [Refer to Chapter 1]
 Avatar2                                              [Refer to Chapter 1]

The The utility belt section found in Chapter 1 provides a brief background on each of the aforementioned
tools, together with installation instructions. Additionally, a working installation of some common
tools such as Git and Python 3 is assumed present.
If you are using the digital version of this book, we advise you to type the code yourself or access
the code from the book’s GitHub repository (a link is available in the next section). Doing so will
help you avoid any potential errors related to the copying and pasting of code.

Download the example code files
You can download the example code files for this book from GitHub at https://github.com/
PacktPublishing/Fuzzing-Against-the-Machine. If there’s an update to the code, it
will be updated in the GitHub repository.
We also have other code bundles from our rich catalog of books and videos available at https://
github.com/PacktPublishing/. Check them out!

Download the color images
We also provide a PDF file that has color images of the screenshots and diagrams used in this book.
You can download it here: https://packt.link/6U6gr.

Conventions used
There are a number of text conventions used throughout this book.
Code in text: Indicates code words in text, database table names, folder names, filenames, file
extensions, pathnames, dummy URLs, user input, and Twitter handles. Here is an example: “Extract
the JDK distribution (the .tar.gz file) to your desired location, and add the JDK’s bin directory
to your PATH: directory.”
xviii   Preface

        A block of code is set as follows:
          #include <stdio.h>

          int main() {
               printf("Hello, qemu fans!\n"); return 0;
          }

        When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or items
        are set in bold:
          docker pull iot-fuzz/openwrt_x86
          docker run --rm -it -v $(pwd)/owrtKFuzz:/krn iot-fuzz/openwrt_x86
          root@5930beaa2553:/TriforceLinuxSyscallFuzzer# md5sum krn/bzImage
          f59f429b02f6fa13a6598491032715ce  krn/bzImage

        Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
          wget https://corretto.aws/downloads/latest/amazon-corretto-11-x64-
          linux-jdk.tar.gz

        Bold: Indicates a new term, an important word, or words that you see onscreen. For instance, words
        in menus or dialog boxes appear in bold. Here is an example: It’s executed using a support program
        called an emulator.

           Tips or important notes
           Appear like this.

        Get in touch
        Feedback from our readers is always welcome.
        General feedback: If you have questions about any aspect of this book, email us at customercare@
        packtpub.com and mention the book title in the subject of your message.
        Errata: Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen.
        If you have found a mistake in this book, we would be grateful if you would report this to us. Please
        visit www.packtpub.com/support/errata and fill in the form.
        Piracy: If you come across any illegal copies of our works in any form on the internet, we would
        be grateful if you would provide us with the location address or website name. Please contact us at
        copyright@packt.com with a link to the material.
        If you are interested in becoming an author: If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you
        are interested in either writing or contributing to a book, please visit authors.packtpub.com.
                                                                                          Preface   xix

Share Your Thoughts
Once you’ve read Fuzzing Against The Machine, we’d love to hear your thoughts! Please click here
to go straight to the Amazon review page for this book and share your feedback.
Your review is important to us and the tech community and will help us make sure we’re delivering
excellent quality content.
xx   Preface

     Download a free PDF copy of this book
     Thanks for purchasing this book!
     Do you like to read on the go but are unable to carry your print books everywhere?
     Is your eBook purchase not compatible with the device of your choice?
     Don’t worry, now with every Packt book you get a DRM-free PDF version of that book at no cost.
     Read anywhere, any place, on any device. Search, copy, and paste code from your favorite technical
     books directly into your application.
     The perks don’t stop there, you can get exclusive access to discounts, newsletters, and great free content
     in your inbox daily
     Follow these simple steps to get the benefits:

       1.   Scan the QR code or visit the link below

                       https://packt.link/free-ebook/9781804614976

       2.   Submit your proof of purchase
       3.   That’s it! We’ll send your free PDF and other benefits to your email directly
