                                                                                                    2
                                    History of Emulation
Bringing software to life again, regardless of whether you own the hardware or not. From passionate
gamers of the arcades of the 80s to PlayStation fans, who hasn't dreamt of the possibility to execute
that software on their PC, or probably already has (https://www.mamedev.org/)? I remember
when I started to use Linux – you could easily convert it into a switch, a router, or a DHCP server. This
concept of a general-purpose machine that can execute all software was extremely intriguing to me.
Since then, emulation has gained hype and it’s being used for multiple purposes. It originated as a form
of art and excellence to preserve the execution of old software when hardware gets inevitably old and
breaks. But the advent of QEMU (https://www.usenix.org/legacy/event/usenix05/
tech/freenix/full_papers/bellard/bellard.pdf), among other emulators, has
opened enormous possibilities to emulate and test any kind of software for any architecture without
moving from your desk. How comfortable does that sound? In the past, people didn’t have the chance
to own expensive hardware, but it was free to write software.
I believe emulation can be described as a sentiment that mixes the desire for gathering deep knowledge
of the internals of architecture, strong technical skills, and overcoming the frustration of not owning a
device or a system. For example, the emergence of Linux was dictated by the need for a free or cheap
operating system such as the powerful Unix from Bell Labs. To use such systems in the past, you had
to be a big institution, such as a university or a corporation.
Ultimately, emulation, like many other techniques and tools in science and arts, is a self-learning
journey to discover how beautiful knowledge is and demonstrate the strength that no barrier other
than time can block you from realizing your dream. Also, as with every idea that is realized, emulation
deals with trade-offs and compromises. Decisions must be taken at every turning point and either
fidelity, stability, or performance must be sacrificed. These choices are personal and have to do with
the scope and motivation of the emulation.
In this chapter, we will cover the following main topics:

   • What is emulation?
   • Why is emulation needed?

        • Emulation besides QEMU
        • The role of emulation in cybersecurity through history

     What is emulation?
     Emulation is a sophisticated technique for running software on a system called a host, which normally
     does not support the software we want to run. It’s executed using a support program called an emulator.
     This emulator executes the unsupported software as a guest. The emulator can make the software
     we want to execute understand that it is running on its original platform, by translating its original
     code into the host’s equivalent. Though it’s not just a matter of translation – embedded devices have
     dedicated peripherals, timers, accelerators, and sensors. Depending on our scope, we will need to
     make choices and decide what we want to keep, implement, and execute, as well as what we won’t.

     Why is emulation needed?
     The first computer I ever owned as a kid was a 386 machine. I broke it after a few months given my
     curiosity. My father was so pissed at me that the next computer I got came 10 years later, and it was
     as Moore predicted – exponentially faster than the one I had previously. It was an Intel Pentium III,
     and I was already a teenager, so I’d traded my computer for a PlayStation or a simple Game Boy. So,
     once my 56K modem was connected, a thought started to occur to me. What if… yeah, what if I can
     execute a PlayStation game on this PC? I just made a very simple analogy – PlayStation works with
     CD-ROMs, and games are copied through computers, so there should be something in common there.
     Internet search engines were not very efficient yet, but forums were full of passionate people eager to help
     and give advice on many things. Haters and trolls were not so common yet. So, after many afternoons
     spent searching and wasting money on an internet connection, I discovered that an emulator existed.
     Its name was Bleem! Later, I also discovered the existence of MAME for arcade emulation. That was
     an incredible discovery and as a passionate individual about computers, my immediate question was,
     how do I program my emulator?
     The need for emulation emerges from the lack of devices, the lack of money to invest into specific
     hardware, and the desire to craft a copy of that device, but a custom one. The advent of emulation
     into cybersecurity emerged for the same needs. I remember when I was studying at university and
     we were penniless, so we couldn’t get hardware capable of virtualization. Therefore, we resorted to
     Bochs (https://bochs.sourceforge.io/), another emulator that was able to emulate such
     functionality. It was so slow to run a virtualized system within an emulated one (http://roberto.
     greyhats.it/pubs/issta09.pdf). As cybersecurity researchers, we wanted to debug kernels,
     firmware, and devices – we wanted to find vulnerabilities and exploit them. TL,DR; hack all the things!

Emulation has become a very powerful Swiss Army knife for security and vulnerability research, a
must-have tool that reduces costs and allows you to explore every aspect of the emulated system. It
allows us to choose which parts we want to keep faithful to the original and which ones we can simply
ignore because they are out of our scope.
Different fields of cybersecurity use emulation as a useful tool in their belts because it provides an isolated
and controlled environment, and it also allows us to run software written for several architectures. For
instance, the emulator can be tweaked and customized to inspect and extract suspicious or malicious
behavior. This could be done by running a malware sample and following its execution trace, as well as
calling system functions and system calls. The world of software exploitation can also take advantage
of the benefits that emulation offers. Commonly, while developing an exploit, the exploited software
will hang, or in the worst case, the system could hang due to a software error (for example, during
kernel driver exploitation). The use of real hardware can increase the time it takes to develop the
exploit because if the system hangs, it can take a long time to reboot, whereas when using software for
emulation, it can quickly be rebooted. In the end phase of exploit development, real hardware is used.
Note that real hardware may just break since we are trying to exploit it and are putting it under stress.
Aside from the cybersecurity world, emulation can be used in software development. For example,
the developers of real-time operating system (RTOS) software can use software such as QEMU to
improve software development times. Once the software has been developed and correctly tested in
an emulated environment, it can be tested and finally deployed on the hardware platform where the
RTOS runs.
While the emulation is not 100% faithful to the specific hardware platforms and specifications, there’s
a trade-off between costs and usability. In any case, we think all these uses for emulation are good
points to cover in this book. From exploit writers to software developers interested in cybersecurity
and testing, emulation can be a useful tool for detecting the presence of flaws in software. Fuzzing
tools such as AFL++ can leverage the advantages of software emulation to look for vulnerabilities in
software compiled for architectures other than the one we’re using.

Differences between emulation and virtualization
These two concepts are commonly misunderstood because they can be closely related, but there are
differences we should point out and understand before we deep-dive into emulation. Virtualization is
a technology that allows us to run another operating system above our current one. There is a logical
division between our current system (also known as a host), and the virtualized one (also known as a
guest). Virtualization is based on a key software component called a hypervisor, which manages the
execution of guest operating systems together with its kernel. Filesystems, as well as various hardware
components, can be virtualized for the guest operating system, but in the end, all this software will run
in our physical processor. For that reason, the virtualized system must have the same architecture or
at least be compatible with the architecture we are using in the host machine. Different software exists
for virtualization, and some of them are multi-platform, such as VirtualBox and VMware. One that’s
specific to Linux is Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM). Virtualization is a technology offered by

     CPUs to abstract themselves as multiple ones through the hypervisor. The virtualized OS will sit in a
     standalone bare-metal machine, while the hypervisor may schedule four different OSes at the same
     time. Virtualization is more performant than emulation because the instructions are executed on the
     physical CPU. However, the transitions the hypervisor must go through to talk with the hardware or
     switch through VMs or the host OS are usually quite expensive. Hypervisors logically sit at ring-1,
     below kernels. On the other hand, emulation is above the virtualization layer, as emulation runs as
     a process inside of a host or a guest operating system. An emulator is a piece of software that acts
     as a whole, standalone computer. It can run software from different architectures (as the emulation
     process is not CPU-dependent). This emulation process has a time penalty because it is software
     that is interpreted by a process running above an operating system. Different strategies are followed
     by emulators for improving the performance of the emulation process – for example, the code can
     be just-in-time (JIT)-compiled to the host architecture, finally running the emulated code in the
     processor. Another strategy is to lift the executed code into an intermediate representation (IR) and
     run the instructions from that IR in a built-in interpreter. This interpreter, as well as the IR code, can
     be improved with different program analysis techniques or by compiling the interpreter with better
     performance. This makes IR faster than interpreting the assembly code directly. Emulation can be
     applied at different levels, with the first one being user-space emulation, where we can use software
     such as Unicorn (a program emulation software), Qiling (a program emulator that uses Unicorn but
     helps with configuration), or Qemu-User (a QEMU software specific for emulating programs). The
     other level for emulation is full-system emulation, which allows us to emulate a whole operating
     system, together with its BIOS, peripherals, and kernel. We can use different tools for this: Bochs (an
     open source x86 operating system emulator), though the one we will use is QEMU.

        Security rings
        The design model for operating systems that has emerged over the years illustrates that the
        proper development of such software should have a separation of privileges (rings) to avoid
        interference and abuse and provide isolation and control. In this hierarchy, the lowest ring has
        higher privileges – that is, the kernel usually runs in ring 0, while hypervisors, which can run
        multiple kernels, run at ring -1. On the other hand, user applications and system services may be
        separated into just a single ring, which may be called ring 1. However, many recommendations
        and papers show architectures with four or five rings, where privileges are separated in a fine-
        grained manner (for example, a micro-kernel may run at ring 0, a low-level driver may run at
        ring 1, driver interfaces such as mini-filters may run at ring 2, and the user application may
        run at ring 3). We will show an example figure taken from Wikipedia later.

VirtualBox

VirtualBox is a form of open source virtualization software. This means that part of the emulation is
offloaded directly to bare metal to enhance performance/stability and reliability. VirtualBox is licensed
under the GPL and the code base is currently owned by ORACLE Inc. It is a very versatile software that
can be easily used in an enterprise environment coupled with other orchestrators, such as https://
github.com/hyperbox/hyperbox or https://phpvirtualbox.github.io/. It also
allows you to run VMs in headless mode – that is, without a graphical interface but with a remote
shell available. It allows you to take machine snapshots and perform a physical device passthrough to
interface peripherals with the VMs. The downside is that its code base is quite complex and problematic
for non-professional developers to extend.

VMWare

VMWare is a commercial virtualization solution that offers support for many platforms and very
advanced products, such as the ESXi version, which is capable of managing entire clouds of VMs.
VMware was also one of the first solutions to support the recently minted Apple M1 architecture
with VMWare Fusion.

Hyper-V

Hyper-V is Microsoft’s alternative for virtualization. Curiously, the original developers of VirtualBox,
Innotek GmbH, contributed to various parts of the code of many versions of virtualization software,
such as Connectrix and Windows Virtual PC, which was a precursor of Hyper-V.
The main difference between VirtualBox, VMware, and Hyper-V is that the latter is a type 1 hypervisor,
which runs from the main boot of the bare-metal machine. The first two options (excluding VMWare
ESXi) are type 2 hypervisors, which are hosted within an operating system:

                          Figure 2.1 – Diagram of an OS stack for virtualization

        Types of hypervisors and containers
        Hypervisors can be divided into two main categories: type 1 and type 2. Moreover, container
        engines have spread lately as a cheaper and more performant solution. The first is normally
        installed on bare-metal hardware and acts as a small operating system managing virtual machines.
        The type 2 hypervisor, on the other hand, runs along with a normal operating system, but when
        it starts to run, it gets privileges to run virtual machines and handle hypervisor-related tasks,
        which normally an ordinary operating system is not allowed nor programmed to execute.
        Containers engines such as Docker run like any other application in the OS, so they can be
        run with or without sudo privileges. The peculiarity of Docker is that it can run an isolated
        container with an independent filesystem and namespace. Also, Docker allows you to connect
        the containers to the underlying OS network stack, providing de facto isolated machines. The
        concept of Docker is not new per se – chroot environments and jails have been introduced in
        FreeBSD and Linux for many years. Docker standardized these concepts and created a cloud-
        based distribution of container images that transformed the system into a plug-and-play ballpark
        for testing applications and services in isolated environments.

     Docker

     Docker is a form of containerization software. It allows you to combine specific OS libraries and
     primitives within an independent portion of the filesystem, providing isolation, native performance,
     and an independent network stack for every image. Docker is not a hypervisor, an emulator, or a
     virtualization system. It’s just a container engine. Think of it as an advanced chroot or jail:

                       Figure 2.2 – Difference between a hypervisor (left) and Docker (right)

SEE – the Simplest Emulator Ever

An emulator is commonly implemented as an interpreter of instructions for a specific microprocessor.
A basic structure or algorithm for an emulator can be imagined as a while loop that fetches the
instruction to run, handles the necessary interrupts for the emulated hardware, and, if needed, emulates
the necessary graphics actions, plays sounds, takes user inputs, and synchronizes microprocessor timer
(as some microprocessors can run slower to the one where the emulator runs).
The basic algorithm in pseudo-C looks as follows:

  While (!stop_emulation)
  {
       executeCPU(cycles_to_execute);
       generateInterrupts();
       emulateGraphics();
       emulateSound();
       emulateOtherHardware();
       timeSincronization();
  }

Imagine we are emulating a Z80 microcontroller that runs at 7MHz of clock speed. If our host CPU
running the emulator runs at 70MHz, we will need to make our emulator execution loop run 10 times
slower to achieve a faithful emulation. In principle, when an emulator starts, it can calculate how
many cycles of host CPU instructions it takes to execute a particular emulated instruction and adjust
its timers accordingly. This is done to achieve a smooth execution and offer the best user experience.
Some of these tasks from the previous loop must be executed periodically and ordered properly. So,
during the loop, we must know when to execute them (for example, when display printing or handling
keyboard interrupts with user input). As this algorithm is sequential and single-threaded, we have to
consider the trade-off between running some instructions or doing other video/sound tasks, and to
which one gives precedence. The most important thing in an emulator is to give the impression that
everything runs on the original machine.
The executeCPU function can be implemented in two different ways:

   • The first way is obtaining the raw bytes of the instructions, decoding the instruction opcodes,
     and then invoking a function that simulates the effects and side effects of the instruction (for
     example, updating CPU flags, updating the program counter, and so on). This is known as
     interpreted emulation. While slower, it is commonly the easiest way to implement it.

        • The second way involves applying the concept of binary translation so that all the instructions
          are translated into the host architecture and run inside the CPU. By doing so, the instructions
          can run faster. An implementation design that’s commonly implemented involves transforming
          the code into an IR and then applying JIT compilation to it. The LLVM project (https://
          llvm.org/) provides an API for JIT compiling known as ORC (https://releases.
          llvm.org/9.0.0/docs/ORCv2.html). This is also the approach that’s followed by
          QEMU with Tiny Code Generator (TCG) (https://www.qemu.org/docs/master/
          devel/index-tcg.html).

     This emulation also involves mocking the memory of the emulated system or device. Temporary data
     is stored in emulated Random Access Memory (RAM) and static code for devices will be present in
     emulated Read-Only Memory (ROM). Devices can also be implemented with memory since operating
     systems commonly specify a region of memory where a device is mapped, and where the device can
     write to give the system access to the written data. The internal representation of memory will involve
     its endianness (that is, where the most significant bit is positioned, either left or right) of this memory,
     as well as the sections a system will map with specific access permissions.

        Memory-mapped I/O
        To enhance performance and unify operating system interfaces, external devices are often
        mapped into the memory address space of the kernel, within a particular address range. In
        this way, the operating system can easily handle access to external peripherals through a
        unified interface. For example, the read() or write() system calls can be used in different
        descriptors. In some cases, they may represent a device, such as when acting with sockets.
        Also, memory-related functions such as memcpy() may be used for the same purpose (that
        is, sending/receiving data to/from a device).

     Time is also a key point of emulation as well since users can notice when a device has been emulated
     incorrectly because it’s slow. However, in some cases, the emulation will go faster. For that reason, it
     is necessary to control the number of cycles our emulator runs per unit of time so that it’s as close as
     possible to the real device.
     Graphics emulation involves showing several frames per second (FPS), whereas sound emulation
     involves playing audio from the system. In our algorithm, this is done sequentially, and we can try
     playing with things such as the frames that are shown to users per second – depending on the emulated
     device, a lower rate of frames will not be easily noticed. This task is more complex for sound where
     it’s easy to be discovered when sound is not played properly.
     All of these emulation tasks must also include an important mechanism that the CPU provides to
     software to talk with devices or with system kernel components. These are known as interrupts. CPUs
     allow software and hardware to emit interrupts that make the system run routines to catch and manage
     those interrupts. These must also be emulated to make the system work.

More about the topic of designing and developing emulators can be found in Study of the techniques for
emulation programming (http://www.xsim.com/papers/Bario.2001.emubook.pdf).

The challenge of IoT emulation
Besides the SEE emulator, which we briefly explained previously, we need to make extra effort to
enter the specific domain that our book covers, which is specific to IoT and embedded devices. So,
let’s retake the loop code:

  While (!stop_emulation)
  {
       executeCPU(cycles_to_execute);
       generateInterrupts();
       emulateGraphics();
       emulateSound();
  //THE DRAGONS OF IoT MAY APPEAR HERE
  /*
          \\  //  .''-.     .-.
          \ \/ /.'     '-.-'   '.
      ~__\(    )/ __~            '.    ..~
      (  . \!!/    . )     .-''-.  '..~~~~
       \ | (--)---| /'-..-'     '-..-~'
        ^^^ ''   ^^^
  */
       emulateOtherHardware();
       timeSincronization();
  }

Particular attention must be paid to the emulateOtherHardware() function because not all
the hardware can be emulated sometimes thanks to frameworks such as Avatar and Avatar2 (which
will be covered in detail in Chapter 3, Chapter 6, and Chapter 7). Here, specific functionalities can be
offloaded to the original device to handle some of the special tasks. Let’s imagine for a second that we
are trying to boot a piece of GSM modem firmware extracted from a phone. We recognize that it is
based on a MIPS CPU. Now, we can try to execute part of the code on QEMU that’s been configured
with a MIPS CPU. What do you think may happen when the firmware looks for the presence of the
radio hardware? If such complex hardware is not present, the firmware may just reset after the timer
expires. IoT and embedded devices are full of peripherals that might be mandatory on boot and might be
extremely difficult to emulate. For this reason, we have mocking/proxying frameworks such as Avatar2.

     Emulation besides QEMU
     Emulation is as old as the theorization of computers. One of the properties of Universal Turing
     Machines (UTMs) is their capability to simulate any other UTM by getting its description. Without
     getting into complex philosophical and mathematical theory, we can easily say that with one computer
     and sufficient resources, we may be able to execute the code of any other. Of course, we may not get
     native performance, but there are astonishing success cases of emulation, which sometimes makes me
     think about how beautiful the challenge between humans and machines is. For instance, the survival of
     arcade games is entirely dependent on emulators, simply because nobody no longer knows how their
     proprietary hardware was built. But passionate people were able to reverse engineer an executable file
     and understand the architecture of the machine, and yeah – it starts with a bang! Awesome projects
     such as MAME, Bleem!, and a few others were born. In this chapter, we will explore some different
     applications of emulations and their development.

     MAME
     As it states on its web page (https://www.mamedev.org/index.php), “Mame is a multi-
     purpose emulation framework.” MAME has been the de facto emulator for different video game platforms
     (mainly focused on arcade video games), as well as the emulator of a variety of vintage computers.
     The main purpose of the MAME team is to preserve the ancient software and hardware platforms,
     and demonstrate that the emulated behavior matches the original one.
     The MAME emulator is programmed in C++. The number of emulated machines has risen to 44,474
     (http://adb.arcadeitalia.net/mame.php) and about 8 million support video games. While
     the support for the emulation is not always perfect, they update a status support check on their wiki.
     The software can be downloaded for Windows directly from their main website: https://www.
     mamedev.org/release.html. If you have a Linux system, you can download the source code
     from GitHub (https://github.com/mamedev/mame) and compile the whole project by
     following the README file:

       make

     Or, we can just compile a part of the emulation system:

       make subtarget=arcade

     While this book is not intended to be a book about video game emulation, we think this is a great
     example of what emulation can do, and how over the years this has allowed people to play with or
     use software that is not maintained anymore.
                                 The role of emulation and virtualization in cybersecurity through history   23

There are several examples of software like MAME for more specific platforms, such as Dolphin
Emulator (https://es.dolphin-emu.org/) for GameCube and Nintendo Wii, the Yuzu
emulator (https://yuzu-emu.org/) for Nintendo Switch, and PCSX2 (https://pcsx2.
net/) for PlayStation 2.
This kind of software is commonly on a legal borderline with intellectual property since the emulation
software does not typically violate copyright. The video games for the emulators cannot be provided
alongside the emulator as the video games are under copyright.

Bochs
If you are looking for performance, Bochs is probably not your favorite choice. On the contrary, if you
are looking for accuracy, Bochs is the correct choice for x86 emulation. Bochs is capable of running
an entire PC within a window of almost any available platform, such as x86, PPC, Alpha, Sun, and
MIPS. Bochs simulates x86 hardware very accurately, it is written in C++, and modular, and the code
is very well structured. The project is available at https://bochs.sourceforge.io/. There is
also an Android application available in the Play Store (https://play.google.com/store/
apps/details?id=net.sourceforge.bochs).

RetroPie
RetroPie is a project that aims to transform a Raspberry Pi into an arcade machine. While this is
not an emulator but a system with many different emulators installed and configured ready to play,
the user just needs to find and install the video games for each video console in their specific folder.
In this case, the installation becomes pretty easy as the project already provides images of the system
that are ready for different Raspberry Pi hardware. You can find all the provided video console emulators
on its documentation web page: https://retropie.org.uk/docs/.

The role of emulation and virtualization in cybersecurity
through history
The capability of executing a program with instrumentation – that is, extra code is added to observe
particular behaviors – and being able to understand sources and sinks of functions and how an input
may influence the state of a system, exploit it, or crash it has become of fundamental importance.
Predicting corner cases in programs may save lives, such as in software running in machines in hospitals,
airplanes, or dishwashers, among others. Also, security and safety often interleave themselves and
mangle in such a way that programs need to be tested for months, if not years, to ensure that plausible
issues can be explored. There are many documented cases of rockets and probes self-destructing
because of software errors (https://medium.com/swlh/some-of-the-most-famous-
bugs-in-software-history-bb16a2ee3f8e).

     It is not incidental that one of the most comprehensive documentation on QEMU internals has
     been redacted by Airbus, an avionics company (https://airbus-seclab.github.io/
     qemu_blog/).
     Hence, anticipating corner conditions and weird cases is of crucial importance. And as the presence
     of software grows all around us, automating such approaches has become mandatory for safety and
     security. Emulators are fundamental pillars of software testing at this point in computer science history.
     In the following sections, we will present how cybersecurity professionals have sharpened their fangs
     to investigate, discover, and hunt for flaws, vulnerabilities, and malicious code.
     Next, we will list famous tools that have been used over the years for analysis that leverage emulation
     and virtualization.

     Anubis
     For decades, people have lived without VirusTotal, but the iSecLab (https://iseclab.org/)
     from 2005 with TTAnalyze and Anubis provided human-readable binary analysis reports based on
     an instrumented instance of QEMU.

     TEMU
     Prof. Dawn Song at CMU and UC Berkeley did crash analysis with her team (BitBlaze) of TEMU. This
     was undoubtedly seminal work in the area of cybersecurity to perform low-level analysis and was all
     thanks to QEMU. TEMU was a modified version of Qemu that was designed to perform one of the
     most challenging tasks in computer science: taint analysis. The system was able to track any byte that
     was coming into the system. Imagine malware getting some external input and, as an analyst, you
     want to understand where this information is used, transformed, and ultimately whether it harms
     the user. Tracking information through taint analysis incurs huge performance degradation because
     every byte of memory also needs tracking structures and eventually a shadow copy to keep track of
     every movement. Taint analysis is extremely powerful and has helped researchers to understand and
     take down many malware botnets and cybercrime operations. Nowadays, TEMU has evolved into the
     DECAF project, which is maintained by volunteers (http://bitblaze.cs.berkeley.edu/).

     Ether
     Another interesting approach that’s developed over the years and dates back to 2008 is Ether. This
     platform leverages Intel virtualization technology and instruments the Xen hypervisor to keep track
     of executed binaries within several virtual instances of Windows. Relying on hardware acceleration
     gave Ether better performance and stability. The project is no longer maintained but it is possible to
     download the code and test it.
                                                                                               Summary      25

The Cuckoo sandbox
Cuckoo is a mature, comprehensive, and modular framework that allows you to analyze multiple files,
Windows binaries, PDFs, Office documents, Java apps, and more. It is a system based on virtualization
that can be orchestrated to use multiple virtual machines and instrumented and customized to look
for specific execution patterns and behaviors (https://cuckoosandbox.org/).

The CAPE sandbox

CAPE is a project derived from Cuckoo that aims to perform malware payload and configuration
extraction. It supports various virtualization technologies as a backend for analysis, but it also allows
the use of QEMU as a form of virtualization/emulation technology. More information can be found
in its repository: https://github.com/kevoreilly/CAPEv2.

Commercial solutions – VirusTotal and Joe Sandbox
After years of pioneering research, the first commercial product to analyze malware on a large scale
was VirusTotal. It was born in sunny South Spain (Malaga) and acquired by Google (Alphabet), who
turned it into the powerful system that we know today. VirusTotal offers powerful cross-correlation
tools on a gigantic corpus of samples. It is a beast for threat hunting at a large scale. VirusTotal uses
commercial antivirus solutions to report possible issues on the analyzed file/URL and it also has JuJu
Sandbox for more advanced analysis. As mentioned previously, the strength of VirusTotal stands within
its capability to handle and search through billions of samples, connections, patterns, and domains.
Joe Sandbox came on to the scene later and offers a tunable and multi-OS sandbox for advanced
malware analysis. It doesn’t rely on any external antivirus.

Summary
In this chapter, we explored state-of-the-art emulation and possible alternatives. We dived into the
history of computation, software testing, and many aspects of safety and security where emulation
has started to play a fundamental role to help us avoid or mitigate issues.
In the next chapter, we will dive deep into QEMU and its internals, and how code is transformed
and executed. We will also have a look at Python frontends that specialize in QEMU for embedded
systems and malware analysis.
