                                                                                                12
      Conclusion and Final Remarks
Writing a book about computer science is something that can become counterintuitive. Why would
you write a book if technology might become obsolete the very next day? What if ChatGPT could
write better than you? We want to stress the importance of books as journeys to explore and experience
topics from the unique viewpoint of the authors.
Throughout this book, we certainly found some answers that we hope you will appreciate. The concept
behind a book is to understand the path and the inferences that the authors have traced through the
concepts, allowing you to grasp them and interpret them in your own way, something that requires
human understanding and interpretation, which machines cannot replicate. This is not specifically
related to any technology, but it’s related to the journey of passing on information from one generation
to another so that experiments, practices, and recipes can be reproduced.
We have struggled and hopefully succeeded in carefully selecting our chapters. Our aim was to balance
which theoretical parts were mandatory, which parts may be helpful, and which practical projects
may inspire you by topic and platform.
We believe that the ultimate IoT devices are mobile phones because they carry a plethora of connected
sensors and are capable of communicating through several technologies. Plus, they are constantly on
the move. This is why we kept the iOS and Android examples for the advanced part.
A mobile’s potential surface of exposure is extremely high, even if, with our examples, we just scratched
the surface by showing relatively trivial exercises, such as scanning for system calls or native libraries.
We hope that we were able to open your personal Pandora’s box and unleash the hacker within,
motivating you to explore something on your own within one of the platforms we have shown in the
book or some other platforms. As you learned along the way, developing fuzzing harnesses is something
that is reproducible and cross-platform, and once you understand where to put your hands, it can be
scaled up to thousands of instances. We hope we were able to show and transmit such magic in detail.
Welcome to the real world, Neo! Now, it’s time to hack!
204   Conclusion and Final Remarks

      Looking forward to seeing you on our next journey.

      The number of people we want to thank for their effort, support and inspiration is huge. We want to
      mention the TriforceAFL project from NCC, which several researchers have used as a basis for their
      fuzzing harnesses. We want to personally thank Nitay Artenstein, Marius Muench, Grant Hernandez,
      Trung Nguyen, @siguza, Nikias Bassen, Antag0nist, and all the people who worked at Aleph Research,
      @zhuowei, Aurielienne Francillon, Jonas Zaddach, and Amat Cama. We also want to thank Packt
      Publishing, who gave us the opportunity to impart knowledge in our own way. Last but not least, a
      special acknowledgment goes to my former students, Marina Caro and Ádrian Hacar Sobrino, who
      helped us with some aspects of the baseband fuzzing.
