Chapter 1

Introduction

Static program analysis aims to automatically answer questions about the possi-
ble behaviors of programs. In this chapter, we explain why this can be useful
and interesting, and we discuss the basic characteristics of analysis tools.

1.1    Applications of Static Program Analysis
Static program analysis has been used since the early 1960s in optimizing com-
pilers. More recently, it has proven useful also for bug finding and verification
tools, and in IDEs to support program development. In the following, we give
some examples of the kinds of questions about program behavior that arise in
these different applications.

Analysis for program optimization Optimizing compilers (including just-in-
time compilers in interpreters) need to know many different properties of the
program being compiled, in order to generate efficient code. A few examples of
such properties are:
   • Does the program contain dead code, or more specifically, is function f
     unreachable from main? If so, the code size can be reduced.
   • Is the value of some expression inside a loop the same in every iteration?
     If so, the expression can be moved outside the loop to avoid redundant
     computations.
   • Does the value of variable x depend on the program input? If not, it could
     be precomputed at compile time.
   • What are the lower and upper bounds of the integer variable x? The answer
     may guide the choice of runtime representation of the variable.
   • Do p and q point to disjoint data structures in memory? That may enable
     parallel processing.
2                                                               1 INTRODUCTION

Analysis for program correctness The most successful analysis tools that
have been designed to detect errors (or verify absence of errors) target generic
correctness properties that apply to most or all programs written in specific
programming languages. In unsafe languages like C, such errors sometimes
lead to critical security vulnerabilities. In safer languages like Java, such errors
are typically less severe, but they can still cause program crashes. Examples of
such properties are:
    • Does there exist an input that leads to a null pointer dereference, division-
      by-zero, or arithmetic overflow?
    • Are all variables initialized before they are read?
    • Are arrays always accessed within their bounds?
    • Can there be dangling references, i.e., use of pointers to memory that has
      been freed?
    • Does the program terminate on every input? Even in reactive systems such
      as operating systems, the individual software components, for example
      device driver routines, are expected to always terminate.
Other correctness properties depend on specifications provided by the program-
mer for the individual programs (or libraries), for example:
    • Are all assertions guaranteed to succeed? Assertions express program-
      specific correctness properties that are supposed to hold in all executions.
    • Is function hasNext always called before function next, and is open always
      called before read? Many libraries have such so-called typestate correctness
      properties.
    • Does the program throw an ActivityNotFoundException or a
      SQLiteException for some input?
With web and mobile software, information flow correctness properties have
become extremely important:
    • Can input values from untrusted users flow unchecked to file system
      operations? This would be a violation of integrity.
    • Can secret information become publicly observable? Such situations are
      violations of confidentiality.
The increased use of concurrency (parallel or distributed computing) and event-
driven execution models gives rise to more questions about program behavior:

    • Are data races possible? Many errors in multi-threaded programs are
      caused by two threads using a shared resource without proper synchro-
      nization.
    • Can the program (or parts of the program) deadlock? This is often a
      concern for multi-threaded programs that use locks for synchronization.
1.2 APPROXIMATIVE ANSWERS                                                        3

Analysis for program development Modern IDEs perform various kinds of
program analysis to support debugging, refactoring, and program understand-
ing. This involves questions such as:
   • Which functions may possibly be called on line 117, or conversely, where
     can function f possibly be called from? Function inlining and other refac-
     torings rely on such information.
   • At which program points could x be assigned its current value? Can the
     value of variable x affect the value of variable y? Such questions often arise
     when programmers are trying to understand large codebases and during
     debugging when investigating why a certain bug appears.
   • What types of values can variable x have? This kind of question often
     arises with programming languages where type annotations are optional
     or entirely absent, for example OCaml, JavaScript, or Python.

1.2     Approximative Answers
Regarding correctness, programmers routinely use testing to gain confidence
that their programs work as intended, but as famously stated by Dijkstra [Dij70]:
“Program testing can be used to show the presence of bugs, but never to show their
absence.” Ideally we want guarantees about what our programs may do for all
possible inputs, and we want these guarantees to be provided automatically, that
is, by programs. A program analyzer is such a program that takes other programs
as input and decides whether or not they have a certain property.
     Reasoning about the behavior of programs can be extremely difficult, even
for small programs. As an example, does the following program code terminate
on every integer input n (assuming arbitrary-precision integers)?

      while (n > 1) {
        if (n % 2 == 0) // if n is even, divide it by two
          n = n / 2;
        else // if n is odd, multiply by three and add one
          n = 3 * n + 1;
      }

In 1937, Collatz conjectured that the answer is “yes”. As of 2020, the conjecture
has been checked for all inputs up to 268 , but nobody has been able to prove it
for all inputs [Roo19].
    Even straight-line programs can be difficult to reason about. Does the fol-
lowing program output true for some integer inputs?

      x = input; y = input; z = input;
      output x*x*x + y*y*y + z*z*z == 42;
4                                                                             1 INTRODUCTION

This was an open problem since 1954 until 2019 when the answer was found
after over a million hours of computing [BS19].
    Rice’s theorem [Ric53] is a general result from 1953 which informally states
that all interesting questions about the input/output behavior of programs
(written in Turing-complete programming languages1 ) are undecidable. This is
easily seen for any special case. Assume for example the existence of an analyzer
that decides if a variable in a program has a constant value in any execution. In
other words, the analyzer is a program A that takes as input a program T , one
of T ’s variables x, and some value k, and decides whether or not x’s value is
always equal to k whenever T is executed.

                             A                                          yes
               (T, x, k)
                               Is the value of variable x
                               always equal to k when
                               T is executed?
                                                                        no

   We could then exploit this analyzer to also decide the halting problem by
using as input the following program where TM(j) simulates the j’th Turing
machine on empty input:
      x = 17; if (TM(j)) x = 18;
Here x has a constant value 17 if and only if the j’th Turing machine does not
halt on empty input. If the hypothetical constant-value analyzer A exists, then
we have a decision procedure for the halting problem, which is known to be
impossible [Tur37].
    At first, this seems like a discouraging result; however, this theoretical result
does not prevent approximative answers. While it is impossible to build an
analysis that would correctly decide a property for any analyzed program, it is
often possible to build analysis tools that give useful answers for most realistic
programs. As the ideal analyzer does not exist, there is always room for building
more precise approximations (which is colloquially called the full employment
theorem for static program analysis designers).
    Approximative answers may be useful for finding bugs in programs, which
may be viewed as a weak form of program verification. As a case in point,
consider programming with pointers in the C language. This is fraught with
dangers such as null dereferences, dangling pointers, leaking memory, and
unintended aliases. Ordinary compilers offer little protection from pointer errors.
Consider the following small program which may perform every kind of error:
      int main(int argc, char *argv[]) {
        if (argc == 42) {
          char *p,*q;
          p = NULL;
          printf("%s",p);
    1 From this point on, we only consider Turing complete languages.
1.2 APPROXIMATIVE ANSWERS                                                         5

             q = (char *)malloc(100);
             p = q;
             free(q);
             *p = ’x’;
             free(p);
             p = (char *)malloc(100);
             p = (char *)malloc(100);
             q = p;
             strcat(p,q);
             assert(argc > 87);
         }
     }

Standard compiler tools such as gcc -Wall detect no errors in this program.
Finding the errors by testing might miss the errors (for this program, no errors
are encountered unless we happen to have a test case that runs the program
with exactly 42 arguments). However, if we had even approximative answers
to questions about null values, pointer targets, and branch conditions then
many of the above errors could be caught statically, without actually running
the program.

 Exercise 1.1: Describe all the pointer-related errors in the above program.

     Ideally, the approximations we use are conservative (or safe), meaning that all
errors lean to the same side, which is determined by our intended application.
As an example, approximating the memory usage of programs is conservative if
the estimates are never lower than what is actually possible when the programs
are executed. Conservative approximations are closely related to the concept
of soundness of program analyzers. We say that a program analyzer is sound if
it never gives incorrect results (but it may answer maybe). Thus, the notion of
soundness depends on the intended application of the analysis output, which
may cause some confusion. For example, a verification tool is typically called
sound if it never misses any errors of the kinds it has been designed to detect, but
it is allowed to produce spurious warnings (also called false positives), whereas
an automated testing tool is called sound if all reported errors are genuine, but
it may miss errors.
     Program analyses that are used for optimizations typically require soundness.
If given false information, the optimization may change the semantics of the
program. Conversely, if given trivial information, then the optimization fails to
do anything.
     Consider again the problem of determining if a variable has a constant value.
If our intended application is to perform constant propagation optimization,
then the analysis may only answer yes if the variable really is a constant and
must answer maybe if the variable may or may not be a constant. The trivial
solution is of course to answer maybe all the time, so we are facing the engineering
challenge of answering yes as often as possible while obtaining a reasonable
6                                                                              1 INTRODUCTION

analysis performance.

                              A                                          yes, definitely!
               (T, x, k)
                                Is the value of variable x
                                always equal to k when
                                T is executed?
                                                                         maybe, don’t know

    In the following chapters we focus on techniques for computing approxima-
tions that are conservative with respect to the semantics of the programming
language. The theory of semantics-based abstract interpretation presented in
Chapter 12 provides a solid mathematical framework for reasoning about ana-
lysis soundness and precision. Although soundness is a laudable goal in analysis
design, modern analyzers for real programming languages often cut corners by
sacrificing soundness to obtain better precision and performance, for example
when modeling reflection in Java [LSS+ 15].

1.3      Undecidability of Program Correctness
(This section requires familiarity with the concept of universal Turing machines;
it is not a prerequisite for the following chapters.)
     The reduction from the halting problem presented above shows that some
static analysis problems are undecidable. However, halting is often the least of
the concerns programmers have about whether their programs work correctly.
For example, if we wish to ensure that the programs we write cannot crash with
null pointer errors, we may be willing to assume that the programs do not also
have problems with infinite loops.
     Using a diagonalization argument we can show a very strong result: It is
impossible to build a static program analysis that can decide whether a given
program may fail when executed. Moreover, this result holds even if the analysis
is only required to work for programs that halt on all inputs. In other words, the
halting problem is not the only obstacle; approximation is inevitably necessary.
     If we model programs as deterministic Turing machines, program failure
can be modeled using a special fail state.2 That is, on a given input, a Turing
machine will eventually halt in its accept state (intuitively returning “yes”), in
its reject state (intuitively returning “no”), in its fail state (meaning that the
correctness condition has been violated), or the machine diverges (i.e., never
halts). A Turing machine is correct if its fail state is unreachable.
     We can show the undecidability result using an elegant proof by contradic-
tion. Assume P is a program that can decide whether or not any given total
Turing machine is correct. (If the input to P is not a total Turing machine, P ’s
output is unspecified – we only require it to correctly analyze Turing machines
that always halt.) Let us say that P halts in its accept state if and only if the
   2 Technically, we here restrict ourselves to safety properties; liveness properties can be addressed

similarly using other models of computability.
1.3 UNDECIDABILITY OF PROGRAM CORRECTNESS                                             7

given Turing machine is correct, and it halts in the reject state otherwise. Our
goal is to show that P cannot exist.
    If P exists, then we can also build another Turing machine, let us call it M ,
that takes as input the encoding e(T ) of a Turing machine T and then builds the
encoding e(ST ) of yet another Turing machine ST , which behaves as follows:
ST is essentially a universal Turing machine that is specialized to simulate T on
input e(T ). Let w denote the input to ST . Now ST is constructed such that it
simulates T on input e(T ) for at most |w| moves. If the simulation ends in T ’s
accept state, then ST goes to its fail state. It is obviously possible to create ST in
such a way that this is the only way it can reach its fail state. If the simulation does
not end in T ’s accept state (that is, |w| moves have been made, or the simulation
reaches T ’s reject or fail state), then ST goes to its accept state or its reject state
(which one we choose does not matter). This completes the explanation of how
ST works relative to T and w. Note that ST never diverges, and it reaches its fail
state if and only if T accepts input e(T ) after at most |w| moves. After building
e(ST ), M passes it to our hypothetical program analyzer P . Assuming that P
works as promised, it ends in accept if ST is correct, in which case we also let M
halt in its accept state, and in reject otherwise, in which case M similarly halts
in its reject state.
                       M
                                                              accept
                                                                         accept
           e(T )           construct e(ST )   e(ST )   P
                           from e(T )
                                                              reject
                                                                         reject

   We now ask: Does M accept input e(M )? That is, what happens if we run
M with T = M ? If M does accept input e(M ), it must be the case that P
accepts input e(ST ), which in turn means that ST is correct, so its fail state is
unreachable. In other words, for any input w, no matter its length, ST does
not reach its fail state. This in turn means that T does not accept input e(T ).
However, we have T = M , so this contradicts our assumption that M accepts
input e(M ). Conversely, if M rejects input e(M ), then P rejects input e(ST ), so
the fail state of ST is reachable for some input v. By the construction of ST , this
means that T accepts input e(T ) within |v| steps. Hence T accepts input e(T ),
and since T = M , this contradicts the assumption that M rejects input e(M ). In
conclusion, the ideal program correctness analyzer P cannot exist.

 Exercise 1.2: In the above proof, the hypothetical program analyzer P is only
 required to correctly analyze programs that always halt. Show how the proof
 can be simplified if we want to prove the following weaker property: There
 exists no Turing machine P that can decide whether or not the fail state is
 reachable in a given Turing machine. (Note that the given Turing machine is
 now not assumed to be total.)
