Foreword
In 1989 I walked into the Distributed Systems Laboratory as an
undergraduate in the Electrical Engineering department at University of
Pennsylvania and it seemed as if I didn’t leave that lab until I received a
doctorate 6 years later. Combining compute and communications has
been a professional passion ever since as I’ve lead a range of initiatives at
Intel Corporation in protecting video and audio content, bring networks
and digital technologies into the home, securing compute infrastructure,
and preparing for a new generation of distributed applications popularly
referred to as the Internet of Things (IoT).
     IoT’s connection and computerization is a pervasive trend
transforming everything we do and the infrastructure which supports
us. From smart cities and homes to Industry 4.0, enterprises, critical
infrastructure, healthcare, retail, and wearables, vast flows of data,
increasingly processed using machine learning algorithms, are altering our
existence. This unprecedented scale, pervasiveness, and interconnectivity
also creates an environment where the security and integrity of these
applications becomes a paramount concern. One only has to look to the
headlines where attacks on critical infrastructure such as power generation
and distribution, vulnerabilities in our automobiles, and malware in the
devices such as webcams, smartphones, and PCs which we bring into our
homes, highlight our collective vulnerability. Given the extensive attack
surfaces being created and the asymmetry between attackers needing to
find a single vulnerability to exploit while defenders have to find and close
all vulnerabilities, IoT creates an unmatched set of security challenges.
     During my journey, I’ve had the pleasure of working with many experts
in their respective fields. These authors are the best when it comes to

Foreword

offering practical guidance in addressing the IoT Security challenges. This
timely book will build your knowledge about the IoT security challenges
and remedies from the ground up, starting with the fundamental security
building blocks and extending into available IoT frameworks and specific
vertical applications. Please join us in the critical mission of securing IoT
applications, and by extension, our future!
                                                              — Brendan Traw
                                                            Intel Senior Fellow
                                                             Hillsboro, Oregon
                                                                       July 2019

