Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a general term describing any device used
to collect data from the world around us and then share that data across
the Internet where the data can be intelligently processed to provide
information and services. This definition can be extended to an industrial
closed loop control system where data is acquired, coalesced with related
data, transmitted to an intelligent station, analyzed, and then acted upon
to influence the environment.
     The technology consulting firm Gartner, Inc. forecasts that 20.4 billion
connected things will be in use worldwide by 2020. The total spending
on endpoints and services will reach nearly $3 trillion in 2020.1 They also
forecast that worldwide spending on IoT security2 is expected to reach $3.1
billion by 2021. In a similar study, IDC Forecasts Worldwide Technology
Spending on the Internet of Things will experience a compound annual
growth rate (CAGR) of 13.6% over the 2017–2022 forecast period and reach
$1.2 trillion in 2022.3
     The authors believe that IoT is a ripe field for not just securing the IoT
devices but also for innovations in secure system design, secure building
block technologies, and secure hardware and software development
practices that together turn the Internet of Things into the Secure Internet
of Things.

1
  w? ww.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2017-02-07-gartner-says-
   8-billion-connected-things-will-be-in-use-in-2017-up-31-percent-
   from-2016
2
    www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3869181
3
     www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=prUS43994118

    The IoT ecosystem is at an inflection point, and Intel has developed
a roadmap of products and services which comprehend this growth and
enables customers to participate in the IoT ecosystem transformation
from a collection of disjointed, vertically integrated suppliers of embedded
technologies into an ecosystem of interoperable and flexible building
block technologies. This transformation has three evolutionary phases:

          Phase 1: Connect previously unconnected devices
          through a multitude of interfaces and gateways
          eventually converging on the Cloud.

          Phase 2: Make devices smarter and more secure
          where the connected devices are empowered to
          make more important decisions and become more
          aware of their environment and context, while
          security is resiliently maintained.

          Phase 3: Increase the degree of autonomous
          operation while maintaining security where the
          smart devices require less dependence on back-end
          services – to dictate policies and to make decisions,
          becoming devices that can dynamically join or leave
          a network, can resiliently recover from failures,
          proactively update system software, and even learn
          to optimize operational efficiency.

    Up through calendar year 2018, the industry, largely, has experienced a
transition to Phase 1. We’re now seeing dramatic shifts toward Phases 2 and
3 throughout the industry. We anticipate the future will be all about making
IoT systems secure as a prerequisite to paving the way for a smarter and
more autonomous IoT. Some may argue that IoT isn’t a new phenomenon,
and some say it’s revolutionizing the compute domain where compute
happens from Edge networks to cloud services. Our perspective is that IoT is
actually both evolutionary and revolutionary – IoT will advance and reshape

the existing (brownfield) infrastructure while at the same time revolutionize
and create new (greenfield) markets, processes, and ecosystems. IoT will
disrupt some businesses, transform others, and create entirely new ones.
That is both evolutionary and revolutionary!
     In this expanding world of IoT, security becomes critical since the
attack surface expands in intricate and profound ways when connecting
billions of new and previously unconnected devices. Connecting
devices that have not historically been part of the Internet world is a
bit like throwing the innocent to the wolves. Security is a vital part of
the IoT transformation to connectedness. The data4 from the National
Vulnerability Database (NVD) pertaining to “CVSS5 Severity Distribution
Over Time” shows that during 2016–2018, the number of vulnerabilities
with medium severity tripled (3359 vs. 8912) and those with high severity
doubled (2469 vs. 4317). During the same period, the total number
of vulnerabilities almost tripled. A search6 for IoT in the NVD from
2016 to 2018 resulted in 89 hits with several critical and high severity
vulnerabilities in IIoT gateways and in other IoT devices. Therefore it is
not enough to simply connect these devices; the imperative is that these
devices authenticate mutually and authorize services all while protecting
the confidentiality, integrity, and privacy of the data they collect and share
between elements of the system. It is critical to have end-to-end security
including each element along the data and control paths from sensor and
actuator, to edge and gateway, all the way to the Cloud, protecting both the
device and their associated data, interfaces, and software. Edge devices
range from the lowest-power MCU-based devices to Intel Atom, all the way
up to high-performance Intel Core/Xeon-based platforms.

4
  h? ttps://nvd.nist.gov/general/visualizations/
   vulnerability-visualizations/cvss-severity-distribution-over-time
5
    Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) : https://nvd.nist.gov/
    vuln-metrics/cvss
6
     https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search/results?form_type=Basic&results_
     type=overview&query=IoT&search_type=last3years

     It is important to understand that the anatomy of IoT hacks is radically
different from typical consumer or enterprise computing. Consider the
example of a hypothetical shutdown of the electrical grid via a domestic,
Wi-Fi-connected oven and a ransomware attack that encrypts the firmware
in a connected oven rendering it unusable. In both cases the oven
becomes inoperable. The difference is in how the device owner needs
to respond to the outage. A systemic outage of the power grid marshals
resources to address the issue fairly quickly as the impact is more broadly
felt. This outage will garner attention from government and private sector
professionals because of its broad indiscriminate impact. Consumers
could overcome the outage by resorting to local power generation sources
to keep appliances, lights, and local networks running. Conversely, a
localized malware compromise of a single oven requires the home owner
themselves to be the first to respond and diagnose. If the malware is
virulent, and noticed by network operators, the home network may be
quarantined to prevent further spreading. The home network owner may
be required to prove to network operators that the home network is free
from malware before being reconnected. This is a significant burden
to most appliance owners – a burden many do not have the skills to
adequately carry. The IoT phenomenon brings an important paradigm
shift where the focus of our attention turns from tactile devices like a
smartphone to a network-of-networks and a system-of-systems where
the misbehavior of a few devices may have systemic consequences. And
at times those consequences may be broadly felt, while at other times fall
fully on an unsuspecting and unprepared few.
     Nevertheless, the IoT paradigm shift doesn’t seem to fully persuade
security practitioners to carefully regard the security design of every
connected device. Some even ask: What is so unique about IoT that it
requires unique security knowledge or expertise? How is it different from
say PCs and servers? What devices qualify as purely or only IoT things?
Any CPU spanning from MCU class to Atom to Core to Xeon to Xeon-SP

can be a “thing” that is connected to the Internet. So what’s unique? From
our perspective, the challenge in IoT can be framed as follows:

      •   The Device Lifecycle is unique since IoT devices often
          have a much longer replacement cycle than PCs and
          smartphones (sometimes up to 30 years). Few of us
          are still using their 10-year-old PC, but many of us can
          identify components in our offices, public buildings,
          transportation systems, HVAC systems, water treatment
          systems, and factories that may be much older. Long
          replacement cycles imply embedded systems with
          security vulnerabilities have embedded attack vectors.

      •   Security objectives and robustness rules vary greatly
          across multiple verticals/domains. Here are a few
          examples: AutoSAR and the numerous standards
          impacting the automotive domain – Automotive
          E-safety Vehicle Intrusion proTected Applications
          (EVITA)/Secure Hardware Extension (SHE)/
          AUTomotive Open System Architecture, Retail Payment
          Card Industry (PCI), Medical Health Insurance
          Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), naming
          only a few.

      •   Multiple Operating Systems must be considered in IoT
          systems to address diverse operational requirements.
          Some examples include Linux-Yocto, Wind River Linux,
          Android, Windows IoT/Enterprise/Client, VxWorks,
          QNX, and many other proprietary implementations.
          Interoperability and consistency in service operations,
          system update capabilities, and driver support are only
          a few of the obstacles encountered in supporting such a
          diverse field of operating systems on a single hardware
          platform.

       •   System on Chip (SoC) and CPU with embedded
           security capabilities and features can vary significantly
           across vendors’ MCU products and even within the
           same vendors’ products including Intel Atom, Core,
           Xeon, and Xeon-SP architectures, making design of
           end-to-end services and security more challenging.

       •   There are multiple pre-OS boot loaders and platform
           initialization software, for example, Firmware Support
           Package (FSP) + Coreboot, Intel Slim Bootloader, UEFI,
           Legacy BIOS, Deep Embedded, and other types of
           firmware that are used across the various IoT segments,
           all of which complicate IoT platform design and field
           support. Inadequate field update mechanism would
           result in attacks on initialization software implying that
           attackers are able to load and configure malware.

       •   The stakeholders are many and scattered –
           independent BIOS/boot loader vendors, board
           vendors, independent maker community design and
           integration shops, OEM/ODM, tiered SW/HW System
           Integrators, and Middleware providers. Producing a
           coalesced platform with consistent and interoperable
           features and services in such a diverse ecosystem is
           formidable. This implies security processes such as
           incident response, forensics, compliance, and system
           design must maintain healthy ecosystem interactions
           to prevent security issues from falling into the “cracks.”

       •   Hypervisors are a critical part of the security equation
           since they provide needed isolation and protection.
           Some of these include Wind River Virtualization Profile,

          Xen, VMWare, RTS, and ACRN. However, hypervisors
          also add system complexity as they impact operating
          systems, device drivers, and platform firmware.

      •   Managing these devices on heterogeneous networks
          is a huge challenge that requires a cradle-to-grave
          lifecycle approach; this includes provisioning,
          commissioning, decommissioning, software update,
          and other operational management tasks. Safety
          and regulatory aspects of security are also inherently
          present.

    Security is not just a single step but instead a journey since what is
secured this minute may not be secure the next minute and also because
security has to be comprehended in all phases of the IoT device lifecycle.
This book aims to diverge from a generic discussion of technologies
presented by existing literature. It instead strives to inform readers of the
methodology and intuition associated with implementing secure systems
that were designed to be secure and presents focused insights gathered
from the authors’ years of experience in the security domain.
    While this book represents a snapshot in time, the IoT ecosystem is
not stationary. The anatomy of threats is dynamic, and more applications
are being designed and deployed every day. The National Vulnerability
Database (NVD) mining reveals that the threats are consistently moving
down the stack, and they are now at the firmware and hardware level.
This makes constant improvement through security by design critical,
and security design cannot start with the application developer, but
must begin at the silicon design and manufacturing phase and continue
through platform development, software design, system installation, and
sustaining operations. This is where a partnership with Intel begins to pay
out enormous benefits that continue long into the system lifecycle.

    Design of IoT devices cannot consider only their own security.
IoT devices that are designed for security must still interoperate with
other devices and systems that may not be built with the same security
measures. Interoperability requires commonly accepted standards and
regulations that help ensure behavior of the singleton as well as a system of
devices is consistent from vendor to vendor and from product to product.
More standards are being created and regulations are being enacted to
address many of the IoT security concerns, including protecting the user’s
data, identity, and other valuable assets.
    Managing risk in an IoT environment is inherently a formidable task.
As Mike Crews, Director of Architecture in Intel Corporation’s Internet
of Things Group (IoTG) – a staunch believer in Security – opines, “Every
vertical domain – whether it is Retail, or Industrial, or Digital Surveillance
System – is just one ‘Jeep Hack’ incident7 away from encountering the
potential risks in not deploying and managing the security lifecycle of the
IoT Devices.” His opinion is vertical domain business owners have to be
well informed, feel responsible, and must judiciously invest in securing
their own assets as well as the assets of their customers.
    The authors believe there are three principles that support security
by design which we have interwoven throughout this book. They are by
no means trivial to achieve in real systems, and instead require a lot of
commitment from all participants in the IoT ecosystem. The principles to
evaluate features that are secure by design include

         •   Simple to Implement by leveraging relevant standard
             Application Programming Interface (API), frameworks,
             and Software Development Kits (SDK) to develop the
             IoT device

7
  www.wired.com/2015/07/hackers-remotely-kill-jeep-highway/

      •   Seamless to Deploy by leveraging relevant standard
          and scalable provisioning tools and associated
          collateral to deploy IoT devices in the field

      •   Easy to Manage by leveraging the standard
          management technologies, tools, and associated
          collateral to manage the IoT device lifecycle

     After reading this book, we anticipate readers will be empowered
with the knowledge and tools needed to recognize security trade-offs
in IoT system design and software architecture and to identify the
relevant hardware building block ingredients that underpin secure IoT
deployments. We believe the solutions presented here provide reasonable
security trade-offs and follow the secure by design principles. The chapters
of this book aim to enlighten the reader’s understanding to address the
following:

      •   Chapter 1: How the IoT ecosystem differs from the PC
          and data center ecosystem and how those differences
          impact security.

      •   Chapter 2: What are IoT frameworks and how design
          choices in different frameworks affect security,
          interoperability, and usability trade-offs.

      •   Chapter 3: What are the relevant hardware security
          features and building block technologies – as the
          authors believe, hardware security is the last line of
          defense.

      •   Chapter 4: How to approach building secure firmware,
          system software, and applications that leverage
          hardware security capabilities.

      •   Chapter 5: Which security properties affect IoT
          connectivity and what impact do they have on network
          and system designs given the IoT paradigm shift toward
          Network of Networks (NoN) and system of systems.
      •   Chapter 6: What other requirements affecting IoT
          verticals are relevant to security and why security is not
          a simple blanket but instead must be designed from the
          beginning with a foundational layer common across all
          verticals and then built up using vertical-specific stack
          components and application services. We also discuss
          key standards impacting some of the IoT verticals.

    From this book, readers will gather an overview of the different security
building blocks available in Intel Architecture (IA)–based IoT platforms.
Readers will also be able to understand the threat pyramid, secure boot,
chain of trust, and the SW stack leading up to defense in depth. Readers
will also be able to comprehend the connectivity interfaces with security
implications and IoT verticals with their unique security requirements and
associated standards and regulations.
    We invite you to join us on our journey demystifying IoT security!

