CHAPTER 1

Conceptualizing
the Secure Internet
of Things
In this chapter we relate several iconic attacks on cyber-physical IoT
systems to illustrate the clever ways attackers are able to achieve their
objectives. The physicality of cyber-physical systems and resource
limitations of constrained IoT devices present new challenges, both for
attackers and systems designers. This chapter explores security trade-off
consequences resulting from design decisions aimed at reducing device
cost. We advocate more enlightened perspectives that consider the value
of the device in terms of the broader network and system value. The
security front line often is a constrained device requiring world-class
security capabilities such as hardware underpinnings for cryptography,
integrity protection, storage, and attestation. Devices that don’t provide
the basic building blocks of security are the weak links in the system –
which systems designers aim to quarantine.

© The Author(s) 2020                                                         1
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8_1

 The BadUSB Thumb Drive
In 2014 Karsten Nohl and Jacob Lell presented proof-of-concept
malicious software at Black Hat USA 20141 that demonstrated how USB
is fundamentally broken. The malware infects USB firmware rather than
simply placing malicious applications on the storage area. USB firmware
is trusted by most every USB controller to behave properly, as defined by
the USB Consortium specifications.2 However, as long as USB firmware
works within the framework defined by the standard, malware can
cause the USB controller to give the USB firmware unintended access to
the host computer. This is unfortunate as the lack of attention given to
security implies a potential for exploits that includes key-logging, privilege
escalation, data exfiltration, identity and access misdirection, session
hijacking, and denial-of-service.
     Karsten and Jacob not only published their findings but also published
the malware on an open source repository known as GitHub.3 This
means virtually anyone can construct their own USB attack device and
even improve upon the original design. There have even been “how-to”
publications4 that step the reader through the process, making it easier
than ever for even those without prior knowledge of USB architecture and
implementation to successfully build an attack device.
     Subsequently, the “maker community”5 has picked up on BadUSB
by creating a business around hardware platforms that have BadUSB
preintegrated called “MalDuino”6 – a play on words involving a popular

1
  w? ww.blackhat.com/us-14/speakers/Karsten-Nohl.html
2
    www.usb.org/home
3
     https://github.com/brandonlw/Psychson
4
      https://null-byte.wonderhowto.com/how-to/make-your-own-bad-usb-0165419/
5
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maker_culture
6
        www.indiegogo.com/projects/malduino-badusb-arduino-usb#/

“maker” platform named Arduino.7 Using MalDuino as a development
platform, it is possible for attackers to integrate other interesting malware
designed to further infiltrate the victim computer or network. Often an
attacker exploits a vulnerability in order to stage an attack on another
vulnerability. Attack lethality can be amplified by linking several exploits
that expose larger attack surfaces and allow the attacker to marshal more
resources for the next attack. An attack that began as a compromise of
something without network connectivity may morph into a compromise
of resources with network connectivity – that broadens the attacker’s reach
and lethality.

A
  ir-Gap Security
Some of the most secure networks rely on “air-gap” security as a way
to prevent the spread of malware through interconnected networks.
Air-gap is an isolation technique that ensures there are no wired or
wireless connections between a highly sensitive network and one that
is commonly accessible to everyone, such as the Internet. The security
principle behind air-gapping is to establish physical isolation such
that in order to move information back and forth between the secure
network and other networks, there needs to be a mechanical system in
place – euphemistically termed a “sneaker-net.” The idea is that only
trustworthy people would have physical access to the air-gap and would
follow appropriate security practices and procedures that ensure sensitive
networks do not fall victim to the many attack scenarios found on public
networks.
     However, air-gaps rely on the use of electronic media to “sneaker-net”
information to and from air-gapped networks. This often involves the use
of USB connected peripherals. The assumption is that a device that isn’t

7
  www.arduino.cc

capable of sending or receiving electromagnetic emanations is safe to cross
an air-gap. The fallacy of this assumption, of course, is they are not safe as
evidenced by BadUSB.
    Air-gap security has a significant usability downside in that it is
costly to deploy, doesn’t scale well, and isn’t forward looking. The next
generation of industrial IoT looks to other network security mechanisms
such as VLANs that segment networks that isolate manufacturing
equipment behind routers, static/dynamic whitelisting, and zoning/
quarantining using network firewalls.
    The lesson learned by air-gap security is that attention to usability
cannot be ignored. Security mechanisms must be designed with all
other system requirements taken into consideration to find the security
mechanisms that optimize trade-offs.

S
  tuxnet
“Stuxnet”8 is the name given to a malware found to have successfully
infiltrated a top security nuclear research facility in Iran in June 2010.
The Natanz uranium enrichment facility employed air-gap security
mechanisms due to the safety critical aspect of the uranium enrichment
process. Furthermore, uranium enrichment processes rely on SCADA
(Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition) systems that are commonly
used for industrial control because of their ability to precisely control
physical machinery and remain resilient in the face of physical system
failures, but also incorporate popular information messaging protocols
such as MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport), AMQP (Advanced
Message Queuing Protocol), and DDS (Data Distribution Service).

8
 w? ww2.cs.arizona.edu/~collberg/Teaching/466-566/2012/Resources/
  presentations/2012/topic9-final/report.pdf

    SCADA systems may use programmable logic controllers (PLCs) and
a variety of other sensors and actuators that can be customized to suit the
needs of the particular mechanical operations in a plant or factory. PLCs
often have USB interfaces for uploading the control logic executed by the
PLC, but also support serial bus interfaces and protocols such as Modbus
or 4-20mA current loops that transfer information reliably and with less
wiring and setup. Unfortunately, these techniques did not anticipate
security or are simply incapable of stopping attackers who have physical
access.
    Stuxnet employed a variety of techniques, some seemingly designed
as alternative attack strategies in case some other strategy failed to pan
out. Among them included a strategy to propagate the Stuxnet malware
using Internet “Futbol”–themed web sites. Ultimately, Stuxnet found a
way to program USB thumb drives that were used to update PLCs used for
uranium enrichment centrifuges.
    Stuxnet ultimately was able to cause physical damage to centrifuges
by working within the tolerance specifications of the control system, but
stealthily controlling the centrifuges to spin faster than usual for longer
than usual or to adjust the rate of acceleration and deceleration in ways
that exceeded the mechanical designer’s expected use case scenarios.
    Although there still remains controversy over who created Stuxnet
and whether it was targeting Iranian nuclear enrichment or not, statistics
gathered by Symantec9 suggest there were unintended consequences in
the form of compromise to “friendly” or untargeted installations. While
the majority of infections, 58.85%, occurred in Iran, the remaining 41.15%
affected other countries; 8.31% occurred in India, 18.22% in Indonesia, and
1.56% in the United States. 13.05% occurred in other parts of the world.
    Stuxnet is interesting because it demonstrates the possibility for
information systems to cross over to operational systems in such a way that
physical systems, infrastructure, the environment, and ultimately human

9
  “W32.StuxNet”. Symantec. 17 September 2010. Retrieved 2 March 2011.

life can be harmed using only commonly available inexpensive electronics
and software.
     It marks the fusion of Information Technology (IT) with Operational
Technology (OT). The acronym Internet of Things (IoT) takes on an
additional and apropos meaning of Informational and Operational
Technology (IOT).

  esigning Safe and Secure Cyber-Physical
D
Systems
The preceding attack scenarios suggest we need to revisit past assumptions
that electronic equipment is “secure” because of physical and air-gap
isolation is incorrect. The presence of electronic “things” may be sufficient
for some form of “networking” to be implemented involving the exchange of
electronic things and therefore the exchange of malware that can transform
to take advantage of different attack vectors. A more enlightened view of
IoT may be the idea that the interconnection of all networks – including the
exchange of physical things containing information – is the Internet.
     Applying this view of the Internet, there are two additional layers to
classes of computers10 that historically fit into three categories: (1) cloud
servers largely composed of mainframes and super computers; (2) mini
computers such as workstations and department or team servers; (3)
microcomputers such as PCs, laptops, tablets, and smartphones.
     IoT more commonly refers to a fourth layer consisting of smart cars,
drones, wearable computing, and pervasive computing. However, a fifth
layer consists of everything else that is electronic including USB thumb
drives, cameras, MEMS,11 smart construction materials, and “Smartdust.”12

10
   h? ttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Classes_of_computers
11
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microelectromechanical_systems
12
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smartdust

    The layering of technology has many non-security related benefits, but
technology layers can present new security challenges. The interaction
between layers is often not well understood or clearly specified. This can
result in exploitable security weaknesses. Security analysis and design
scope should therefore be expanded to include these other layers. Another
aspect of security analysis is to determine the “attack surface”13 – the
environment or sum of all points where an unauthorized user can try to
extract information or inject control not anticipated by system designers.
A basic tenant of security design is to keep attack surface small to limit the
potential for unanticipated interactions.
    The attack surface of IoT can be viewed as a pyramid (Figure 1-1)
where the number of possible interactions is a function of the number of
possible “things.” Although cloud servers process large workloads, there
are only a few cloud servers in terms of possible points of interaction.
Cloud servers expose commonly used web interfaces that do largely a
small set of things, but in large volumes.
    The IoT pyramid also illustrates the importance of defense in depth
as nodes at opposite ends of the pyramid tend to be separated by routers,
gateways, and other networking equipment that can be repurposed as
security enforcement. Network segmentation reduces the effective attack
surface by artificially isolating IoT nodes.
    Intel predicts there will be 200 billion “objects” by the year 2020.14
An object is anything that is “smart” – that is anything that has a
microcontroller of some kind. If we consider relative population of
objects across a five-layer IoT pyramid, the number of objects is roughly
exponentially larger in the layer below and the layer above is exponentially
smaller. A simple calculation showing exponential distribution across five
layers reveals approximately 1.4B objects at the top layer, 1.9B objects at

13
  h? ttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Attack_surface
14
    www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-things/infographics/
    guide-to-iot.html

the second layer, 3.6B objects at the third layer, 13.4B objects at the fourth
layer, and an amazing 179B objects at the fifth layer.

                                  Less                             Cloud
                               Constrained                        Servers      Few

                                   IT
                                                   Enterprise
                                                   Servers &
     Roots-            IoT                        Workstations
       of-     IP    Frame-
      trust          works
                                                   Laptops,
                                                                            Number
                                                Phones, Tablets,
                                                                              of
                                             Networking Equipment
                                                                            Devices

                                             Automation, Wearables,
                                              Cars, Transportation,
                                             Drones, Medical, Energy
     Future? Future? Future?       OT
                                           MEMS, Construction
                                  More        materials,
                               Constrained    Smart dust                      Many
                                         Internet-of-Things Pyramid

Figure 1-1. Internet of Things pyramid

    Amazon had around 2M cloud servers and 1M customers in 2014.15
Alibaba had 765,000 customers in June 2017.16 Microsoft, IBM, Google, and
others also have cloud service offerings that contribute to an estimate in
terms of number of cloud server objects that could very well be in the 1B
range by 2020.

15
   w? ww.bloomberg.com/news/2014-11-14/5-numbers-that-illustrate-the-
    mind-bending-size-of-amazon-s-cloud.html
16
     https://intl.aliyun.com/about

    In 2015, it was estimated there were 2.6B smartphones17 and predicted
to be 6.1B by 2020. There were about 2B PCs and laptops in 2014.18 Our
simple calculation suggests there would be 3.6B objects at layer 3 – off by a
factor of 1.5 or 2, but still in the ballpark.
    Even with conservative estimates, these account for only 10B of the
200B forecasted. If layer 4 accounts for 15B objects, that leaves 175B
objects unaccounted for at layers 1–4. These estimates suggest, by far, that
layer 5 represents the largest attack surface. That suggests there will be
many more “Stuxnet”-like attack scenarios going forward. It also suggests
mitigation of these attacks will be countered by additional security
capabilities being applied to layer 4 and layer 5 objects.
    Security capabilities often are required across a spectrum of
technologies ranging from hardware to system software to application
layers. IoT security also embraces network security and distributed
computing security techniques. The potential exists to substantially
increase the overall cost and complexity of security functionality for IoT
systems. As security professionals anticipate the role security should play
given an Internet of 200B connected things, security interoperability and
standards are increasingly needed at layers 4 and 5 of the IoT pyramid.
This includes the need for hardware-roots-of-trust (specially hardened
components in hardware that resist many common vulnerabilities),
common networking layers, and common IoT framework and object
models. Consolidation of technology choices has a desirable consequence
of allowing more security functionality to fit into constrained computing
environments.

17
   h? ttps://techcrunch.com/2015/06/02/6-1b-smartphone-users-globally-by-
    2020-overtaking-basic-fixed-phone-subscriptions/
18
     www.reference.com/technology/many-computers-world-e2e980daa5e128d0

 Constrained Computing and Moore’s Law
In 1965 Gordon Moore made a prediction that computing would dramatically
increase in power, and decrease in relative cost, at an exponential pace.19 The
computing industry perspective historically has been one that continually
looks for “power-hungry” applications that can soak up the predicted CPU
cycles. Ironically, that pursuit has led the computing industry to push the
IoT pyramid higher and wider, but only recently has realized a frontier in
the form of many (billions) chips that are power constrained. In constrained
computing environment, the application that runs on a chip is quite small
and functionally is relatively simple. The path to realizing Moore’s Law is
through the number of chips – increasing in number exponentially.
     Rather than consolidating more workloads on increasingly more
powerful computers, constrained computing is about distributing
workloads across hundreds, thousands, and even millions of nodes.
Distributed applications are described more in terms of conceptual notions
of computing such as “pervasive,” “mobile,” “intelligent,” “autonomous,”
“perceptual,” “virtual,” “emotional,” and “augmented.” These adjectives
describe properties of computation that are realized in large part due to
distributed computing that bridges the five layers of the IoT pyramid.
     Constrained computing dynamics optimizes the computing
environment to fit specialized functions. The function is unique to sensor/
actuator capability. Hence, enhancing a distributed application may be
realized by adding constrained nodes as well as by adding more powerful
nodes or by moving compute-intensive operations to edge servers.
     These dynamics aim to provide more flexibility at the lower layers
of the technology stack by using, for example, virtualized PLCs where
manufacturing equipment can be consolidated into more powerful
gateways running multiple, redundant servers that are less expensive to

19
  w? ww.intel.com/content/www/us/en/silicon-innovations/moores-law-
   technology.html

operate than deployments of multiple less powerful devices. Non-mission
critical sensing over wireless technologies is an important trend where
the cost driver is low-power sensing solutions (sometimes retrofitted
with brownfield sensors and actuators) designed to operate without
replacement over many years. Deployment models such as this don’t
anticipate having extra watts for security processing.
     Security however follows a counterintuitive cost model (Figure 1-­2)
where the motivation is to make nodes more powerful – so they can
perform security processing that applies security consistently across all
nodes. Workload consolidation, data consolidation, and redundancy
result in the deployment of additional nodes or more powerful nodes – all
requiring consistently strong security capabilities and hardening.
     In the Stuxnet scenario, attackers were able to connect USB thumb
drives to air-gapped process control networks because the USB thumb
drive didn’t have strong cryptography and authentication protections built
into the IO control subsystem. Such sophisticated security operations
are often determined to be “too costly” to justify bills-of-material cost
constraints typically expected in “mass market” products.
     Security functionality overhead for layer 1–3 systems typically is
expected to be 10–15% of the total system cost. These environments
are often very capable of supporting a common set of security features,
algorithms, and operations such that the goal of having a network of
equivalently protected computers is achieved. However, when moving
compute into constrained environments, even with the dynamics of Moore’s
Law, computing power remains constrained. As such, the percentage
of overall functionality that is security related vs. non-­security related
increases. Our estimates suggest that as much as 60% of a constrained
environment computer could be focused on performing security-related
computation, leaving 40% for application-specific computing. In other
words, the “tinification” (the process of removing unused functionality
not needed by purpose-built embedded systems) of an application to fit
into constrained environments results in the need to preserve more of

the security functionality than the non-security functionality. This leads
business decision makers to question the viability of profits in constrained
environments. Often these trade-off decisions lead to justification for
weaker security, lack of firmware update capability, and no support for
hardware root-of-trust architectures. These economic dynamics have
led leading security thinkers to suggest the only resolution is through
regulation.20 However, regulation aimed at even the most insignificant of IoT
platforms would affect over 170B things – 85% of everything! If regulation
happens to have inefficiencies, those inefficiencies would be multiplied
170B times – a cost that could outweigh the cost of smartly applied security.

                    85%
 Resource
 Utilization
                                 “tini-fication”
                               scales differently
                                  for security
                                 functionality
                                                                   40%
                    15%
                                                                   60%
                   Less                                           More
                Constrained           Security Functionality   Constrained
                  Device              Other Functionality        Device

Figure 1-2. Nonlinear “tinification” of security vs. other functionality

20
   www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2017/02/security_and_th.html

 Trusted IoT Networks and the Network Edge
The Internet of Things is a new term to describe an old concept –
connected embedded computing. For as long as there has been electronic
control, there has been connected embedded computing. Every dimension
of process control and automation is characterized by a flavor of
connected embedded control technology.21 In most cases, process control
networks were connected using wires. This is no different a phenomenon
for IP networks that first began as Ethernet22 cable. More recently wireless
communications dominate applications where mobility or deployment
considerations make using wires infeasible. Nevertheless, the array of
wireless networking standards23 has evolved to take the place of wired
equivalents. However, convergence toward a single network protocol
remains a promise of IoT which anticipates that IPv6 (Internet Protocol)24
will become the foundation of IoT networks – and by extension the entire
Internet. Nevertheless, there are non-IP protocols that sometimes are
included under the umbrella of the IoT buzz word such as Bluetooth25
and Zigbee.26 Although these are not technically IP, there are strategies to
encapsulate IP over non-IP networks using 6LoWPAN27 to support larger
payloads, compression, and framing that otherwise would not be feasible.
IPv6 encapsulation is currently supported with Bluetooth Low Energy
(BLE) 5, IEEE 802.15.4, and ZigBee.
     The interesting security challenge for encapsulated or bridged
networks (Figure 1-3) is the expectation of end-to-end security is often

21
   h? ttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_automation_protocols
22
     www.safaribooksonline.com/library/view/ethernet-the-definitive/
     1565926609/ch01.html
23
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Comparison_of_wireless_data_standards
24
       www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2460.txt
25
        www.bluetooth.com/specifications/bluetooth-core-specification
26
         www.zigbee.org/zigbee-for-developers/network-specifications/
27
          https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4944

not possible since security applied within one suite of IoT network
technology must be mapped, in the clear, to an Internet-based protocol
suite. This creates the need for a security appliance, such as a firewall, that
maps not only distributed application data but also security semantics
and operations. We show a simple security appliance example here.
Subsequent chapters provide additional insights into network partitioning,
monitoring, and responses facilitated by security appliances.

                                                    Trusted
                                                    Devices

                                       loT
                                      Device

                                            loT
                                           Device

                              loT
                             Device                             Trust
                                                              Negotiation
                        X               Firewall

                                                                    Device
                     loT               loT           loT           with root-
                    Device            Device        Device          of-trust

                             Untrusted Devices

Figure 1-3. Negotiating trust with IoT devices

   IoT networks are in a constant state of flux forming and re-forming
coalitions of devices needed to implement a variety of distributed
applications. We use the term “onboarding” to refer to this dynamic.
Devices not yet recognized as members of a coalition are considered

“untrusted,” while devices already part of the coalition are considered
“trusted.” Membership in the coalition involves trust negotiation where
the device presents evidence of trustworthiness; for example, the device
may be equipped with a “root-of-trust” hardened environment containing
a manufacturer embedded attestation key. The root-of-trust is designed to
meet a set of security features and assurances as a basis for trust. Secure
key storage and secure cryptographic operations are important capabilities
of a root-of-trust that can be used to implement attestation.
     Attestation protocols (Figure 1-4) allow the root-of-trust to prove to a
verifier that it is capable of protecting secrets, identities, and data. When
an untrusted device is onboarded into a coalition, it first attests to its
level of trustworthiness. This allows the attestation verifier to determine
if the desired coalition is appropriate or if some other coalition is more
appropriate. For example, a coalition of medical devices might expect
all coalition member devices to have been approved by a quality control
agency and receive a statement of approval that could be included with the
attestation exchange at onboarding. If omitted, the verifier might conclude
the device hasn’t been vetted by the agency and recommend it join a
coalition of personal health fitness devices (that don’t require agency
vetting).
     The attestation verifier is a process that operates at a border
that separates trusted and untrusted. In practice, these borders are
nondescript. They may not align with geographic, topologic, social, or
political boundaries. Likewise, such boundary criteria could also be
asserted as part of attestation (if combined with additional contextual
information), making enforcement of such bounding criteria eminently
possible.
     Attestation is a form of operational integrity checking that can be
pervasive. IoT nodes should respond to changes that might invalidate
recent checks and respond proactively by updating integrity profiles and
rechecking. If an attack is successful, the attestation check can detect it and
respond appropriately.

           IoT                                                 IoT
         Device                    Trust                     Device
        (trusted)               Negotiation                  (edge)
                                 (protocol)
                         May I join your network?

                            Can you be trusted?

                             Yes, here is proof

                     Use these settings in my network

Figure 1-4. Attestation protocol
     IoT can therefore be thought of as a connectivity graph where certain
nodes are simultaneously connected to multiple other coalitions of
connected nodes. The connectivity graph reveals relative importance
of certain nodes but also relative security and safety risk as more
highly connected nodes represent a greater potential for doing harm if
compromised or malfunctioning.
     Attestation therefore can be thought of as a fundamental capability for
anything that is connected. It provides a first-order filter that categorizes
IoT devices according to the risk they bring to the established coalition. If
we consider all ventures as being composed of a collection of IoT devices,
whether they be Smartdust or whether they are cloud servers, the value of
the venture is collectively held by the coalition. The introduction of a new
IoT device that may have the potential to nullify that value creates the basis
for risk-based management approach that relies primarily on attestation and
root-of-trust as the primary tools for value preservation and risk management.

    An IoT root-of-trust (Figure 1-5) can be constructed in a variety of ways
and can vary dramatically in terms of implementation and deployment
costs. However, all root-of-trust designs have several minimum capabilities.
First the IoT device is partitioned into trusted and traditional functionality.
Traditional functionality is everything that isn’t essential to satisfying coalition
onboarding requirements. An IoT device that can’t satisfy onboarding is
simply an embedded or stand-alone device. It isn’t a “connected” device – at
least not a trusted connected device. Trusted functionality is everything else
that is needed to satisfy coalition onboarding and is trusted to work correctly.

                                IoT Root-of-trust

                                      Device

                               Other functionality

                       Trusted Execution Environment
                                   (TEE)
          Contextual awareness
                                                   Secure storage
              functionality

                                                   Authentication
           Security functionality
                                                       keys

          Secure communication                        Encryption
              functionality                             keys

           Attestation and Trust                     Attestation
               functionality                             key

Figure 1-5. Root-of-trust architecture

     Trusted computing is defined by TechTarget28 as “Trusted computing is a
broad term that refers to technologies and proposals for resolving computer
security problems through hardware enhancements and associated software
modifications.” Wikipedia29 defines a trusted system as “… a system that is
relied upon to a specified extent to enforce a specified security policy. This is
equivalent to saying that a trusted system is one whose failure would break a
security policy (if a policy exists that the trusted system is trusted to enforce).”
     The most essential elements of a trusted system are its trusted
computing base (TCB). The TCB of a computer system is the set of all
hardware, firmware, and/or software components that are critical to its
security, in the sense that bugs or vulnerabilities occurring inside the TCB
might jeopardize the security properties of the entire system.
     Some devices have a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) for
executing trusted application code. The TCB and TEE cooperate to
ensure embedded security functionality can be accessed from within the
TEE without a significant security risk. Bugs and vulnerability in these
components jeopardize the security properties of the device. The TEE
may be effective at detecting, preventing, or countering security events
occurring in other parts of the system. It is therefore extremely important
that every IoT device have a trustworthy TCB!
     The authors suggest every TCB for IoT should contain the following:

     (A) Attestation key: An asymmetric key supplied by
         the device manufacturer that establishes device
         origin authenticity. The Enhanced Privacy Identifier
         (EPID)30 can be used to attest device origin without

28
   h? ttp://searchsecurity.techtarget.com/definition/trusted-computing
29
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trusted_system
30
      Proceedings: WPES ‘07 Proceedings of the 2007 ACM workshop on Privacy in
     electronic society, pp 21-30, Alexandria, Virginia, USA – October 29, 2007, ACM
     New York, NY, USA ©2007, ISBN: 978-1-59593-883-1 doi>
     https://doi.org/10.1145/1314333.1314337

          introducing a trackable identifier that violates
          privacy.

     (B) Attestation functionality: Trusted code that
         implements attestation and attestation verification
         logic.

     (C) Encryption keys: Symmetric and asymmetric keys
         used to protect device-device and device-human
         interactions that may occur in the context of a
         coalition.

     (D) Secure communication: Trusted code that
         implements cryptographic algorithms used
         to protect the confidentiality and integrity of
         information exchanged between devices and TCB
         peers. It contains support for key management
         protocols such as Kerberos,31 PKI,32 and Fluffy.33
     (E) Authentication keys: Symmetric and asymmetric
         keys used to authenticate the originators of
         messages exchanged device-device and device-
         human, also in the context of a coalition.

     (F) Authentication functionality: Trusted code that
         implements identity and authentication primitives
         including support for distributed authentication
         protocols such as OAuth234 and OpenID Connect.35

31
   h? ttps://web.mit.edu/kerberos/
32
     www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc5280.txt
33
      https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-hardjono-ace-fluffy/
34
       https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749
35
        http://openid.net/connect/

     (G) Secure storage: The ability to store keys, integrity
         measurements (cryptographic hash), whitelists,
         settings, and contextual information that if modified
         or deleted could result in failure of the TCB to
         correctly apply a security objective.

     (H) Contextual awareness functionality: Trusted code
         that can encrypt and authenticate stored data
         securely even if the attacker has physical access to
         the storage resource. The ability to sense and collect
         security relevant context such as time, location,
         biometrics, and other context.

      (I) Trusted execution environment functionality:
          Trusted code that correctly implements the TEE
          environment such that the TEE firmware can be
          updated securely and computing interfaces into the
          TEE are resistant to attack.

   These security “building blocks” provide the core set of hardened
functionalities that enables an IoT device to establish itself as a trustworthy
node suitable for inclusion in one or more coalition groups of IoT devices.
Once a member of a coalition group, a distributed application can be
deployed securely.

 Conclusion
The Internet of Things can be described as a dynamic set of distributed
computing coalition groups that come into existence seemingly on their
own, without a presumption of central control or orchestration. Coalition
groups may just as easily disappear, but IoT networks persist as a set of
protocols, data structures, and capabilities that enable these dynamics.
A secure IoT network is essential to a sustainable and automated distributed

computing on a massive scale where the tiniest of computing nodes needs
to support a set of security capabilities that is common to all other nodes
in the Internet including the largest cloud servers. Coalitions of devices
will work together to manage risk and to preserve the value inherent in
the distributed computing venture by vetting coalition memberships.
Failure to enforce membership integrity places at risk the value of the
coalition. These economic dynamics, once properly understood, motivate
proper investment in security capabilities, even among the simplest of
IoT devices. This leads to a rethinking for conventional practices that
assume security functionality should be less than 15–10% of total system
cost. Rather, we think an enlightened approach considers the value of
the network is greater than the sum of its constrained endpoints. The
cost of security is weighed against the larger value where the percentage
investment in security technology, standards, and business practices is
aligned. Such a perspective will make it more feasible for most relevant IoT
security technology to exist at the right layers of the IoT pyramid.

                Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms
                of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included
in the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise
in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder.

