CHAPTER 2

IoT Frameworks
and Complexity
      The complexity of things – the things within things – just seems
      to be endless. I mean nothing is easy, nothing is simple.
                                                               —Alice Munro1

I? ntroduction
In Chapter 1 we explored device cost dynamics when security is built-in
from the beginning. Either the cost of the device increases or the ratio
of device resources attributed to non-security-related functionality
decreases. However, ignoring security results in the IoT device
becoming the “weak link.” This chapter surveys IoT frameworks. We
categorized them according to a consumer, industrial, or manageability
focus though many seek broader relevance. IoT frameworks hide a
lot of underlying complexity as the industry wrestles with embracing
newer Internet protocols while maintaining backward compatibility. A
plethora of standards setting groups have come to the rescue offering

1
  www.brainyquote.com/quotes/alice_munro_176434
© The Author(s) 2020                                                           23
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8_2

insightful perspectives on framework design to accommodate broader
interoperability goals. But this may be too much of a good thing as
framework interoperability has become yet another interoperability
challenge. Framework designs often emphasize differing objectives,
interoperability, adaptability, performance, and manageability. We offer
an idealized framework that focuses on security to add contrast to what
the industry already has considered. This chapter is lengthy relative
to the other chapters in part because there are many IoT framework
standards available and each takes a different perspective. Each has
merit but ultimately the IoT ecosystem is likely to reduce the number of
viable frameworks. We nevertheless encourage continued IoT framework
evolution that removes unnecessary complexity and places security by
design at the center.

 Historical Background to IoT
Before the “Internet of Things” became a commonly used term, embedded
control networks used for real-time distributed control were known as
process automation protocols, also referred to as fieldbuses. Fieldbuses
are commonly used to implement SCADA (Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition) networks, building automation, industrial process control,
and manufacturing control networks. These systems tend to be extremely
complex and difficult to manage, especially over time as the number
of system endpoints grows and the usages demanded of these systems
increase. SCADA systems often involve connecting programmable logic
controllers (PLCs), proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controllers,
sensors, actuators, and supervisory management consoles, all connected
through fieldbus protocols. But fieldbus technology isn’t limited to a single
protocol or even a small number of protocols. There have been more than
a hundred fieldbus protocols entering industrial automation markets

in the last 20 years. The IEC-61158-12 and related standards describing
fieldbus technologies contain over 18 families of fieldbus protocols. Some
of these include CAN bus, BACnet, EtherCAT, Modbus, MTConnect,
LonTalk, and ProfiNet. Wikipedia also has a fairly complete listing.3 The
Complexity can skyrocket when multiple fieldbus protocols are used
to create an interconnected system. Then, with the birth of IoT, these
fieldbus protocols are required to interconnect with Internet protocols,
in some cases by replacing a fieldbus layer with an IP layer, which adds
further complexity. When IoT systems are built to integrate with existing
systems, based on fieldbus protocols, IoT systems are sometimes referred
to as brownfield IoT because they represent use cases, ecosystems, and
solutions that existed before the introduction of Internet technologies.
Looking forward, industrial process automation and control, building
automation, electrical grid automation, and automobile automation
might continue using brownfield IoT nomenclature even though Internet
technology integration is taking place.
      Nevertheless, existing brownfield systems are highly proprietary and
vertically integrated solutions, while Internet protocols historically have
been more open and layered and support a richer ecosystem of vendors
and value-added suppliers. Reducing fragmentation of brownfield
networks through IT/OT convergence is a key motivation for IoT. Possibly
it is this openness and richness of the Internet that drives the OT industry
toward an “Internet of Things.” Additionally, with respect to security, IT
priorities have focused on CIA (confidentiality, integrity, and availability),
in that order, while OT has prioritized availability and integrity above
confidentiality. The tension between CIA trade-offs is an important
consideration as the IT and OT come closer together.

2
  I? EC 61158-1:2019 “Industrial communication networks - Fieldbus specifications -
   Part 1: Overview and guidance for the IEC 61158 and IEC 61784 series”,
   International Standard, Ed. 2.0, 2019-04-10. Available at: https://webstore.iec.
   ch/publication/59890
3
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_automation_protocols

    Instead of using existing system as the starting point, the Internet of
Things can bring a fresh perspective. Extending Internet connectivity
beyond desktops, laptops, smartphones, data centers, cloud computing,
and enterprise computing to agricultural, industrial, energy, health,
transportation, public sector, and critical infrastructure seems a
reasonable context for understanding the momentum behind the Internet
of Things (IoT) evolution. The use of IoT technology to implement a
completely new IoT system spawns unique applications for operational
automation; building such a system with wholly new technology and
protocols is sometimes referred to as greenfield IoT technology. Some
examples may include drone control, self-driving cars, smart cities, supply
chain automation, and machine learning. Greenfield IoT is riding the
Internet wave of less-proprietary, lower-cost, and increasingly ubiquitous
network technology that revolutionized PC, data center, and mobile
device networks in the 1990s and 2000s. IoT may also benefit from the
wave of microprocessor, memory, power, and storage innovations in
mobile computing that results in lower-cost but highly capable computing
platforms.
    Whether the system is a brownfield system tying existing industrial
or manufacturing automation control system with Internet technology
or a greenfield system using completely new protocols and devices, both
instances of IoT systems bring a level of intricacy that necessitates some
abstractions to improve application development efficiency and to make
management of these systems feasible.
    But it isn’t just the protocols that generate complexity in IoT systems.
Industrial IoT systems may have multiple layers of networks connected
through gateways. IoT systems may best be categorized as a system of
systems. As security practitioners contemplating the prospect of securing a
complex system of systems, we must take every opportunity to ask whether

the complexity is justified because we, like other security practitioners,
believe complexity is the enemy of security.4

I? oT Ecosystem
The IoT ecosystem is extremely complicated, fragmented, and evolving. It
evolves at different rates depending on many factors, one of which is the
replacement cycle for a given solution or industry. The replacement cycle
for business PCs is 3–5 years, smartphone replacement is 1–3 years. Contrast
this with building automation where an HVAC system replacement cycle is
15–20 years or nuclear power generation facilities that must replace failing
parts with identical replacement parts – leaving no room for the introduction
of innovative or more secure technologies. These refresh rates either speed
adoption of new technologies or restrict, even inhibit, the adoption of
technologies that might improve operations, reduce costs, or even protect lives.
     Due to the many differences in various sectors of the IoT ecosystem
(e.g., health, public, transportation, industrial, energy), the sectors appear
to embrace Internet technology differently – in silos (refer to Figure 2-1).
However, the market forces keeping the silos defined are due in part to the
technical requirements unique to the usages and applications that drive
internal market cohesion. Brownfield solutions may have benefitted from
proprietary or vertically integrated solutions, aided by these cohesive
market forces, long replacement cycles, and costly specialized hardware
components. But that is unlikely to persist as IoT innovations continue
to find technology adjacencies that spill over silo barriers causing
technological disruptive innovation. Generally, this is a good thing.
However, these disruptive forces breaking down the proprietary silos
also brings new challenges that impacts security in the form of increased
complexity, new business models and unanticipated interactions.

4
   om Gillis, Contributor, Network World, “Complexity is the enemy of security,”
 T
 Aug 8, 2016. www.networkworld.com/article/3103474/security/complexity-
 is-the-enemy-of-security.html

Just as the changes in Internet protocols brought more complexity to PC
networks in the 1990’s, Internet of Things technologies promise more
complexity (at least initially) for industrial, control and automation systems.

           IoT Analytics - Quantifying the connected world
                                                            Internet of Things - Market segmentation by industry/application
          Global                                                                                    IoT world market
           level
                                       1                                                                                                        2
                                            Consumer-facing                                                                                              Business-facing
     Customer type
                                                (loT2C)                                                                                                       (loT2B)
                         1a                1b               1c            1d                     2a               2b              2c                2d               2e                2f              2g                2h
     Main category            Home              Lifestyle        Health        Mobility               Retail           Health          Energy            Mobility         Cities        Manufact.           Public&             Other
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Services
                           Home             Wearable     Fitness     Connected                      Stores         Monitoring   Transmission&        Aerospace&       Infrastructure    Mining            Schools             Environment
                           automation       computing    Monitoring  cars                           Shops          Measurement Distribution          Airports         Water/            Oil&Gas           Universities        Military
                           Home             Entertain-   Measurement eBikes                         Convenience    Diagnosis    Fossil               Marine           Wastewater        Discrete          Government          Agriculture
                           improvement      ment & Music Diagnosis                                                 Surgery      Nuclear              Rail&Stations    HVAC              production        Banking             Hospitality
                           Energy           Family                                                                 Patient care Alternative                           Lighting
       Industries/         efficiency
                                                                                                                                                     Automotive                         Contin.           Insurance
                                            Leisure                                                                                                                   Security          Production        Admin-
      applications                                                                                                                                   Traffic
                                            Pets                                                                                                                      Life safety       Supply Chain      istration
                                            Toys                                                                                                                                                          Commercial
                                            Drones                                                                                                                                                        services

    We consider the following application as adjacent to the Internet of Things but not part of it: Car sharing, ePayment

                                                                                                                                For more information, go to www.iot-analytics.com           IoT-analytics.com 2014. All rights reserved.

Figure 2-1. IoT market segmentation by industry/application5

    The IoT ecosystem (referring to Figure 2-2) can be understood in terms
of concentric rings of technology used to connect distributed physical
and logical components. The technology within a particular ecosystem is
specialized for that ecosystem, its business models, as well as the producers
and consumers in that market. Ecosystem-specific components are
specialized for different aspects of an ecosystem’s distributed applications,
resulting in unique devices that coordinate sensing, actuation, control,
data collection, data aggregation, data analysis, risk management, and
operations. IoT system components may be distributed because of
physicality of sensing and actuating, or due to efficiency requirements that
result in specialized computation. A potential unifying factor in all this is an
interoperable, low-cost networking capability that makes distributed IoT
possible. But satisfying the myriad needs canvasing multiple IoT segments
using a single IoT technology seems improbable if not impossible.

5
 I? oT Analytics, Knud Lasse Lueth, “IoT market segments – Biggest opportunities
  in industrial manufacturing,” Oct 31, 2014. https://iot-analytics.com/
  iot-market-segments-analysis/

C
  onnectivity Technology
Network and connectivity are nevertheless of paramount importance. IoT
systems must enable connections over short-, medium-, and long-range
distances. IoT solutions often must satisfy a wide range of transmission
quality requirements that may also need optimizations for low latency,
isochronous, asynchronous, store-and-forward, mobility, or streaming.
IoT systems must consider environmental disturbances such as radio
interference or emissions from other electronic equipment, low-power
conditions, congestion, and resource starvation scenarios. Guaranteed
service levels also add to the mix of requirements.
    Additionally, trade-off decisions impact safety, reliability, resiliency,
security, and availability. A variety of network technologies have emerged
to address the multifaceted needs of IoT such as Zigbee, Industrial
Ethernet, LoRa, LPWAN, Modbus, and TSN – to name a few. Some are
highly specialized to a specific application context such as the Control Area
Networks (CAN), which uniquely addresses the safety critical automated
braking systems found in many automobiles. Fieldbus protocols, such as
Modbus, use a synchronized communications bus to ensure each PLC
(programmable logic controller) receives the messages directed at it.
    While others are more general purpose such as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, 5G,
and Ethernet that accommodates information networks, streaming media,
as well as control network applications. Industrial Ethernet operating
at very high data rates can accommodate industrial real-time control
requirements by ensuring network utilization remains below about 10%.
Chapter 5 will dive deeper into details of different connectivity interfaces
and considerations facing consumer and industrial IoT.

M
  essaging Technology
IoT frameworks are exposed to IoT applications using a data model
abstraction. The framework data model describes a view of the network
where nodes appear as flat or nested data structures, and updates to

data values may result in actuation of various controllable elements. The
data model abstraction allows the applications to focus on capturing
semantic richness and less on moving data from node to node. Data are
represented as structured markup that easily maps to messaging transport
technologies.
     Messaging technology determines how messages flow between
network nodes. It also facilitates the building of IoT systems that collect
data from various nodes using disparate protocols at the expense of
creating additional complexity in the messaging layer. Simple messaging
is request-response based such as REST (Representational State Transfer).
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol) and CoAP (Constrained Application
Protocol) follow the REST methodology. Publish-subscribe messaging
allows multiple nodes to register for notifications when a change is
detected in a variable on a peer node. MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry
Transport) is a popular example of a publish-subscribe messaging system.
Broadcast and multicast can make publish-subscribe more efficient, which
may be used in some IP-based networks. Different protocols are useful
in different environments, and the whole communication stack even
down to the availability of broadcast at the network physical layer must be
considered when developing services in an IoT system. This complexity
is difficult for the system designer but becomes overwhelming to the IoT
developer. This complexity becomes most evident when designing an IoT
platform, especially when designing an IoT platform intended to service
multiple ecosystems. Platforms manage this complexity through the use of
IoT frameworks.

 Platform Technology
IoT platforms host applications, resources, and data useful to an IoT
distributed application. Platforms are specialized to the type of work
each performs. Constrained IoT platforms may optimize for connectivity,
latency, and small footprint, while less constrained platforms at the OT

network edge may optimize for device offload and bridging across control
domains. Cloud platforms optimize for compute, scalability, capacity, and
analytics. IoT frameworks are used in platforms because they facilitate
interoperability and connectivity by combining appropriate networking,
protocol, and platform ingredients in ways that allow application
portability regardless of the node’s native specialization characteristics.

                                                 Devices

                                                 Networks

  Health                                                                                           Public Sphere
                                                 Protocols

                                                 Platforms
              WiFi                                                                        LTE

                     Mqtt                   Data Analysis                          REST     5G
           Zigbee            Fog                                           Data
                                     Big Data                Prescriptice bases
                                                    loT       Analytics
                                                                                            LoRa
                             Edge                                         Device
           FS20                          Stream                           Mgmt.
                                        Analytics    Business Rules
                             GATT                     Management
                     BLE                                                                  LPWAN
            Bluetooth              Cloud
                            CoAP                           ID Mgmt.        oneM2M
                                                  M2M
                                                                                   Modbus
                     Industrial
 Energy                                          OPC UA TSN                                        Transport
                      Wireless
                                    Industrial                            TSN
                                     Ethernet           ProfiNET

                                                               Industry

Figure 2-2. IoT ecosystem

 Elements of an IoT System
This section describes the elements of an IoT system focusing on
device architecture, network architecture (an interconnected collection
of devices), system management architecture, and lastly framework
architecture.

 IoT Device
The term “device” can be confusing because it means different things
in different contexts. When viewed from a manufacturing perspective,
the device is a physical component consisting of hardware, firmware,
and system software. It may also be preloaded with application software
compiled into a single image that is embedded into persistent memory.
     When viewed from a network management perspective, a device
is a node that has a network address and could be part of a collection
of interconnected devices. There could be multiple network endpoint
addresses per physical device. Furthermore, given multiple network
interfaces, the same physical device could appear as multiple nodes to
other devices.
     When viewed from an IoT framework perspective, a device is a logical
context that exposes message passing interfaces. Interfaces are used to
exchange data that is structured according to an interface definition.
The actual data structure as viewed from within the framework may
differ depending on the network protocols, message passing technology,
or system usage. A logical device may have multiple interfaces to
the network giving the impression to peer nodes there are multiple
physical devices. This can be confusing if network address is the only
way to disambiguate IoT devices. IoT frameworks expose a logical IoT
device whose identity is independent of the underlying connectivity
layer. However, security challenges can arise when a single networking
interface exposes shared data or control surfaces with multiple logical

devices. This creates an opportunity for an attacker to exfiltrate data,
perform side-­channel analysis, or maliciously control logical devices.
Consequently, the security design should incorporate endpoint
protection technology deeper into the system – at the logical device level.
    When viewed from an application perspective, the IoT framework
data abstractions can make it difficult for application code to tell when a
physical device boundary is crossed. A single application may interact with
multiple IoT framework “devices” not knowing if they are geographically
local or remote. This is relevant to security practitioners because device
physicality is often what defines a security boundary. Obscured security
boundaries make it more difficult for applications to effectively apply
security protections.
    To avoid confusion, the authors try to provide clarifying context
whenever “device” terminology is used.

 IoT Device Architectural Goals
Unlike smartphones, PCs, laptops, and servers, the device bill of materials
(BOM) for constrained IoT devices is often under significant cost pressure.
In addition to the expected processing requirements, IoT devices often
must accommodate hostile operating conditions that include extreme
temperatures, vibration, humidity, and ultraviolet radiation. Meeting BOM
constraints implies every ingredient is scrutinized to identify the minimum
viable hardware, firmware, and software configuration while still satisfying
product requirements. Part substitutions may be made over the course
of a product’s lifetime to lower production costs.6 The IoT supply chain
competes to be the low-cost supplier, and device vendors want to foster
this competition to drive component costs even lower. Common interfaces
facilitate interoperability and the integration of specialized hardware with

6
   endors often qualify multiple suppliers for hardware components that perform
 V
 essentially the same function but allow production lines to keep producing if one
 supplier’s supply chain happen to be disrupted.

general purpose hardware, sensor, accelerator, and Field Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA) processor integration traditionally is done by a device
manufacturer, but increasingly, specialized functionality is exposed to the
network as a service. Software layers create logical devices that may be
dynamically defined. Software defined devices offers greater flexibility for
tailoring IoT solutions that meet customer need. Securing software defined
devices requires a trusted execution environment that creates trustworthy
hardware isolation and exposes security roots of trust to the soft device.

Interoperability
Architecting a device to be interoperable with other devices or infrastructure
already, or soon to be, on the market is of paramount importance for IoT,
especially given the enormity of different devices in large IoT systems. Web-
based validation suites allow device vendors to verify their products will
interoperate with a wide variety of other vendors’ products, which would
be too numerous to exhaustively validate using direct interactions from
device to device. Testing for interoperability with an actual device that has
not completed development or is not yet released to market is simply not
possible. However, web validation suites allow testing for interoperability
with standard protocols and frameworks, ensuring compatibility with peer
IoT devices that have not yet completed development.
    Nevertheless, interoperability gaps are likely to exist. For example, data
models developed by competing standards may have syntactic differences
even though semantics are similar. Standard protocols may not fully
interoperate if certification testing is missing or is not comprehensive.
Simulation tools that virtually deploy customer-specific configurations can
be helpful. Simulations help expose interoperability gaps in specifications
and validation suites relating to software behavior and data definitions.
Trial deployments and test beds are another technique for finding gaps.
This helps find hardware-dependent incompatibilities. Trial deployments
go live once the gaps can be corrected. Test beds can be used for

longer-term evolution of products with sequenced rollout of increasing
capabilities and features while ensuring that interoperability or backward
compatibility problems do not creep in.
    It is prudent for IoT system designs to anticipate having to work
around incompatibilities and building specific features into their design
to compensate for such issues. Postdeployment reconfigurable layers
between applications and embedded components give systems architects
the ability to make corrections during simulation and trial deployment.
Less constrained devices such as hub controllers, bridges, and gateways
more easily accommodate reconfigurable layers as they often support a
wider variety of network interfaces and have more computing resources
and storage to draw upon. Nevertheless, reconfigurability comes with a
security cost. Malware might more easily exploit reconfigurability features
that compromise embedded system components.

Security
Security consists of both functionality and assurance disciplines. Security
functionality typically deals with secure boot, secure key storage, and
cryptographic algorithm acceleration, while security assurance typically
deals with ensuring security functions work the way they are intended.
Trusted computing technology combines security functionality with security
assurance mechanisms so that security compromise isn’t catastrophic.
Trusted computing components are called upon to perform recovery steps.
All devices contain some set of trusted functionalities, upon which all other
parts of the system assume is trustworthy and has not been compromised;
this is called the root of trust for the device. The root of trust is normally
involved in the secure booting of the device, holding the device’s identity
credentials, and presenting cryptographic evidence of device claims, called
attestation. Depending on the device, the quality of the root-of-trust may vary.
     In less constrained environments, a root-of-trust could be a security
subsystem such as a Trusted Computing Group (TCG) Trusted Platform

Module (TPM) or a secure storage module such as Replay Protected
Memory Block (RPMB). It could be a secure coprocessor such as ARM
TrustZone or a security mode of a CPU such as Intel Software Guard
Extensions (SGX). All other software and hardware components depend
on the root-of-­trust components in some way for their security.
     Typically, less constrained systems make use of multiple roots-of-trust
and multiple trusted execution environments. For example, trusted boot
may rely on a root-of-trust for measurement in the form of a boot ROM
that computes an integrity value for software images loaded during boot-­
up. These integrity values are stored in another root-of-trust for storage
that protects them until they’re queried by a remote device that verifies
boot integrity. The remote device expects to receive an attestation report
that is signed by a trustworthy signing key protected by a root-of-trust for
reporting. The TPM is an example of a discrete processor that combines
roots-of-trust for storage and reporting.
     Roots-of-trust can protect application code while it executes using
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) technology such as Intel SGX.
Application developers partition application functionality according to the
functions that are security relevant and those that aren’t. Less constrained
environments allow multiple TEE instances. Managing and deploying
multiple trusted environments and roots of trust adds cost and complexity.
     In more constrained devices, these costs may be too high. Instead,
devices must be designed with layered trusted computing. The Trusted
Computing Group (TCG) proposed an approach for secure constrained
device boot, secure device identity creation, and device attestation
(Figure 2-3) that doesn’t depend on a security coprocessor called Device
Identity Composition Engine (DICE).
     Using a DICE strategy, the root-of-trust elements are those that operate
first when the device is reset or when it resumes from a nonoperational
state. The DICE architecture defines a Unique Device Secret (UDS)
that is a circuit that produces a unique number when the platform
undergoes power reset. The UDS circuit reads low-level device firmware

that is used to boot and possibly operate the device once booted.
Firmware is cryptographically hashed with the UDS that is then fed into
a cryptographic key generation circuit to produce a device identifier.
Cryptographic hash is a one-way function that ensures input data can’t be
discovered by analyzing the output value. If a different firmware image is
hashed, it will produce a different hash output value. This will cause the
key generation circuit to produce a different device identifier than what
results from the first firmware image. If the device identity changes from
what the IoT network expects, the changed device identity is no longer
trusted and must be revetted and onboarded into the network.
     The device identifier is unique to the UDS secret and the firmware
installed. The secret is immutable because it is hardware. If the firmware
is updated, a different device identity key is generated. A controller,
bridge, gateway, or other IoT nodes can determine if firmware changes
because it will no longer recognize the device identifier or be able to
verify its digital signature. If malware corrupts device firmware then
resetting the device sill return it to a secure operational state. The UDS and
DeviceID derivation functionality form a root of trust that is simpler than
a traditional Trusted Platform Module (TPM), secure co-processor or TEE.
This is better suited for cost constrained IoT devices, but also benefits TCB
design by tailoring TCB functionality that is most appropriate for special
purpose IoT devices.

                             Device
                                                                    DevcelD

 Root-of-trust        UDS              Firmware

                                  Memory /
                      CPU         Storage

Figure 2-3. Device Identity Composition Engine

I? oT Network
When multiple IoT devices are connected together, they form an IoT
network. However, connectivity alone isn’t very interesting. IoT devices
should interoperate as a distributed application. One expects IoT nodes
will cooperate to achieve a common objective. To do this, devices need
a few basic behaviors: (a) the ability to discover peer nodes, something
about their function or role and interfaces they support; (b) the ability
to connect, which may involve authenticating and constructing a secure
channel or cryptographic association; and (c) the ability to send and
receive formatted data, parse it, and process it according to application-­
specific semantics.
    Core to IoT design is the idea of an hourglass network layering model
(Figure 2-4) that seeks to simplify the possible choices of network layer
protocols to Internet Protocols (IPv4 and IPv6) while permitting legacy
SCADA, fieldbus, and embedded control physical and data link layer
technologies to remain available either through gateways or through
encapsulation, such as 6LoWPAN7 (IPv6 over Low-Power Wireless Personal
Area Networks).
    The top half of the hourglass hosts existing and evolving IP transport layer
technologies, for example, the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)8
supports an HTTP-like RESTful message exchange without the overhead
required to support HTTP and TCP. The Datagram Transport Layer Security
(DTLS)9 applies TLS-like security to CoAP. An impressive array of emerging
protocols designed for IoT are being developed by the IETF Constrained
RESTful Environments (CORE)10 working group. DTLS may be appropriate in
cases where reliability and in-order guarantees are not needed.

7
  h? ttps://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4944
8
    https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc7252/
9
     https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc6347/
10
       https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/core/documents/

                                 Framework

                                  Transport

                                  Network

                                    Link

                                  Physical

Figure 2-4. IoT network layering

    The framework layer sits atop the hourglass consisting of a dizzying
mix of technologies that predate IoT or have emerged as a result of it. Most
interestingly a flurry of new standards organizations has emerged that
seem to have insightful perspectives on how best to define IoT frameworks.
The authors believe that much of the IoT ecosystem will coalesce around a
common set of Internet-based technologies forming an hourglass shape.

 IoT System Management
IoT system management comprehends manageability goals for both IT
(Information Technology) and OT (Operational Technology). Device
lifecycle management is common to both IT and OT disciplines covering
the full spectrum beginning with manufacturing and supply chain through

all phases of operation, including decommissioning and retirement.
Management services support device lifecycle management. These
include security services for managing roles, access control policies,
and cryptographic keys and certificates; software update services for
distribution and installation of firmware, software, and security patches;
orchestration services for coordinating distributed application behavior,
simulation, and for handling graceful failover, resiliency, load balancing,
and redundancy; and telemetry services report on a variety of operational,
security, safety, and behavior components of an IoT system that may be
used further by IoT analytics and business management.
     A challenge facing IoT systems is finding a uniform and consistent
approach to manageability given the deeply fragmented brownfield and
greenfield IoT solutions. Proprietary and vertically integrated solutions
often don’t interoperate with horizontal IoT framework approaches,
and framework manageability is quite often rudimentary lacking deep
integration.
     Lack of a uniform approach to security manageability has potentially
significant IT and OT impact. For example, application of a security patch
in an industrial IoT deployment may require multiple security consoles
with labor-intensive checklists that verify all nodes are patched properly.
Access control policies may not be consistently expressed across disparate
IoT systems where role names and syntax may differ, access enforcement
conventions may differ and be inconsistent, or key management
capabilities may differ and may lack scalability or equivalent security
strengths. Security gateways may be considered as a way to address some
of these issues, but they may require deployment of new trusted nodes
in situations where trust semantics don’t normally expect or allow a
universally trusted gateway system. For example, a security gateway node
that links an industrial process automation network to a business analytics
server might be located at a base station in a wireless edge environment
that has limited physical security, but nevertheless must operate with full
security privileges of both networks.

D
  evice Lifecycle
Trust in logical IoT devices is (or should be) tied to trust in the physical
layer that hosts it. In an enterprise deployment scenario, servers, PCs,
and even smartphones can undergo a rigorous manual inspection and
configuration step by trained security professionals. However, the scale
at which IoT devices are deployed is seldom feasible to apply the same
rigorous manual processes. Instead, onboarding techniques that require
minimal or no touch are needed. IoT platforms and devices follow a
lifecycle (Figure 2-5) that may begin during manufacturing and ends
when the device is decommissioned or waterfalled to another owner for
redeployment starting another lifecycle.

                                                Normal
  Manufacturing   Supply Chain   Deployment   Operation &   Manage    Update   Decommission
                                              Monitoring

Figure 2-5. IoT device/platform lifecycle model

     Attackers may target vulnerabilities earlier in the lifecycle in order
to avoid detection and circumvent mitigation strategies that presume
manufacturing, supply chain, and onboarding steps are free from
compromise.
     IoT frameworks make assumptions about where along the device
lifecycle continuum the framework abstraction models begin to apply.
Early in the lifecycle, only physical devices exist. Even if logical devices
come into being early in the supply chain, it may still be possible for
additional logical devices to appear subsequent to initial onboarding or
may disappear prior to a final decommissioning step. Security of the IoT
system may depend on how well the IoT framework layer integrates with
the platform lifecycle.

Manufacturing
Manufacturing processes are critical toward the establishment of
hardware-roots-of-trust which is a term used to describe security
building blocks having to do with establishing platform/device identities,
protecting cryptographic keys and algorithms, and creating hardened
execution environments and system bootstrap procedures that resist
attacks. Features may include hardware random number generation,
cryptographic algorithms in ASICs (Application-Specific Integrated
Circuit), FPGA (Field Programmable Gate Array) or instructions, hardware
fuses that seed random number generation, boot ROM, replay protected
memory, and others.

Supply Chain
Supply chain processes protect platforms and devices as they make their
way from manufacturers to retailers to customer first deployment. Supply
chain participants may have physical access to hardware components that
if replaced by malicious components could result in undetectable attack
scenarios. Tracking platform and devices through the supply chain may
involve the use of RFID (Radio-Frequency Identification) tags, supply chain
UUIDs (Universally Unique Identifiers), or cryptographic device identifiers.
Privacy may become a challenge however as tracking capabilities could be
misused in ways that violate privacy goals. Privacy requirements need to be
anticipated as part of supply chain tracking mechanisms.

Deployment
Deployment is concerned with initial power up, customer-specific
configuration, and establishment of the platform/device owner.
Then the entity responsible for adding IoT devices to their network is
sometimes called the “owner” which implies a change of ownership and
establishment of a “local” identity that differs from a manufacturer or

supply chain supplied identity. The owner operates onboarding services
that facilitate ownership transfer, verification of supply chain provenance,
attestation of security properties and roots of trust, issuance of credentials,
security associations, roles, and access control policies. Taking ownership
of many devices can be challenging given limited human resources and
large numbers of devices. Zero-touch commissioning is immensely
important and difficult to get right given the diversity in supply chain and
given the spectrum of customer security and privacy expectations.

Normal Operation and Monitoring
Normal operation refers to operational states where IoT functions are
fully enabled and ready for use. Security monitoring ensures devices and
networks continue to function securely. IoT frameworks may choose
to hide security monitoring operations from IoT application-level
abstractions, but they should consider how to fail gracefully when security
conditions require service disruption.

Manage
IoT devices require periodic management, tuning, and adjustment. Some
management functions can occur while devices are operating normally.
For example, addition of security credentials for dynamically added
devices may not need to interrupt activity with existing devices. Other
management tasks may require disruption of normal operations. For
example, an uncalibrated actuator may result in device, process, or system
failures if asked to operate outside its design constraints. Frameworks
can facilitate communication of device status and availability to enable
periodic maintenance without major disruption to peer nodes. This
management implementation could be in-band (within the OS/FW
control) and/or out-of-band (outside of OS/FW control).

Update
Software and firmware updates are arguably a subset of device
management commonly known as Software Over-the-Air (SOTA) and
Firmware Over-the-Air (FOTA) updates. Software update management
must consider trade-offs of propagating large image files over networks
optimized for small messages that may be latency sensitive. IoT networks
may have “sleepy” nodes that are not available to receive an update in a
timely manner.
    Nevertheless, software and firmware updates are essential to secure
operation. It is inevitable that security weaknesses will exist in most
firmware and software images. Hence, when weaknesses are found, they
should be fixed quickly to avoid possible exploit.

Decommissioning
Decommissioning is the process of undoing onboarding, commissioning,
and provisioning that were applied previously. Although it is expected
that devices and frameworks will anticipate scenarios involving devices
that don’t go through a decommissioning process to handle it gracefully,
applying decommissioning steps helps ensure privacy objectives are met
by removing trackable personally identifiable information (PII) or privacy-­
sensitive information before it falls into other hands. Decommissioning
also ensures security-sensitive data, credentials, keys, and access tokens
are removed so they aren’t used to later attack other nodes. Frameworks
can facilitate decommissioning by orchestrating the nodes removal in a
coordinated way. Sometimes decommissioning could entail replacing the
device under consideration with another device consisting of the same
persona.
    Automation of the IoT device lifecycle is an important security
capability as it helps ensure the device never enters an insecure state and
minimizes opportunities for attacker exploit by ensuring secure lifecycle
practices are consistently applied.

 IoT Framework
An IoT framework is a middleware layer beneath one or more IoT
applications that presents a network-facing application interface through
which peer framework nodes interact. Frameworks often support multiple
communication technologies and message passing techniques. IoT
frameworks also expose security capabilities including hardware-roots-of-
trust to applications and peer framework nodes.

 IoT Framework Design Goals
IoT frameworks have four primary design goals: (1) reduce development
time and bring IoT solutions to market sooner; (2) reduce apparent
complexity of deploying and operating an IoT network; (3) improve
application portability and interoperability; and (4) improve serviceability,
reliability, and maintainability. Given the vast range of existing and
emerging communication technology choices, it is untenable for
applications to manage the combinations of possible ways to connect.
Frameworks hide connectivity complexity beneath a higher-level
message passing abstraction like REST and publish-subscribe. Standards
organizations help achieve these goals through standardization of the
framework layer interconnect, message passing interface definition,
and data definitions leveraged by applications. Standards groups also
document IoT system design principles, architecture, and interconnect
options. Standards organizations and industry consortia may assist
developers by supplying and certifying reference implementations that
include source code. Reference code helps streamline development by
providing implementations that pass compliance tests and correctly
interprets standards specifications. Reference codebases are easier to
maintain benefiting from a large diverse community of open source
developers who cooperate by actively developing code and improving the
codebase.

     Frameworks simplify IoT networks by creating an abstraction of the
IoT device networks that hides much of the underlying complexity while
exposing data, interfaces, and functions that facilitate interoperation. All
it should take to develop an IoT application is to create an application in
a high-level language such as Node.js that utilizes framework APIs. The
framework provides a semantically rich description of IoT nodes, objects,
and interactions that allow IoT network designers to focus only on node
interaction semantics rather than on the details of connectivity.
     Frameworks facilitate improved application portability. This can be
achieved at different levels. The bottom layer of the framework is operating
system specific. The top layer of the framework is IoT use case specific
in that it exposes a data model abstraction that reinforces an IoT usage
context. Some examples include lighting control, home automation,
health monitoring, entertainment, process automation, industrial control,
and autonomous control. IoT applications can be developed once given
the framework abstraction and can execute on any OS the framework
is ported to. The details of dissimilar OSs and platforms can be hidden
where porting of framework code to another OS (source code–level
compatibility) can happen independently of application development.
Binary compatible platforms can migrate compiled framework code across
platforms using the same binary. Platforms that are not binary compatible
may rely on virtualization to host framework images or may rely on device
management services that hide the complexity associated with paring and
installing the right framework with the correct platform.
     Frameworks enable interoperable devices in heterogeneous
environments. Consider a hypothetical scenario where devices are
running different OSs and HW platforms. These devices could be built
by different platform vendors using silicon from multiple vendors
running different OSs such as Windows IoT Embedded and VxWorks
running different middleware stacks. This is a perfect storm scenario
for an IoT network deployment where there are too many possible
combinations of connectivity and message exchange options to expect

speedy deployments. IoT frameworks come to the rescue by building the
connectivity intelligence into the framework – hidden from application
view and simplified from the device and network management view.
     Frameworks also facilitate seamless manageability and serviceability
by leveraging the framework’s infrastructure to expose platform status
information through the framework layer in accordance with the
framework’s data model abstraction. For example, a firmware update
availability notification may be easily propagated across an IoT network.
If the framework supports applying a firmware update, either push or
pull, the firmware update images may be distributed over the air using the
connectivity solution worked out by the framework.

IoT Data Model and System Abstractions
IoT frameworks define an application layer abstraction so that applications
interact directly with framework data. For example, a temperature
sensor might show the current temperature (currTemp) and the average
temperature over the course of 24 hours (aveTemp). Temperature values
might be shown in Fahrenheit and Centigrade. Consequently, a data
model description might be as follows:

{
    "tempSensor" = "/myTempSensor",
    {
        "currTemp"="85",
        "aveTemp"="70",
        "degrees"="Centigrade"
    }
}

    Data modeling languages are used to richly describe framework
objects according to a schema definition. Examples of data modeling
languages include XML (eXtensible Markup Language), JSON (JavaScript

Object Notation), CBOR (Concise Binary Object Representation), and
YANG (Yet Another Next Generation language) – just to name a few.
    Data structures are accessed through well-defined network interfaces.
For example, CoAP is a REST model interface that uses four methods:
GET, PUT, POST, and DELETE to interact with framework data. A couple
RESTful interface definition languages include RAML (Restful API
Modeling Language) and Swagger.11
    A framework node may consist of several objects such as a temperature
sensor, camera, and light bulb. A deviceId may disambiguate multiple
instances of a framework node. For example:

{
    "nodeType"="myDeviceType",
    "deviceID"="<UUID>",
    {
        "tempSensor" = "/myTempSensor",
        "ptzCamera" = "/myPtzCamera",
        "lightBulb" = "/myLight"
    }
}

    Using these simple but powerful data modeling tools, IoT frameworks
can describe elaborate IoT systems while hiding much of the network
complexity that underlies connection establishment, routing, packet
transmission, network address translation, and so on.
    To a certain extent, IoT frameworks can be compared with
Information-Centric Networking (ICN).12 ICN rethinks the network where
named information is the centerpiece of network architecture. Rather

11
  h? ttps://swagger.io/
12
    https://irtf.org/icnrg

than focusing on nodes, network topology, and protocol layering, ICN
focuses on end-to-end data interactions. Data doesn’t necessarily reside
on endpoints but may be cached and replicated anywhere in the network.
Like ICNs, the upper layer of IoT frameworks presents a data-centric
view of the network. However, unlike ICNs existing protocol layering is
retained. Arguably, this adds additional complexity but offers greater
interoperability. Indeed, an ICN connectivity plugin to an IoT framework is
a reasonable approach to bridge ICN with legacy networks.
     Securing IoT messages must take an end-to-end view so that
authentication, confidentiality, privacy, and authorization goals may be
realized. Otherwise, the benefits of hiding complexity beneath an IoT
framework may instead be hiding security gaps. The IoT application using
an IoT framework may not be aware when security is managed using
system layer interfaces. Internet protocols often have a secure alternative
such as https for http and coaps for coap, where the “s” means security.
A REST GET message works the same over coaps as it does for coap. The
main difference is the Transport Layer Security (TLS) binding to the
REST messaging protocol negotiates a secure session using credentials
(keys and certificates) that may have been provisioned directly into the
TLS subsystem without coordination through the framework layer. The
framework layer may not be aware of the impact to authorization which
can result in the framework misrepresenting actual security posture to
IoT applications. IoT frameworks can differ significantly in their design
and implementation attention to end-to-end security. We hope to
illustrate this point more profoundly as we walk through a variety of IoT
frameworks later in this chapter.

IoT Node
IoT frameworks define a device abstraction that is a logical representation
of a physical device. This chapter uses the term IoT node to refer to the
logical abstraction to avoid confusion regarding the physical device.
Frameworks can create some interesting properties regarding IoT nodes:

      •     They may expose multiple nodes per framework to
            give the appearance of many nodes having the same IP
            address.

      •     They may consolidate multiple network addresses
            terminating into a common framework node.

      •     They may host services and capabilities that are
            dynamic – being created and deleted according to
            RESTful messages.

      •     They may impose system partitioning semantics such
            as dividing nodes into domains, groups, rooms, or
            some other semantic overlay.

    Nevertheless, security semantics must remain true despite the
framework abstraction. For example, if the node describes the endpoint
where access is controlled, data is encrypted and decrypted. Then
protection of the physical endpoint resources should strongly correlate
with protection of the framework node.

IoT Operations Abstraction
IoT operations consist of several node interactions facilitated by
frameworks. These include discovery, message exchange, event
registration, and asynchronous notification. IoT nodes typically are not
preconfigured to recognize other nodes. They must instead be discovered.

Discovery allows other framework nodes to inquire regarding supported
interfaces and data structures essential to interoperability. Discovery
can take many forms. For example, multicast and broadcast networking
supports unsolicited discoveries. Nodes monitoring the broadcast may be
required to disposition discovery events even if there is no action needed.
Devices with limited battery capacity may have shorter life expectancies
if deployed in highly dynamic networks. Alternatively, discovery may
be accomplished by sending discovery requests to discovery interfaces
for specific nodes querying the relevant information. This approach
minimizes unnecessary activity on nodes that wouldn’t otherwise need
to participate. However, this approach may require multiple “drill down”
discovery requests before finding the data or interface needed. Passive
discovery employs directories or less constrained nodes that respond in
place of other nodes that may disregard all discovery requests while in a
low-power mode. The directory nodes satisfy the discovery phase so that
power-constrained nodes only process the functions that they uniquely
provide.
     Discovery conventions:

      •   Consulting a directory of framework devices to learn
          device identities and how to connect – conceptually
          similar to LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access
          Protocol) commonly used by PCs in IT networks to
          accomplish a similar objective

      •   Inspecting a schema describing interfaces to learn
          which REST, publish/subscribe, and asynchronous
          notification messages can be used

      •   Querying the device directly to introspect its current
          state and configuration

 Note An anonymous entity may learn a tremendous amount about
 how an IoT network functions, the type of nodes involved, what work
 they’re capable of performing, and typical interaction patterns simply
 by using available discovery mechanisms. Given a small amount
 of additional information that links actual devices or users to the
 observable network, it may be relatively easy for an attacker to obtain
 or infer knowledge that otherwise is expected to be privacy sensitive.

     Message exchange conventions:

       •    Preparing a message body whose syntax satisfies a
            recognized (standardized) data model schema

       •    Protecting the message using the appropriate security
            credentials

       •    Sending the message following the interface definition
            schema for the target node

       •    Collecting and processing the response message that
            similarly follows these conventions

     Event handling conventions:

       •    Identifying objects and attributes available for
            participating in asynchronous events and conditions to
            be met that result in notifications.

       •    Preparing and sending a registration/subscription
            message following messaging exchange conventions.

       •    Maintaining context for processing asynchronous
            notifications.

      •   Nodes managing registrations/subscriptions must
          maintain context for secure delivery of the notification
          message(s) potentially involving many subscribers.
          Asynchronous message delivery may involve different
          security associations and context from those used to
          process registrations/subscriptions.

 Connectivity Elements
IoT frameworks facilitate connectivity, gatewaying, and bridging. The
following briefly summarizes how each is facilitated:

      •   Connectivity: Framework endpoint abstractions are
          mapped to network layer addresses and protocols
          where framework message exchange abstractions
          map to protocol specifics such as MTU (Maximum
          Transmission Unit) framing, multicasting,
          broadcasting, and packet delivery mechanisms.

      •   Gatewaying: Framework domain abstractions impose
          operational context for domain-specific filtering
          (hiding) traffic and performance of administrative
          duties.
      •   Bridging: Due to the proliferation of framework
          solutions, it is often necessary to translate from one
          framework environment to another. Framework
          bridging may have side effects where objects,
          interfaces, or semantics in one environment don’t
          exactly translate to a second.

 Manageability Elements
IoT frameworks may expose manageability elements through the
framework object abstraction layer as a way for other framework objects
and resources to better manage and respond to change resulting from
management activity. However, this is more the exception than the rule.
Even among horizontal open standard frameworks, there are many
examples of device vendors wishing to retain proprietary or exclusive
control over firmware/software update, onboarding, and cloud access
capabilities. Nevertheless, frameworks can facilitate updates occurring
outside the IoT framework by informing other nodes regarding
pending updates or notifying regarding changes to version information.
Additionally, IoT frameworks may not allow the framework itself to be
updated from within an IoT framework context.

 Security Elements
IoT frameworks need to accommodate security by ensuring endpoint
nodes and their physical equivalents (i.e., device, process, virtual
machine, enclave) have a secured identity, protected cryptographic keys
and appropriately provisioned roles, credentials, and access policies.
Endpoint security capabilities should protect sensitive data that is
stored, transmitted, or manipulated locally outside of the IoT framework.
Software and firmware should be protected when transmitted, installed,
stored, and loaded for execution. Framework processing of encrypted
data, access control decisions, and identities should be protected within
an appropriately hardened Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) or
isolated from non-framework aware services and interfaces. IoT device
roots of trust should be used to protect device identities and ensure the
appropriate firmware and software is loaded and executed.
    Inherent to distributed systems is added risk associated with a
dependence on multiple peer nodes that contribute data, processing,
and administration to an overarching distributed application. Nodes

largely trust peer nodes to be in a correct operational state. However,
this assumption of trust may not be justifiable without taking additional
precautions to prove and verify the hardware, firmware, software, and
operational state to peer nodes. Attestation is a security concept that
addresses this concern but only if it is correctly implemented and
integrated.

Consider the Cost of Cryptography
IoT systems are inherently distributed. Cryptography is an essential
security building block technology for distributed systems. Nevertheless,
cryptography imposes additional overhead in terms of computation,
memory, storage, network bandwidth, and hardening. Symmetric
cryptography generally speaking is lighter weight than asymmetric
cryptography, and asymmetric cryptography is lighter weight than
certificate-based asymmetric cryptography. IoT devices typically
are designed with cost targets that may impact device cryptographic
capabilities. Since these choices also impact interoperability, IoT
frameworks must anticipate common cryptographic algorithms, key
sizes, and key management infrastructures. Asymmetric cryptography is
dominated by at least two algorithms: elliptic curve cryptography13 (ECC)
and Rivest-Shamir-Adelman (RSA)14 algorithms. ECC has smaller key
sizes than the RSA. ECC can accomplish the same level of security as RSA
with key sizes that are 10–15% smaller. Key size is an important factor for
constrained platforms as such many IoT standards require ECC.
    Table 2-1 details some of the trade-offs associated with cryptography.

13
  h? ttps://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6090
14
    https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8017

Table 2-1. Trade-Offs Associated with the Type of Cryptography Used
Criteria           Symmetric                 Asymmetric        Asymmetric
                   (Preshared Secrets)       (Raw Public/      (Certified Public/
                                             Private Keys)     Private Keys)

Hardware           Not Required              Required          Required
Acceleration
Memory Size        Small                     Medium            Large (certificates)
Code Size          Small                     Medium            Large (certificate
                                                               parsing)
Message Size       Small                     Medium            Large (certificates)
Persistent         Small–Medium              Medium–Large      Medium (depends
Storage Size       (depends on network       (depends on       on caching
                   size)                     network size)     algorithms)
Security –         No                        Yes               Yes
Perfect
Forward
Secrecy (PFS)
Security –         High (keys are shared,    Medium (no        Low (depends on
Impersonation      no detection of misuse,   common trusted    secure storage)
Risk               no common trusted         infrastructure,
                   infrastructure, depends   depends on
                   on secure storage)        secure storage)
Constrained        Optimized for             Balanced          Optimized for
Environment        Verification (benefits                      Signing (benefits
                   constrained servers)                        constrained clients)
Scalability        Low                       Medium            High
(number
of nodes
interacting)

    Quantum computers15 present new threats to existing cryptographic
solutions because they are more effective at solving certain types of
mathematical problems such as the integer factorization16 problem, the
discrete logarithmic problem,17 or the elliptic curve discrete logarithm
problem.18 Current asymmetric cryptography algorithms reduce to one of
these mathematical problems which are known to be solved by quantum
computing more easily than traditional computers. Cryptographic
algorithms are being designed that are thought to be secure against
quantum computers are called post-quantum safe algorithms and has led
to a new branch of cryptography study called post-quantum cryptography.
Since asymmetric cryptography is most threatened by quantum
computing, post-quantum asymmetric algorithm design is receiving a lot
of attention currently. In contrast, symmetric key cryptography and hash
functions are relatively secure against attacks using quantum computers. It
is believed doubling the key size (e.g., from 128-bits to 256-bits) adequately
protects against quantum computer attacks on symmetric algorithms.19
    It is still too early to tell which quantum-safe algorithms will become
an industry favorite for IoT given cost, power, and size constraints.
However, it seems clear that where symmetric cryptography is already
acceptable for IoT, it should continue to remain acceptable given a
doubling of key size is the most economical quantum-safe solution.
Quantum-safe asymmetric algorithms have much larger key size
requirements or computation trade-offs, both of which apply to typical IoT
platforms.

15
   h? ttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_computing
16
     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Integer_factorization
17
      https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Discrete_logarithm
18
       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elliptic-curve_cryptography
19
        Daniel J. Bernstein (2010-03-03). ”Grover vs. McEliece” (PDF).

 Summary IoT Framework Considerations
IoT frameworks came into being as a way to simplify development and
deployment of IoT networks. The reality is IoT networks are inherently
complex and, in many cases, necessarily so. IoT frameworks offer
value because they create a data model abstraction that is simpler than
applications having to deal with a myriad of message exchange options
and dissimilar data definition. By allowing applications to focus only on
the semantics of IoT node behavior and node interactions, interoperability
improves. By hiding the complexity of connection establishment,
bridging, gatewaying, and deployment of heterogeneous platforms,
efficiency optimizations can be applied more uniformly. Although
frameworks may increase complexity for simple deployment situations,
they scale as deployments grow resulting in a simpler IoT system overall.
Frameworks have other advantages, namely, they enable multiple views
of the IoT system so manageability, resiliency, interoperability, security,
safety, and usability perspectives can be represented. Complexity in
any form, however, is a security consideration because vulnerabilities
and security weaknesses can hide within the corners of complexity.
Security practitioners should ask whether the framework is more complex
than needed in order to realize the expected benefits, but also avoid
workarounds that expose new attack surfaces.

 IoT Framework Architecture
This section explores IoT framework layers in more detail. A following
section looks at specific framework architectures that may be compared
and contrasted. The majority of IoT framework architectures define
three layers: (1) Data Object layer, (2) Node Interaction layer, and (3)
Connectivity and Hardware Abstraction layer. This section also considers
the Hardware layer, though it typically isn’t considered part of an IoT

framework. However, because security necessarily should have ties to
hardware, we’ve included a Hardware layer discussion. Security is integral
to IoT framework layers revealing additional security insights relating to
each layer (see Figure 2-6). This section explores each framework layer in
detail with an emphasis on security.

 Data Object Layer
The Data Object layer defines data structures that expose the “nodes”
and their capabilities using a data definition language such as JSON.20
One or more nodes may be hosted in the framework where one or more
applications may interact with framework nodes via a framework API. Data
objects are a set of attribute encapsulations. Some framework object models
allow nested encapsulation with unlimited depth. Other frameworks limit
nesting depth. The outermost encapsulation is the node. Since nodes
logically correspond to an IoT network endpoint, it is given an identifier,
NodeID, such as a Universally Unique Identifier (UUID) which is easy to
generate dynamically given framework nodes may be transient. NodeID
differs from DeviceID in that DeviceID is fixed in hardware. It is created
during manufacturing and is used to facilitate device onboarding. NodeID
typically is created in response to successful onboarding. Very constrained
devices may use the DeviceID as the NodeID if the manufacturer has
prevented the framework from supporting additional nodes.
     The Data Object layer may define security objects such as access
control lists (ACLs), credentials, and other device status information
useful to management consoles and other nodes. Exposing security
objects using the framework object model allows device and security
management using the IoT framework infrastructure. The framework
connectivity and interoperability properties make it a desirable ingredient
for manageability. Security objects may expose values that are specific to a

20
   www.json.org

node such as credentials, ACLs, and NodeID or may expose values that are
node independent or shared such as DeviceID, firmware, and hardware
configuration.
    The Security Objects in Figure 2-6 are useful for intranetwork
and intradomain interactions. More sophisticated internetwork and
interdomain interactions require an additional security layer that may
be helpful for gateway operations. The gateway application contains
control and management logic to present nodes to a peer IoT network
that shadow actual nodes existing deeper inside the local IoT network.
Gateway applications might even be used to bridge non-interoperable
IoT frameworks. A following section explores interdomain security and
framework gateways in more detail.

 Node Interaction Layer
The Node Interaction layer contains messaging semantics and defines
interfaces used for peer node interaction. Interface definition languages
such as RAML and Swagger may be used to create machine- and human-­
readable interface definitions. A framework instance may support one or
more messaging models, such as REST, publish-subscribe, and MESH. This
layer ensures messages are formatted correctly, parses message contents,
performs data consistency checks, and ensures messages are sent, queued,
resent, or received properly.
    Messages may require encryption and integrity protections. This layer
maintains security associations between the local and peer nodes. Security
associations identify the nodes, ACLs, privacy policies, and credentials
(used to authenticate, authorize, and protect message contents). They may
also define the security context from which to perform various security
relevant operations such as encryption, decryption, signing, verifying
signatures, enforcing access control, and so forth. The security context
defines what is (or should be) the correct way to terminate the data
exchange with peer nodes.

    There are implementation challenges associated with security
endpoint definition due to network layering. For example, a TLS or IP
Security (IPSec) secured channel may be shared across multiple locally
hosted nodes, implying nodes must use shared credentials, something
frowned upon by most security practitioners. Alternatively, acceleration
hardware may offload packet processing which may include offloading
security operations too.
    Ideally, the Security Endpoint Context is the central point of
enforcement where the flow of data between the Data Object layer and the
Connectivity layer can be inspected and controlled.

 Platform Abstraction Layer
The Platform Abstraction layer defines the logical connection points
available to framework nodes. Connection points support the messaging
models available to the Node Interaction layer regardless of the capabilities
of the underlying network stack. The Connectivity layer typically supports
multiple connection points – one for each unique network stack. For
example, the connection point, Conn-A, has a network stack consisting of
HTTP, TCP, IP(v4 or v6), and Ethernet (Figure 2-6). A second connection
point, Conn-B, has a network stack consisting of MQTT, TCP/UDP, IPv6,
6LoWPAN, and IEEE802.15.4. Connection points may be dynamically
added or removed on more sophisticated platforms, while constrained
platforms may embed a single connection point and network stack.
     In some cases, the network stack includes message security technology
such as IPSEC and TLS. The Connectivity layer depends on the Device
Interaction layer for security associations specific to the node-to-node
interaction semantics. This potentially divides the security enforcement
point between the security side and the networking side. Some platforms
are equipped with isolated execution technology that enables security
processing within a network stack to be offloaded to a resource-isolated
environment here referred to as a container. An alternative approach is

to move data protection into the Node Interaction layer. For example,
OSCORE21 defines a standard format for encrypting CoAP payloads
before being given to the CoAP layer. This approach allows the security
endpoint to move out of the protocol stack into the Node Interaction layer
potentially simplifying implementation.
    The basic idea is that the security endpoint context, data packets,
and node-to-node security associations should exist within a suitably
hardened container as a prerequisite for performing security relevant
operations. Otherwise, there is opportunity for clever attackers to
intercept, modify, view, or replace node objects.

                               App-A               App-B                    App-C                      Mgmt App            Gateway App

                 Data Object Layer                                                                                  Security Objects
                              Node-A            Node-B                  Node-C                          ACLs        Credentials        Device State

                                                                             (4)
 IoT Framework

                 Node Interaction Layer                                                                        Security Endpoint Contexts
                                     MESH          Pub/Sub                   REST
                 Framework

                                                                                                        Security        Security            Security
                  Interface

                                                                                                (3)
                                IPSEC Sec.          OSCORE                  TLS Sec.                   Context-A       Context-B           Context-C
                                   Asso.           Sec. Asso.                Asso.
                                                                                                 (5)
                                                                      (2)
                 Platform Abstraction Layer                                                                        Resource Isolation
                                                                                                       Context-A       Context-B           Context-C
                      Conn-A              Conn-B           Conn-C                    Device            Container       Container           Container

                 Platform Layer
                                                                                     Sensor /          Trusted Execution Environment Technology
                          MQTT                HTTP           CoAPS                   Actuator                   Segmented
                              UDP             TCP           DTLS/UDP                                             Memory
                                                                                        API
                     IP Multicast             IPv6               IP                                            Secure Storage
                                                                                       Driver                                                  Root-
                              WiFi          6LoWPAN             WiFi
                                                                                   HW Interface         Keys       ACLs         DeviceID      of-Trust
                                            802.15.4
                                                                                   and Hardware
                                     Network Acceleration       (1)                                                Crypto Acceleration

                                                           Peer Node

Figure 2-6. IoT framework layers

21
     https://core-wg.github.io/oscoap/draft-ietf-core-object-security.html

 Platform Layer
The Platform layer beneath IoT frameworks can be divided into three
categories: (1) networking, (2) sensor and actuator, and (3) security. The
network layer focus is on efficient processing of network packets, quality of
service, and power optimization. It also addresses network security threats
related to malicious manipulation of network protocols. A common denial-­
of-­service attack might flood the network with unexpectedly high volume
of discovery packets. Discovery (aka ping) packets may not require prior
authorization since the goal of discovery often implies finding out which
credentials are most appropriate to use. Well-known attack mitigation
techniques often are part of network hardware implementations, allowing
the mitigation technique to be applied efficiently.
     The sensor and actuator focus is on implementation of the main
processing function of the IoT node which often represents the transition
from IT to OT as native interactions are applied to the physical world.
Otherwise, the node would just be manipulating data and couldn’t be
considered a cyber-physical system. The device driver and API are most
often proprietary and specific to the vendor and model of the sensor or
actuator. Vendor-specific behavior multiplied by the already large and
expanding collection of IoT devices multiplies the complexities associated
with multivendor interoperability. Hiding this complexity behind a
common data object model is a primary reason for IoT frameworks.
     The security focus is on hardening security-sensitive IoT functions.
Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) technology isolates computing
resources according to the various system tenants. IoT frameworks allow
multiple tenants in the form of IoT nodes – nodes that may have different
identities, security credentials, access policies, and configurations. Even
in constrained environments where a single node is supported, there are
security and device management scenarios that require tenant isolation
for nodes performing administrative duties. The industry has a variety of
TEE technologies that could be leveraged to harden IoT workloads that

include Intel SGX, Intel VT-x (virtualization technology), ARM TrustZone,
and hardware memory managers that physically partition memory and
other compute resources.
    Secure storage is an essential element in IoT devices in that
cryptographic keys, trust anchors, access control lists, and other policies
need to be stored in ways that resist software attacks and ideally resist
attackers who have physical access to the device. Replay protected
memory is helpful toward preventing attacks on key exchange protocols,
memory replacement, firmware update, and timing attacks.
    Root-of-trust hardware is essential to the creation and protection of
device identities that may be used to attest device security properties
to a peer node and to security boot the device. Crypto acceleration
hardware may offer additional protections as offloading encryption and
signing operations may involve the use of a hardened coprocessor or
ASIC (Application-Specific Integrated Circuit). Root-of-trust hardware or
crypto offload hardware often includes a source of entropy necessary for
generating encryption keys and trustworthy identifiers.

 Security Challenges with IoT Frameworks
Security challenges are a reoccurring theme as we explore various IoT
frameworks. Though they may have been designed with a wide range
of security and privacy requirements, there are a few areas that are
consistently problematic. IoT framework nodes are the logical endpoints
in IoT networks, but the network layer context is often out of scope when
operating at the framework Data Object layer (Figure 2-7).
    In IP networks, endpoint nodes are identified by IP addresses,
and routing logic is expressed in terms of IP addresses. Network layer
identifiers are insufficient as IoT framework node identifiers. In IoT
frameworks, nodes are logical and hence may share the same IP address
but have different node identifiers. Linking encryption keys, authentication

credentials, and access control policies to IP address means security will
not be granular enough and can’t be consistently applied.
    Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) and object identifiers such
as Universally Unique Identifier (UUID) may be used to reference
the framework’s device nodes. For example, a URI might identify the
framework context followed by an object identifier that is specific to the
logical device instance – “href” : “oic://<Base64_encoded_UUID>/oic/d”.

                                Data Object Layer

                     Node N1              Node N2          Etc...

Figure 2-7. IoT framework nodes are the logical endpoints in IoT
networks

      The IoT framework node presents a security context where the
security endpoint is an IP multicast address; using IPSEC implies the
data protection ends at the network interface card or possibly inside a
networking driver in an operating system. This leaves data exposed before
it reaches the IoT framework’s enforcement point where the decision is
made to which node the data belongs.
      A similar concern exists using Transport Layer Security (TLS) where data
protections end within the operating system or within a network connection
provider service. Connection services often expose APIs that a variety of
applications may utilize. If the service isn’t exclusive to the IoT framework,
it is possible the cryptographic protections intended to terminate within the
logical IoT device terminate within the service instead. Other applications
serviced by the connection provider are at risk of becoming targets for attack
because of the special access unwittingly given to them by the service. Care
must be taken to ensure data carried over communication channels and
messaging systems are protected by trusted execution environments that
correspond to the expected logical device endpoint.

    If data is protected using message-oriented techniques such as
JSON Web Token (JWT), data protection may be extended into the IoT
framework data abstraction layer, but there may be secure messaging
library that is shared by all the logical device instances. A man-in-the-­
middle (MITM) attack could be successful if malware found a way to
intercept the data after the data protection module is finished but before
the logical device context is in place.
    An IoT framework access path is depicted in Figure 2-6 where in step
(1) a peer node accesses the IoT device through a Wi-Fi networking stack
at connection Conn-C. In step (2) the Conn-C access path finds the TLS
security association and the Security Context-A in the Security Endpoint
Contexts. In step (3) access to decryption keys, ACLs, and role credentials
is checked. The Security Context-A is a fulcrum point in the framework
that uniformly applies an IoT network security policy involving the peer
nodes and Node-A. Ideally, the security context operations are performed
in a TEE that resists man-in-the-box attacks. If access is permitted, in
step (4) the sensor/actuator hardware may be exposed to the peer node
through Node-A data objects at step (5). Ideally, the entire access path will
be isolated from the other nodes and operations occurring on the same
device as the other tenants present security threats from within the device.

 Consumer IoT Framework Standards
In this section, we explore several IoT framework architectures
highlighting similarities and differences. In some cases, differences exist
because different frameworks intend to address different requirements
and use cases. In other cases, significant overlap of features and
capabilities appears to exist because they address similar requirements but
do so differently. This is unfortunate because it creates opportunities for
incompatibilities. Such differences may be benign when used in isolated
deployments but add significant complexity when interoperability across
multiple deployments is desired.

 Open Connectivity Foundation (OCF)
The Open Connectivity Foundation (OCF) was originally formed under
the name Open Interconnect Consortium (OIC). Broadcom, Intel, and
Samsung were among the initial founders of OIC and were later joined by
Electrolux, Microsoft, and Qualcomm. IoTivity is the open source reference
implementation of both OIC and OCF specifications. The OIC later became
OCF when the AllSeen Alliance and OIC merged in October of 2016. The
AllSeen Alliance is discussed in more detail in a following section.
     The OCF framework (Figure 2-8) consists of three layers, Transports,
Core Framework, and Profiles. The transport layer is a plugin interface
that supports any number of transport plugin modules. Although the
architecture refers to them as transports, the remaining networking layers
(network, data link, and physical) are presumed to be provided as well. The
OCF specifications do not prescribe how the layers are implemented, but the
IoTivity reference implementation (see https://iotivity.org/downloads)
may offer guidance. Support for various wired and wireless transports in
IoTivity continues to grow. At the time of this writing, there was support for
CoAP (UDP) over IPv4, IPv6, Ethernet, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth LE. At the time
of this writing, an Object Security for Constrained RESTful Environments
(OSCORE) draft specification22 defines a REST message binding to CoAP and
HTTP. OSCORE supports connections originating in IoT networks based on
a UDP transport that terminates in cloud services environments or remote
access gateways that are based on a TCP transport.
     OCF transport plugin module interface is transport agnostic, making
it possible to define transport plugin modules that implement REST
(Representational State Transfer) semantics. This implies OCF transport
plugins could implement message queuing techniques such as MQTT
(Message Queuing Telemetry Transport) or XMPP (eXtensible Messaging
and Presence Protocol) without structural modifications to the framework.

22
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-core-object-security/

     The transport interface interaction model roughly follows an object
lifecycle pattern called CRUDN – Create, Retrieve, Update, Delete,
and Notify. RESTful interaction semantics easily map to a series of
request-response exchanges for each interaction – for example, Send
Create_Request message followed by Receive Create_Response message.
OCF interface semantics are typically defined using RAML23 (RESTful
API Modeling Language), although there is interest in migrating to
Swagger24 which complies with the OpenAPI specification. The OpenAPI
specification25 is an open source community effort aimed at defining
robust data modeling languages and tools.

                    Application

             API - Language Mapping                         API - Language Mapping
                                                                                                 Protocol Plug-In
                Resource Model                                Resource Model                        Manager
     Discovery          Comms           Device     Discovery          Comms           Device
                                      Management                                    Management   Protocol Plug-In
             Security, Identity & Permissions              Security, Identity & Permissions

               Transport Abstraction                       Transport Abstraction
                                                                                                     Resource
     Local                                         Local
      IP                  LE                        IP                                                Comms

                             Shared Transport

Figure 2-8. OCF conceptual framework

 OCF Core Framework Layer
The Core Framework lies at the center of the OCF architecture. It defines
the “resource” abstraction model which is arguably its most fundamental
building block concept and the characteristic that most distinguishes
it from other frameworks. An OCF resource is primarily a sequence of

23
   h? ttps://Raml.org
24
     https://swagger.io/
25
      https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification

tag-value pairs but can have nested sequences as well. Resources are
typically described using JSON. The OCF resource model approach to
IoT networking presumes all aspects of the network can be represented
declaratively, as a set of resource data structures having CRUDN
interaction semantics. The traditional notion of a network topology
consisting of nodes having routable IP addresses is hidden behind the
resource abstraction.
     Resources have several built-in properties (tags) that are common to
all resources such as name, resource type, interface type, and whether or
not it is discoverable and observable. Resource names are a URI (Universal
Resource Identifier). Property names and name prefixes that are common
to all are reserved by the OCF specification.
     For example, “rt” refers to the resource type property, “if” refers to
resource interface type property, “uri” is the resource name property
if expressed as a URI, and “n” refers to a resource by its friendly name.
Resource names prefixed with “/oic” are reserved for OCF use.
     Additional properties may be appended that further specialize
the resource. For example, it might define a property representing an
operational state such as “on-off-state” where the accepted values are
either ON or OFF. It might have another property “dim-level” with values
in a range from 0 to 100, representing a light’s brightness level.
     This is a JSON schema representation of a simple resource:

"oic.r.switch.binary": {
    "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "value": {
                "type": "boolean",
                "description": "Status of the switch"
            }
        }
}

    This is a RAML representation of a CRUDN RETRIEVE interface
definition:

get:
responses :
200: body:
          application/json:
             schema: |
                 { }

    The point behind using interface and data modeling languages such
as JSON and RAML is to enable the use of automated tools for generating
code, tests, and even human-readable documentation that makes it easier
to develop applications that not only interoperate but also can be adapted,
updated, or modified at various operational stages.
    The Core Framework layer defines several built-in resources used to
implement several of the services and capabilities offered by the core layer.
These include resource discovery, data transmission, data management,
device management, security, identity, and permissions. Several built-in
resources are listed in Table 2-2.

Table 2-2. A Few Resources Built into an OCF Core Framework Layer
Resource Name Description                                  Functional Area

/oic/res         A resource that lists all discoverable    Discovery
                 resources known to the current network
/oic/p           A resource that reveals details about the Discovery
                 platform that hosts the OCF device
/oic/rts         A resource that lists the resource type    Discovery
                 information for all discoverable resources
                                                                    (continued)

Table 2-2. (continued)

Resource Name Description                                     Functional Area

/oic/ifs         A resource that lists the resource         Discovery
                 interface information for all discoverable
                 resources
/oic/mon         A resource that reveals observable           Device Management
                 resources
/oic/sec/cred    A resource that lists the credentials this   Security Management
                 device has configured
/oic/sec/acl2    A resource that lists the access control     Security Management
                 restrictions for this device
/oic/sec/dots    A resource that facilitates device           Device and Security
                 onboarding                                   Management

    A JSON representation of the /oic/p resource might appear as follows.
Note this example includes comments denoted by double slash “//” which
isn’t defined by JSON:

/oic/p {
"rt": "oic.wk.p",
"if": ["oic.if.r"],
"pi": "ABCD123...",      //platform identifier UUID
"mnmn": "acme.org",    //platform manufacturer
"mnmo": "widget X",    //platform model number
"mnpv": "v1.0",        //platform version number
}

    All properties of the /oic/p resource are read-only to support discovery
use cases. A device management resource would likely allow update
so a management console could configure the resource according to
management goals.

    The Core Framework specifications also define helpful building block
resources that other resource designers may find useful such as Links and
Collections. Links are a structure for defining a static connection between
multiple resources. It consists of at least three parts: (1) the Context, (2) the
Relationship, and (3) the Target and (4) additional parameters.
    For example:

{
    "anchor": "/my/room/1",    //the Context
    "rel": "contains",         //the Relation
    "href": "/the/light/1",    //the Target
    "rt": "acme.light",        //the resource type
    "if": "oic.if.a"           //the interface type
}

    The Collection resource is a bit like a Link resource only it contains an
array of static connections to other resources.
    For example:

/my/room/1 {
"rt": "acme.room",
"if": ["oic.if.r", "oic.if.rw"],
"color": "blue",
"dimension": "15bx15wx10h",
"links": [
    {?"href":"/the/light/1", "rel":"contains", "rt":"acme.
      light",    "if":["oic.if.a", "oic.if.baseline"]},
    {?"href":"/the/light/2", "rel":"contains", "rt"="mycorp.
      light", "if":["oic.if.s" , "oic.if.baseline"]},
    {?"href":"/the/fan/1", "rel":"contains", "rt":"hiscorp.fan",
      "if":["oic.if.baseline"]}
    ]
}

 OCF Profiles Framework Layer
OCF Profiles are libraries of resources containing common functionality
(e.g., light bulb, pan-tilt-zoom camera). Profiles are grouped according to a
target deployment context such as consumer, enterprise, industrial, auto,
education, and health. Profiles are extensible. JSON validation ignores
content not matching a schema target. OCF makes use of this behavior
by allowing vendors to customize in any way they choose. We have mixed
opinions regarding the use of this extensibility mechanism because,
although it allows for post deployment customization, it also encourages
the use of non-interoperable profiles.
    The OCF data model supports resource introspection. Introspection
can be used by a client to obtain a machine-readable description of all the
resources, properties, and interface definition syntax. Introspection may
be useful for systems that can learn how to interact with resources without
prior programming.

 The OCF Device Abstraction
OCF uses Universally Unique Identifiers (UUIDs) to identify OCF
devices. The OCF device is like an OCF resource in that it has nested OCF
defined Core and Profile resources. Core resources facilitate discovery,
manageability, security, and connectivity. Profile resources define device
type–specific data and behavior.
     Access to OCF resources is accomplished using URIs. The OCF
URI contains a device identifier in the form of a UUID followed by a
reference to its resources. A client interacts with an OCF device by issuing
a discovery message to identify available OCF server devices. This is
followed by a RESTful message targeted at the device with interesting
capabilities. The device’s introspection resource may be used to gain
additional insight regarding device capabilities and may be used to fine-­
tune subsequent interactions.

    The OCF device abstraction logically defines a security boundary. OCF
resource accesses follow CRUDN (Create, Retrieve, Update, Delete, Notify)
interaction semantics that are part of the RESTful interface definition (e.g.,
PUT, GET, POST, DELETE). Access control policies use CRUDN privileges
that are applied prior to returning resource data.
    There can be multiple OCF devices hosted on the same physical
platform. Logical devices are identified independently of the physical
platform that hosts them. This means, from the perspective of the OCF
device, it is not possible to distinguish whether a peer OCF device is
geographically local or remote.

 OCF Security
OCF security is exposed to devices through OCF resources. This is a
simple yet powerful idea as all security interactions can be accomplished
using the OCF framework. OCF security architecture has three main
aspects: (1) access control, (2) message encryption, and (3) device
lifecycle management. Access control is applied at the OCF device and
resource-­level granularity. It’s worth noting that access control is not
applied at the property level (although there are some exceptions). Access
control list (ACL) policy is configured using the /oic/sec/acl2 resource.
This resource is an array of ACL entries where each entry may be used to
match the resource requestor to the requested resources so that an access
restriction, expressed as CRUDN, can be applied before the requested
resource is returned to the requestor.

/oic/sec/acl2 {
"aclist2": [
                "subject": ...,
                "resources": [...],
                "permission": CRUDN,

                "validity": ...,
                "aceid": INTEGER
            ]
}

     The subject property is used to match the requestor. There are three
ways this could be accomplished. One method uses the OCF device ID,
which is a UUID. If the requesting device authenticates with a credential
known to the local device, then the requesting device’s ID is known.
Another method is by role name. A role certificate may be presented at
any time by the requestor during a session. If a role is asserted, then ACL
entries that specify a role name could be used to match the requestor. A
third method is by connection type. OCF connectivity options allow for
anonymous (unauthenticated) and/or encrypted message payloads. It may
be appropriate to supply a blanket ACL entry for anonymous requestors
that is highly restrictive and only lessen restrictions when requestor is
authenticated. Unencrypted data similarly may require a blanket ACL rule.
     OCF supports a variety of cryptographic algorithms and key types
including symmetric, raw asymmetric, and certified asymmetric. OCF
devices must support symmetric keys and related algorithms. Security
profiles may require support for raw asymmetric keys or keys with
certificates.
     Message encryption is applied by the transport layer (e.g., DTLS
applied to CoAP messages). The use of TLS (Transport Layer Security)
implies the endpoint where data is no longer protected by cryptography
is somewhere in the framework but not necessarily in the OCF device
context. The use of TLS also implies there are deployment cases where
the TLS endpoint is actually a gateway, proxy, or firewall or another
intermediate node that isn’t the originating OCF device. Consequently,
the use of TLS alone can’t guarantee end-to-end data protection. To
handle these, one of four options may be tried: the intermediary obtains

a copy of the OCF device’s credential, the intermediary presents its own
OCF credential (masking the true OCF device originating the request),
the intermediary uses its own credential but supplies a role credential
that is common to the originating device, or the intermediary remains
anonymous.
    While there may be several ways for an intermediary to establish a
connection legitimately, the credentials used may not adequately enable
the original requestor the appropriate access rights. Lack of end-to-end
message protections can complicate management and deployment of
proper security controls. Adding this complexity runs counter to the
philosophy of simplifying apparent complexity while hiding actual
complexity.
    OCF has a device lifecycle management model that incorporates
device lifecycle state into the device resource model. The /oic/sec/pstat
resource includes a property named Device Onboarding State or “dos.”
There are five states:

      •     RESET: Device transitions to its default state prior to
            onboarding.

      •     RFOTM: Device transitions to a state ready for
            onboarding into a new network.
      •     RFPRO: Device transitions to a state ready for
            provisioning resources.

      •     RFNOP: Device transitions to a state suitable for
            normal operations.

      •     SRESET: Device transitions to a state subsequent
            to onboarding, but where the device may be
            recommissioned or reconfigured with other options
            normally established only at onboarding.

     The device is guaranteed to be in one of these five states throughout
its deployment. These states map to elements of an IoT platform lifecycle
model (see Figure 2-5). For example, a device may be in the RESET state
during manufacturing and supply chain phases then transition to RFOTM
in order to enter the deployment phase. It may transition to RFPRO as part
of onboarding and initial commissioning then transition to RFNOP while
in normal operation and monitoring phase. Management and update
phases may or may not require a transition to RFPRO depending on how
impactful the changes may be to the framework’s resources. Hardware or
low-level system changes may require transitioning to SRESET in order to
change resources and properties the framework expects are immutable.
Decommissioning implies a transition to RESET.
     OCF “dos” states can have beneficial security impact because the
device model at the framework layer enforces restrictions that could
otherwise be ignored (potentially resulting in security incidents) by other
resources and applications. For example, the /oic/sec/dots contains a
property “owned” that is only updatable when the device is onboarded
into a network for the first time. It is read-only thereafter. If an attacker tries
to update it in some way to force an ownership change, the device state
model prevents it.
     OCF onboarding accommodates secure supply chains. Owner
Transfer Methods (OTMs) are secure protocols designed to work with
platform embedded credentials such as a manufacturer’s certificate.
OTMs rely on participation from platform vendors to establish platform
provenance at manufacturing and through the supply chain. A variety of
OTMs are supported having various levels of provability of supply chain
provenance. The OTM interface is extensible, allowing improved OTM
adoption over time.
     A security challenge facing OCF frameworks is the binding between
the lower framework layer to the platform and its security capabilities
isn’t defined by the specification. Implementers are free to make trade-off
decisions that likely differ from product to product and vendor to vendor.

    The OCF resource model tolerates complexity in that it supports any
data structure representable by JSON. OCF standardized structures, Links
and Collections, can be used to create complex relationships between
resources enabling, for example, unlimited layers of nested resources that
are difficult to define meaningful ACL rules. Resources can contain links
to resources hosted on remote devices resulting in a chain of interactions
not bounded by an end-to-end ACL policy. Encryption is achieved using
TLS. TLS endpoints occur in the communication layer resulting in hop-­
by-­hop confidentiality protection semantics. Although the OCF resource
model complexity may be justified, its flexibility shouldn’t reach beyond
the security mechanisms protecting it.

A
  llSeen Alliance/AllJoyn
The AllSeen Alliance began in 2013 as an open source Linux Foundation
project that defined an IoT framework aimed at consumer class home and
small office automation use cases. AllJoyn is the open source reference
implementation that first became available in 2016. AllSeen Alliance
member companies included Affinegy, Arçelik, Canary, Cisco, Changhong,
doubleTwist, Electrolux, Fon, Haier, Harman, HTC, LIFX, Liteon, LG,
Microsoft, Muzzley, Onbiron, Panasonic, Sears, Sharp, Silicon Image,
Sproutling, Sony, TP-Link, Two Bulls, and Wilocity. The AllSeen Alliance
merged with the Open Connectivity Foundation in October of 2016.
IoTivity 1.3 released in June 2017 contained support for an IoTivity to
AllJoyn bridge.26 AllSeen deployments exist primarily as legacy networks as
development resources have turned elsewhere.
    AllJoyn architecture (Figure 2-9) consists of three classes of node,
leaf nodes, router nodes, and bridges. Leaf nodes contain application
code and are primarily responsible for authentication and encryption.
Router nodes host leaf nodes – no direct application to application

26
   https://iotivity.org/downloads/iotivity-1.3.0

interaction is permitted unless brokered by a D-Bus (Desktop Bus)
agent – though application nodes may embed router node functionality
giving the impression of direct application connectivity. Router nodes are
responsible for message exchange that includes request-response and
publish-subscribe support. It handles discovery, advertising, presence,
and session management. The messaging transport is provided by D-Bus27
technology. D-Bus is a point-to-point communications protocol built
on top of IPS (inter-process communication) or through TCP sockets. A
daemon process monitors bus activity processing messages on behalf of its
connected applications. D-Bus channels are named using UNIX filesystem
objects. An application must know which transport protocol to use and an
appropriate D-Bus name when attempting to connect to a peer leaf node
known as the “bus address.” D-Bus supports several status and discovery
commands that may be helpful in determining the health of D-Bus
daemon processes:

      •   Org.freedesktop.DBus.Peer is used to determine if a
          peer is alive.

      •   Org.freedesktop.DBus.Introspectable is used to obtain
          an XML description of the interfaces, methods, and
          signals the device implements.
      •   Org.freedesktop.DBus.Properties is used to expose
          native properties and attributes of connected devices
          or to simulate them if they don’t exist.

      •   Org.freedesktop.DBus.ObjectManager is used to query
          subobjects under its path when device objects are
          organized hierarchically.

27
   https://cgit.freedesktop.org/dbus/dbus/tree/NEWS?h=dbus-1.12

                          App
                                                                                           App

                App                        AllJoyn
            (Leaf Node)                    Router                                        AllJoyn
                                                                                         Router                 App
                                                                    Bridge
                          App

                                Ethernet                                                                        App
                                                                                      AllJoyn
                                                                                      Router

                                                 Bridge
                                                                                                          App

                                                                                                   WiFi
                                       App                                   Bridge

                                                          AllJoyn
                                     App                  Router

                                       App

                                              BT / Thread

Figure 2-9. Example AllJoyn network topology
     AllJoyn leaf node layers (Figure 2-10) consist of the AllJoyn Core
that handles discovery, security, connection management, and network
management. The AllJoyn Thin Client is an optimized subset of the AllJoyn
Core targeting ultra-constrained environments. Message authentication
and encryption protects the service framework and application data end-­
to-­end. However, AllJoyn Thin Client nevertheless requires at least one
routing node to complete an end-to-end connection.
     The AllJoyn Service Framework implements device services.
Onboarding, control panel, and notification services are common to all
devices. Application-specific services are added as needed to expose
device-specific specializations.
     The AllJoyn router nodes contain an AllJoyn Core layer that contains
message routing capabilities. However, routing nodes can be configured
to protect all D-Bus traffic between cooperating D-Bus daemon processes
using a common shared key. AllJoyn Management Functions perform
advertising and discovery functions on behalf of leaf nodes. Routers

maintain context regarding leaf node presence and maintain a session for
each attached leaf node. Messages involved in publish-subscribe messaging
may have fan-out semantics requiring platform-level optimization support.
For example, IP multicast may be an efficient way to deliver the same
message to multiple recipients. Subscription registrations are maintained
here as well. Message filtering can be applied by AllJoyn routers where the
aim is congestion control given requests containing a query string.
    AllJoyn bridges perform network and link layer translations when
AllJoyn nodes are physically separated or when AllJoyn framework-level
objects are gatewayed to a different IoT framework environment. For
example, framework bridges may support IoTivity or OneM2M mappings.

                         AllJoyn Leaf Node

                       AllJoyn Application Layer
                                                                                            AllJoyn Routing Node
                      AllJoyn Service Frameworks
                                                                                         AllJoyn Management Functions
         Onboarding           Control Panel          Notifications
                                                                           Advertising    Sessions &       Fan-out      Subscrib &
                                                   AllJoyn Thin Client     & Discovery     Presence      Stor&Forwd      Filtering
                             AllJoyn Core
                                  Connection        Network
     Discovery   Security        Management        Management                                    AllJoyn Core      Message Router

                            Physical Layer                                                      Physical Layer

Figure 2-10. AllJoyn leaf and router nodes layering

A
  llJoyn Security
AllJoyn security rests with the AllJoyn leaf node and with the application
layer. Such an approach encourages end-to-end protection of data.
Effective data-level protection at the application layer requires data
formatting and encapsulation technology that is part of its data model.
AllJoyn data objects are described using XML and rely on XML Security28
for secure encapsulation. Although D-Bus can support security at the IP
layer, it relies on the application endpoint for end-to-end data protection.

28
   www.w3.org/standards/xml/security

   When the Open Connectivity Foundation and the AllSeen Alliance
merged, they defined a bridging specification that allows OCF and AllJoyn
devices to interact; however the OCF bridging specifications do not define
security interoperability.

 Universal Plug and Play
Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) was originally designed for consumer
electronics, mobile devices, home automation, and personal computer
networks emphasizing zero configuration networking – the idea that
setting up a service doesn’t require any manual configuration. It includes
automatic assignment of network addresses, automatic distribution
of hostnames, and automatic discovery of network services. Although
UPnP envisioned interoperation with consumer electronics and home
automation, its first international specification published in 2008 by ISO/
IEC29 before the Internet of Things became a popular buzz word.
    The UPnP set of standards has evolved to better support audio/video
equipment, remote user interfaces, quality of service, and remote access
from the Web. As recently as 2015, the UPnP Forum published the UPnP
Device Architecture 2.030 specification that extends into the Web through
XMPP integration. The IoT Management and Control Architecture31
published September 10, 2013, addresses more directly home automation
requirements with the inclusion of sensor management.

29
   ”? ISO/IEC standard on UPnP device architecture makes networking simple
    and easy.” International Organization for Standardization. 10 December 2008.
    Retrieved 11 September 2014.
30
     www.upnp.org/specs/arch/UPnP-arch-DeviceArchitecture-v2.0.pdf
31
      http://upnp.org/specs/iotmc/UPnP-iotmc-IoTManagementAndControl-
      Architecture-Overview-v1.pdf

    The UPnP protocol stack (Figure 2-11) may be regarded as IoT
frameworks, though loosely as UPnP is tightly bound to IP and the network
services built around IP such as DHCP, DNS, IP multicast, and so on. UPnP
network topologies parallel that of IP network topologies.
    The UPnP Device Architecture layer consists of a discovery service
named Simple Service Discovery Protocol (SSDP) that supports passive
discovery request-response as well as active service availability notification
and unsolicited advertisements using local multicast addressing. The
General Event Notification Architecture (GENA) handles the details of
registering notification events and sending notification messages when
events are triggered. The Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP) uses
XML-formatted messages that are delivered using RESTful HTTP request-­
response exchanges. UPnP also supports IP multicast events for simple
messages that need to be broadcast to multiple UPnP nodes.

                                  UPnP Applications

                             UPnP Vendor Specific Layer

                          UPnP Forum Standardization Layer

                           UPnP Device Architecture Layer
              Discovery   Notification         Messaging
                                                                   HTTP
               (SSDP)       (GENA)              (SOAP)

                                         TCP / UDP

                                         IPv4 / IPv6             Multicast

Figure 2-11. UPnP protocol stack

    UPnP networks (Figure 2-12) consist of two node types, control points
and Devices. Devices host Services. Device nesting is supported; the top-­
level Device is known as the Root Device. Devices are conceptual objects
but are identified using IP addresses. Control points contain code that
controls devices or otherwise interacts with services.

              Control Point

                                                 Root Device
                 Control
                  Code
                                                   Service

                                                   Service

              Control Point
                                                   Device

                 Control                           Service
                  Code

Figure 2-12. UPnP network nodes consist of control points and
Devices that host Services

    UPnP can be divided into six architectural elements: addressing,
discovery, description, control, event notification, and presentation.
Architectural elements roughly follow six phases of UPnP service and
control point interactions:

      I. Addressing: Zero-touch configuration motivated
         the use of DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration
         Protocol) so the device would automatically look
         for a DHCP service to obtain an IP address. If no
         DHCP service was available, the UPnP device
         will autogenerate an IP address. The device can
         automatically obtain a DNS name using DNS
         forwarding. Secure device and control point identity
         was not a major focus.

     II. Discovery: Service discovery automation is
         achieved through proactive “alive” messages that
         are broadcast periodically to listening control
         points. Control points can send discovery messages

     with filters for the class of interesting service. This
     approach removes the need for statically configured
     services enabling dynamic services (that can go
     online or go offline easily). Control points rely
     on SSDP notifications to keep them appraised of
     service online status. Service name URLs are public
     which could have privacy implications. Secure
     discovery was not a major focus.

III. Description: Discovery reveals the existence of
     UPnP devices and services, but control points
     may require more context to determine if they
     are relevant to control point applications. Device
     description allows introspection using an XML
     description of the device structure. It includes the
     following information:

     •   Vendor-specific details include manufacturer
         name, model, version, serial number, and URLs to
         vendor-specific web sites.

     •   Service details include URLs for control, event
         notification, and service description. Service
         commands and their parameters are detailed.

     •   Variables that describe Runtime state are described
         in terms of data type, expected range, and event
         characteristics.

IV. Control: Control point code is expected to identify
    which commands and data objects are supported
    by the service to construct a program sequence
    that uses them to achieve application objectives.
    Command formatting is specified using SOAP
    protocol following the request-­response pattern.

      V. Event Notification: Services built around sensors
         and physical devices may change internal state
         autonomously. Control points seeking to be appraised
         of service and variable state changes can register for
         asynchronous notifications when things change.
         Notification messages are small; if the control
         point needs more information than is available in
         the notification message, it may need to follow the
         notification with a request-response interaction.
         UPnP event notification capability is referred to as the
         General Event Notification Architecture (GENA).

     VI. Presentation: Normally, UPnP nodes operate as
         headless entities. Nevertheless, users may need
         to monitor and control things. UPnP services can
         support web browser user interfaces by returning
         a URL to a web page markup (HTML) that exposes
         service variables and control widgets.

U
  PnP Security
Initially, UPnP architecture did not comprehend security. It was thought
to be addressed in the layers beneath (network) or above (application).
More recently The IoT Management and Control Architecture32 was added
which included access control features for sensors was facilitated by roles
and sensor permissions. Sensor permissions include

      •     ReadSensor: Control points can issue ReadSensor()
            actions to sensor objects.

      •     WriteSensor: Control points can issue WriteSensor()
            actions to sensor objects.

32
  h? ttp://upnp.org/specs/iotmc/UPnP-iotmc-IoTManagementAndControl-
   Architecture-Overview-v1.pdf

      •   ConnectSensor: Control points can issue
          ConnectSensor() and DisconnectSensor() actions to
          sensor objects.

      •   CommandSensor: Control points can modify
          IoTManagementAndControl properties in the
          data model (which is a data repository object).

      •   ViewSensor: Control points can read
          IoTManagementAndControl properties in the
          data model.

    UPnP sensor objects expect control point operates with a particular
role where permissions are assigned based on the set of behaviors each
role is expected to follow.
    UPnP control points must possess one of three UPnP defined roles:

      •   Admin: Role can read, write, connect, command, or
          view any sensor object.

      •   Public: Role can read or write specific sensor objects
          (e.g., those supporting the Public role).

      •   Basic: Role can read or write specific sensor objects
          (e.g., those supporting the Basic role).

    A group of sensors form an object that can respond to control point
accesses. Sensor groups have their own permission classification denoted
by a sensor command name followed by the group name (e.g., smgt:ReadS
ensor()#[SensorGroupName]). There are four permissions for Read, Write,
Command, and View. ConnectSensor isn’t supported. Sensors inherit
the group permissions upon joining the sensor group. Control points
acquire the “group” access by joining the sensor group as a Control point.
Interestingly the UPnP specification refers to group permissions as group
roles.

    UPnP security features are optional to implement, making it difficult to
force the ecosystem to deploy UPnP with security.
    The Open Connectivity Foundation and the UPnP Forum merged in
2016. They defined a bridging specification that allows OCF and UPnP
devices to interact; however the OCF bridging specifications do not define
security interoperability.

 Lightweight Machine 2 Machine (LWM2M)
The Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) defined the Lightweight Machine 2
Machine (LWM2M)33 specification to address IoT device management. We
have included it at the end of the section summarizing consumer class IoT
frameworks, but it could just as easily be classified as an IoT manageability
framework. However, the Internet Protocol for Smart Objects (IPSO)
Alliance extended LWM2M such that it can be used to describe a variety
of consumer class IoT devices referred to as “smart objects” borrowing
terminology from the LWM2M “object” model. OMA and IPSO Alliance
merged in March 27, 2018,34 forming new committees within OMA
organization to continue its evolution as both an IoT manageability
framework and a general-purpose IoT framework.

L? WM2M Architecture
LWM2M architecture (Figure 2-13) utilizes a LWM2M Server node to host
device management and other applications that interact with LWM2M
client nodes hosting one or more LWM2M objects. Servers use RESTful
CoAP commands (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE) to read and update the
objects. Secure access is achieved using DTLS layer of CoAPs. CoAP and
DTLS use UDP/IP and SMS transport protocols.

33
  w? ww.openmobilealliance.org/release/LightweightM2M/
34
    www.omaspecworks.org/ipso-alliance-merges-with-open-mobile-alliance-
    to-form-oma-specworks/

      Device
                         M2M Web             M2M Web
   Management
                         Application         Application
    Application

                       LWM2M Server                                          Objects

                  Interfaces     Stack                           LWM2M
             Bootstrappping      Efficient Payload
                Registration     CoAP Protocol                      CoAP
   Object / Resource Access      DTLS Security
                                                             DTLS          SMS
                   Reporting     UDP or SMS Bearer
                                                              UDP

                       LWM2M Client

                           Objects
                        M2M Device

Figure 2-13. LWM2M architecture showing client node with objects
being managed by a Server node hosting device management and
various web applications

    The LWM2M object model (Figure 2-14) is a simple but powerful
abstraction of IoT devices. The LWM2M client is the managed node and
corresponds to a sensor/actuator device. LWM2M nodes describe a set of
network exposed variables called objects. A LWM2M Server may reference
an object using a URI string that names the object plus its resources. For
example, a LWM2M URI might appear as “/0/1” where “0” is the object
identifier and “1” is the resource identifier. Objects contain one or more
resources, but resources may not contain objects; in other words, nesting
of objects is not supported. Friendly names are not supported since doing

so was thought to make URIs unnecessarily verbose. Instead objects and
resources are numeric values. It is possible to have an array of objects of
the same type using same object identifier. An Object Instance Identifier
is added between the object ID and the resource ID to qualify the object
instance. The URI format has the following form:

            / <ObjectID> / <ObjectInstanceID> /
            <ResourceID>

     Figure 2-14 shows an example object configuration consisting of two
objects. The first contains a single object instance with three resources.
The URI path begins with a leading slash “/” followed by the ObjectID
referencing the first object (denoted by red arrow). It is followed by a
second slash then the ResourceID referencing the third resource in the
first object (denoted by a green arrow). The second object contains two
instances of Object 2 where each instance consists of six resources. The
URI path examples have three elements, the middle being the Object
Instance Identifier (denoted by a blue arrow). One URI path shows an
Object Instance Identifier with the value 1 that references the first object
instance and the first resource instance within it. The other URI path
references the second object instance and the sixth resource within it.

                        LWM2M Client

                           Object 1

                          Resource 1               uri:/ 1 / 3
                          Resource 2
                          Resource 3

                           Object 2
                                                    uri:/ 2 / 1 / 1
                       Object Instance 1

                         Resource 1
                             ...
                         Resource 6
                                                     uri:/ 2 / 2 / 6

                       Object Instance 2

                          Resource 1
                              ...
                          Resource 6

Figure 2-14. LWM2M object model example showing URI references
to data values

    The LWM2M object model expects IoT devices can be described
relatively simply. The object model abstraction may hide significant actual
complexity requiring the object model designer to think carefully about
which device attributes need to be exposed and how best to map actual
complexity to a simpler apparent complexity.
    The example object in Figure 2-15 reveals six resources. The chart
describes additional metadata regarding the resource including the type
of access allowed (read vs. read/update), if it is a multi-instance object,
the resource data type, the allowable range of data values, and the units in
which the data is expressed.

     Resource   ID    Access Multiple       Type     Range    Units                             Descriptions
      Name             Type Instances?

 Latitude       0     R      N0          Decimal             Deg        The decimal notation of latitude, e.g. -43.5723
                                                                        [World Geodetic System 1984]
 Longitude      1     R      N0          Decimal             Deg        The decimal notation of longitude, e.g. 153.21760
                                                                        [World Geodetic System 1984]
 Altitude       2     R      N0          Decimal             m          The decimal notation of Altitude in meters above sea
                                                                        level.
 Uncertainty    3     R      N0          Decimal             m          The accuracy of the position in meters.
 Velocity       4     R      N0          Refers to           Refers to The velocity of the device as defined in 3GPP 23.032
                                         3GPP                3GPP      GAD specification. This set of values may not be
                                         GAD                 GAD       available if the device is static.
                                         specs               specs

 Timestamp      5     R      N0          Time                           The timestamp of when the location measurement
                                                                        was performed.

Figure 2-15. Example LWM2M location object

     The object namespace needs to be managed to avoid confusion when
servers access client objects. The OMA reserved object identifiers 0–1023
for OMA defined objects. 1024–2047 are reserved for future use. 2048–
10240 are allocated for third-party defined objects. For example, the IPSO
Alliance object definitions are allocated from this range. 10241–32768 are
assigned to public entities, vendors, or individuals for proprietary use.
     Introspection is not supported except through the use of a separately
defined introspection service – something that wasn’t defined at the time
of this writing.

 LWM2M Device Management
LWM2M defines five device management services:

            •   Bootstrapping: Configures symmetric secrets, raw
                public keys, and certificates clients and service will use
                to establish DTLS sessions. LWM2M Services may be
                configured. Access control lists may also be configured.

            •   Remote Management: Updates operational settings
                as defined by device profiles. Triggers for controlling
                actuation may also be configured or reset as part of
                normal operation.

      •   Firmware Update: Client nodes report firmware version
          and firmware packages can be installed through the
          firmware update object.

      •   Fault Management: Device errors can be exposed
          through the fault reporting objects. These may be
          viewed by other nodes querying operational status.

      •   Reporting: Notification of changing sensor values
          can be configured for multiple recipients. Status of
          the notification can be monitored and configuration
          changes applied when needed.

     The LWM2M architecture model reverses client and server roles
(Figure 2-16) in comparison to other frameworks such as OCF, UPnP, and
AllJoyn. This seems reasonable since the primary goal of LWM2M is device
management where the device utilizes management service providers
that bootstrap and configure the client. LWM2M supports both client- and
server-initiated bootstrapping. Once the client device is configured, it may
interact with other IoT nodes as an IoT service such as a sensor or actuator.
     It may be reasonable to combine LWM2M for device management with
a different IoT framework that doesn’t support device management since
LWM2M can operate alongside it provided the other IoT framework device
lifecycle states are aligned with the LWM2M device state model.

                          LWM2M                                         LWM2M
                           Client                                        Server
            Client Bootstrap
                   (Optional)               Bootstrap Object

                                     Endpoint Client Name, Objects
                Registration

                                           Object / Resource
                                                                             Read Resource
                                             Resource Value

                                    Object / Resource, Resource Value
                                                                             Write Resource

                                           Object / Resource
                                                                             Observe Resource
                                             Resource Value

                                             Resource Value
                      Notify

                                               De-register
                 De-register

Figure 2-16. LWM2M example device management lifecycle scenario

L? WM2M Security
LWM2M security has two main components, DTLS secured messages
and access control lists (ACLs) for LWM2M objects (Figure 2-17). DTLS
supports shared secrets (symmetric) using cipher suites for preshared
keys (PSK), raw public keys (asymmetric) using cipher suites that perform
ephemeral Diffie-Hellman key exchange that supports perfect forward
secrecy (PFS), and certificates (asymmetric) using cipher suites that
support popular certificate signing algorithms such as elliptic curve
cryptography and RSA.

    ACL support is achieved using the Bootstrap server to provision access
control resources to LWM2M clients seeking access to LWM2M servers.
In the following example, the Bootstrap server provisions the security
object in Client 1 with the ACL object with read and write access to Server 1
(e.g., ACL:<Server 1, RW>). It also provisions Client 3 with read and write
access to Server 2 (e.g., ACL:<Server 2, RW>).

   LWM2M
                     Registration and
    Client           resource access

                                         LWM2M
                                         Server 1
          ACL:                                          Light
        <Server 1,
          RW>
                                                       Switch
                                         Application
                                                                Registration
    LWM2M
                                          LWM2M                     and        LWM2M
   Bootstrap                                                     resource
                                          Client 3                             Server
     Server              ACL:                                     access
                       <Server 2,
                                                                                 2
                         RW>

Figure 2-17. LWM2M access control list configuration

    Provisioning credentials to each of the clients to allow the Bootstrap
server access to their security objects is part of initial device setup, but
LWM2M doesn’t (at the time of this writing) implement onboarding
(see the section “Deployment”). The method for establishing trust in the
Bootstrap server by devices is vendor specific.

 One Machine to Machine (OneM2M)
Eight global standards organizations [ARIB (Japan), ATIS (United States),
CCSA (China), ETSI (Europe), TIA (United States), TSDSI (India),
TTA (Korea), and TTC (Japan)] and six other industry fora, consortia, or
standards bodies (Broadband Forum, CEN, CENELEC, GlobalPlatform,
Next Generation M2M Consortium, OMA) collaborated to develop the
OneM2M standard. The group, known as OneM2M,35 was formed in July
2012. OneM2M produced the OneM2M technical specification in February
2016.36
     OneM2M is an architecturally complete IoT framework (Figure 2-­18)
that consists of three basic layers: (1) Application layer, (2) Common
Services layer, and (3) Network Services layer. An instantiation of a layered
module is called an entity. An application is therefore an application entity
(AE), a service is a common services entity (CSE), and a network module
is a network services entity (NSE). Interfaces facilitate communication
between entities known as Reference Points. A OneM2M reference point
uses the nomenclature “Mc-” meaning M2M communication to the entity
“-” – where the dash is a placeholder for the first letter of the entity name.
For example, Mca describes a reference point connecting an Application
Entity and a Common Services Entity. Mcn describes a reference point
connecting a Network Services Entity to a CSE. Mcc describes a CSE to
CSE reference point.

35
  h? ttp://onem2m.org/
36
    OneM2M Technical Specification, TS-0001-V1.13.1, Functional Architecture,
    2016- February-29

                                          AE          AE        AE

                  Infratructure Node                 IN-CSE

                  Middle Node             CSE           CSE   Middle Node

                                                                      Application
                  Middle Node      CSE     AE                 AE       Dedicated
                                                                            Node
        Application
        Dedicated         AE                                  AE     Application
        Node
                                                                        Service
        Application                                                        Node
        Dedicated         AE                                  CSE
        Node

Figure 2-18. OneM2M node topology architecture

    Deployment scenarios may have stereotyped nodes, according to
a logical or functional network topology. For example, Application and
Common Services entities may cooperate to provide infrastructure
capabilities such as manageability services, message logging, telemetry,
and so on. OneM2M refers to these nodes as infrastructure nodes (IN).
Other nodes may cooperate to implement an application, for example,
HVAC control, called Application Dedicated Node (ADN) or Application
Service Node (ASN). Nodes deployed to connect ADNs to INs or other
ADNs are called middle nodes (MN). Bridging non-OneM2M nodes are
given the acronym NoDN.
    Nodes may contain programs that control resources on other nodes.
Resources are composed of a set of attributes. Resources can be nested,
called a child resource.
    Nodes are identified with a globally unique identifier that is assigned
when the node registers with a registration node hosting a registration
common services function. Physical devices host OneM2M nodes.

    Entity layers are subdivided into functions. The Common Services
Entity (Figure 2-19) defines a handful of common services functions (CSF)
that manage device lifecycle including the following:

      •     Application and service layer management (ASM):
            The ASM function manages all entities hosted by any
            node excluding NoDN nodes. Management functions
            consist of two categories: (1) configuration functions
            and (2) software management functions. Configuration
            CRUDN functions expose resources used to manage
            entities, while software management functions are
            concerned with managing software and related artifacts
            associated with a software lifecycle.

      •     Communication management and (message) delivery
            handling: These functions manage delivery, temporary
            storage, and caching of messages. It also manages
            policies related to configuration and tuning of message
            delivery infrastructure.

      •     Data management and repository handling: These
            functions manage data repositories. They are
            concerned with the collection, aggregation, mediation,
            storage, and preparation for analytics and semantic
            processing.

      •     Device management: These functions address device
            management capabilities associated with OneM2M
            nodes and can use existing IoT device management
            frameworks such as TR-069 and LWM2M or may define
            new functions. Device management functions translate
            data, protocol, and semantics from one management
            node to another using a Management adapter module.
            Management gateways, proxies, and bridging functions

    fall within the scope of device management functions.
    Device management functions perform device
    configuration, device diagnostics, monitoring, firmware
    management, and topology management.
•   Discovery: Nodes, resources, and attributes can be
    discovered using a discovery CSF. Typically, the invoker
    supplies a query value that selects a subset of available
    possible matches. Filter criteria are expressed in terms
    of identifiers, keywords, location, and other semantic
    information.

•   Group management: Nodes can be organized into
    groups. The group management CSF must validate
    group membership and whether the group member
    is capable of performing functions meaningful to the
    group. Groups are used to coordinate publication,
    broadcasts, or multicasts to multiple nodes and to
    define roles for access control.

•   Location: The location CSF senses and publishes
    location information for the node. Location coordinates
    can be more than latitude-longitude coordinates but
    require knowledge of location extension semantics.

•   Network service exposure: The network service
    exposure, service execution, and triggering (NSSE)
    CSF manages exposure of underlying networks and
    communication layers through Mcn reference points
    and NSE modules.

      •     Registration: Entity services must register with a
            registrar CSF in order to make their services available
            for use. The registration CSF supplies a requestor with
            the node identifier where the service can be reached,
            a schedule for when it can be reached, and details for
            accessing the service.

      •     Security: The security CSF handles identity
            management, access control, authorization,
            authentication, security associations, data
            confidentiality, data integrity, and security system
            management. Access control list subjects can group
            nodes that enforce read or write permissions.
            ACLs are associated with resources, entities, and
            repositories. Access control can be applied to discovery
            resources but requires subject authentication and
            authorization – though an “anonymous” group could
            be defined that corresponds to an ACL entry matching
            unauthenticated subjects.

      •     Service charging and accounting: The SCA CSF
            manages telemetry generation and collection used to
            charge for services, events, information, and real-time
            credit control.

      •     Subscription and notification: The subscription CSF
            manages subscription operations and notification
            message delivery to subscribers when the subscription
            condition is met. Subscriptions are registered with
            a resource or group of resources following an access
            control check. Changes to resources are tracked at
            attribute granularity. Changes to subresources are also
            tracked but not attributes of subresources.

                                             Application
                                             Entity (AE)
                                                      Mca Reference Point
    Common Services Entity (CSE)

     Application and      Communication               Data Management            Device
      Service Layer        Management/                  & Repository           Management
      Management         Delivery Handling

                                                                             Network Service
       Discovery             Group                         Location          Exposure/Service
                           Management                                         Ex+Triggering

                                                                                                 Mcc Reference Point
                                                      Service Charging &      Subscription and
      Registration           Security                     Accounting            Notification

                                                      Mcn Reference Point

                                        Underlying Network
                                        Service Entity (NSE)

Figure 2-19. OneM2M layering with entities and Common Services
Entity functional modules

    IoT networks are sometimes partitioned into enclaves of subnetworks
called domains (Figure 2-20) to improve isolation for safety, reliability,
and security reasons. OneM2M reference point architecture envisages
network enclaves by allowing multiple AE + CSE + NSE verticals connected
through peer Mcc and Mca reference points. For example, a fieldbus
domain may contain a network of closed-loop sensors and actuators
running at real time or near real time, while an infrastructure domain may
contain accounting, telemetry, firmware update, and other services based
on restful client-server interactions. Still another domain may offload
complex analytics to a data center or Cloud.

      Field Domain                    Infrastructure Domain

        AE                                      AE

              Mca      Mca                           Mca

                       Mcc                                 Mcc’   To Infrastructure
        CSE                                    CSE                Domain of other
                                                                  Service Provider

              Mcn                                    Mcn

        NSE                                    NSE

Figure 2-20. OneM2M domain architecture allows network enclave
isolation

    OneM2M device management is built from an open-ended set of
common services functions that may be tailored toward any number of
existing industry standard and nonstandard device management solutions
including TR-069,37 OMA-DM,38 and LWM2M. As such, OneM2M can be
thought of as a framework of frameworks.
    OneM2M architecture allows extremely flexible configuration of
functional modules and extensibility options. This flexibility may be
helpful when tailoring a solution for constrained embedded devices
seeking to minimize resource footprint or when designing gateways,
bridges, and framework service nodes that are scattered throughout
a complex IoT network. However, flexibility may come with a cost as

37
     roadband Forum Technical Report, “TR-069 CPE WAN Management Protocol,”
   B
   Issue: 1 Amendment 6, Version 1.4, March 2018. www.broadband-forum.org/
   technical/download/TR-069.pdf
38
    www.openmobilealliance.org/wp/overviews/dm_overview.html

network latencies, routing, network security, and network management
overhead may be incurred. Hiding this complexity from system designers
may have undesirable consequences, while exposing the flexibility (having
simplified apparent complexity) to applications and users may also have
undesirable consequences.

 OneM2M Security
OneM2M security design comprehends identity, authentication,
authorization, access control, data protection, and privacy. That is to say,
each of these security requirements was considered and addressed to a
certain extent. However, the test determining adequacy largely depends on
how completely the industry implements the standard and how effective
the security mechanisms defined address the threats facing IoT networks.
    OneM2M security administration begins with the provisioning of
master credentials that enables the security CSF functions to be applied.
Master credentials can be post-provisioned (subsequent to initial
deployment of a CSE containing security CSFs) or pre-provisioned with
cooperation from a device manufacturer – though the exact operation of
onboarding protocols for pre-provisioning is out of scope.
    OneM2M framework architecture abstracts away (hides) physical
(device) boundaries. An Mcc reference point may or may not cross a device
boundary. The same is true for Mca reference points as well. Intuitively,
one might conclude that the use of an Mcn reference point does cross
a physical boundary, but with IP loopback, shared memory, and other
interprocess communication and overlay network mechanisms, Mcn also
doesn’t describe physical boundary crossing semantics. This is relevant to
security because attack points often occur at boundary crossings. Although
the specification intends security CSF functionality will “protect” security-­
sensitive information, there are a wide variety of hardware and software
mechanisms to draw from – each having differing security and privacy
properties.

 Industrial IoT Framework Standards
The IoT framework standards discussed up to this point primarily address
consumer grade IoT applications and deployments. That doesn’t mean
the standards organizations and member companies could not extend
their architectures to accommodate requirements typically associated with
industrial IoT. This section considers IoT frameworks that were designed
specifically to address industrial control system requirements. Industrial
control systems predate the Internet of Things and even predate the
Internet. Fieldbus technology is the foundation of process automation,
building automation, and automated manufacturing. This section
doesn’t survey the vast expanse of “brownfield” fieldbus technology.39
Instead, it focuses on Industrial IoT (IIoT) standards that aim to improve
interoperability through appropriate use of inexpensive, ubiquitous
Internet technologies and are supported by a rich ecosystem.
     Industrial Internet Control Systems (or just Industrial Internet
Systems – IIS) may be a more appropriate terminology than IoT because
at their core are complex semiautonomous and fully autonomous process
automation systems that operate at a level of sophistication that clearly
goes beyond consumer IoT. They pay close attention to Quality of Service
(QoS), Quality of Experience (QoE), and safety requirements.
     The architectural principles defined by the IIC reference architecture
serves as a reference point for evaluating the merits and demerits of IIS
framework solutions. The next section highlights important elements of
industrial IoT system architecture as defined by the Industrial Internet of
Things Consortium (IIC). In subsequent sections, we also highlight the
Open Platform Communications-Unified Architecture (OPC-UA) and Data
Distribution Services (DDS) open source IIS frameworks.

39
   <tbd Reference to industrial control systems>

I?ndustrial Internet of Things Consortium (IIC)
 and OpenFog Consortium
The Industrial Internet of Things Consortium (IIC) was formed by AT&T,
Cisco, IBM, Intel, and General Electric in November of 2016. The IIC
created a reference architecture40 for IIS that considers common needs
and challenges pertaining to control systems in energy, healthcare,
manufacturing, public sector, transportation, and factory automation.
    In December 2018, the IIC and OpenFog Consortium agreed to join
forces under the name IIC.41 The OpenFog Consortium was founded by
ARM Holdings, Cisco, Dell, Intel, Princeton University, and Microsoft in
2015. OpenFog Consortium and IIC both focused heavily on industrial IoT
architecture.
    Industrial Internet Systems bring new levels of performance,
scalability, interoperability, reliability, assurance, and efficiency
to the forefront. As such, the IIC determined it should produce a
reference architecture first (and not an IoT framework42 and a reference
implementation). IIS systems often operate in mission critical
environments that require real-time or near real-time responses and
are “smart” through increased integration with higher-level networks
that include enterprise resource planning, information technology
administration, analytics, and big data correlation engines.
    One aspect of the IIC architecture helps us understand the
implications of transforming the largely isolated brownfield embedded
control systems and technology into something that benefits from

40
     he Industrial Internet of Things Volume G1: Reference Architecture
   T
   IIC:PUB:g1:V1.80:20170131 https://www.iiconsortium.org/IIC_PUB_G1_
   V1.80_2017-01-31.pdf
41
    www.smartindustry.com/industrynews/2018/iic-and-openfog-consortium-
    join-forces/
42
     Note to reader: The IIC specification refers to sub-architecture sections as
     “frameworks” not to be confused with our usage.

the Internet economies of scale and its robust ecosystem. Industrial
embedded control systems have existed before the popular Internet and
have evolved alongside it for several years. Its evolution into the IIoT seems
inevitable, but doing so creates a complex problem for interoperability
given the existing brownfield systems will likely continue for many years.
    It is not our objective to deeply explore the IIC reference architecture
here. However, the reader might appreciate the role of a reference
architecture when evaluating IoT frameworks as building blocks of IIS
systems. Different parts of an IIS ecosystem bring different viewpoints
(Figure 2-21) of the system. The IIC reference architecture explores IIS
from four viewpoints:

      •     Business viewpoint: Identifies stakeholders, business
            objectives, values, vision, and related regulatory
            context and comprehends business-oriented concerns.

      •     Usage viewpoint: Represents the activities, sequences,
            and functionality involving human or logical users. It
            ultimately establishes whether the IIS achieves value
            from the user’s perspective.

      •     Functional viewpoint: Identifies functional
            components, structures, interfaces, interactions, and
            relationships. It considers trade-offs associated with the
            interests of systems architects, component architects,
            developers, and integrators.

      •     Implementation viewpoint: Considers challenges
            and implications of functional components, their
            communication, and lifecycle procedures and
            dependencies.

                         Business Viewpoint

                          Usage Viewpoint

                        Functional Viewpoint

                     Implementation Viewpoint

Figure 2-21. IIC reference viewpoints

     Although multiple viewpoints exist, security objectives can be frustrated
if a perspective somehow becomes hidden from the others in the context
of continuous security monitoring, threat detection, decision making, and
response management. For example, security return on investment value
may be weighed against performance or consumer satisfaction value. The
user benefits of autonomous operation (without users) may be compared to
perceived and actual benefits of user involvement in setting and evaluating
security relevant decisions. Security functional viewpoint defines points
where security-related enforcement and decision making may impact
other functional goals. The implementation viewpoint applies security
technologies involving patterns and system components in ways that are
correctly implemented and easy to maintain and ensure correct operation of
security functions, algorithms, and hardening.
     The IIC functional viewpoint reference architecture (Figure 2-­22)
recognizes an important understanding of IIS systems having five functional
domains that must coexist as interoperable subsystems while ensuring
appropriate isolation mechanisms prevent the goals of each domain from
being compromised given failure or compromise in a peer domain.

                                                             System Characteristics

                                 ity
                                  ce

                                 ity
                                  y

                               cy
                               ty

                              rit

                            ien

                             bil
                             bil

                         iva
                          fe

                                                                              ...
                         cu

                        ala
                        lia
                        sil
                       Sa

                      Pr
                      Se

                     Re
                     Re

                     Sc

                                                                                                                                                    Intelligent & Resilient Control
                     Trustworthiness

                                                                                                                                                                                       ...
                        Functional Domains

                                                                                                                            Industrial Analytics
                                                                                              Distributed Data Management
                              Business

                                                                               Connectivity
                              Information

                                               Application
        Operations

                                                                                                                                                                                       ns
                                                                                                                                                                                      tio
                                 Control
                                                                                                                                                                             nc
                                                                                                                                                           Fu
                                                                                                                                                    g
                                                                                                                                                   tin
                                                                                                                                       ut

                      Sense                 Actuation
                                                                                                                             sc
                                                                                                                            os
                                                                                                                        Cr

                         Physical Systems

Figure 2-22. IIC functional viewpoint reference architecture showing
various functional domains

    The business domain functions as a layer on top of operations,
information, and application domains that interact with the control
domain. The control domain consists of a separation between cyber
and physical systems brokered by sensing and actuation functions. User
interactions may occur at each domain according to domain-specific

Quality of Experience objectives. Cross-domain interactions should carry
the appropriate level of domain-specific context to ensure peer domain
functions do not, in some way, misinterpret the semantics of command
interaction, control flow, and data representation as this can result in
failures and security vulnerabilities.
     The IIC implementation viewpoint reference architecture (Figure 2-­23)
captures an important three-tier network topology structure that recognizes
an Edge Tier network consisting of sensor, actuator, and controller nodes
that may share latency, resiliency, and QoS requirements that typically
are met by Edge-class technologies. These differ from Platform Tier
technologies used to implement scalable, reliable, available systems
for data analytics, operations, and data transformation. Similarly, the
Enterprise Tier consists of technologies tuned for system maintenance,
management, and system-level controls. Inter-Tier interactions are held
in check through bridging, gatewaying, and proxying technologies aimed
at preserving the correct context of the peer Tier when performing control
operations or when moving data between Tiers.

Figure 2-23. IIC implementation viewpoint reference architecture
showing a three-tier network

    Multiple viewpoints can be combined to reveal additional insights
regarding an IIS system. For example, Figure 2-24 shows the functional
viewpoint architecture overlaid with the implementation viewpoint
architecture. The Control Domain exists in the Edge Tier which contains
the Proximity Network consisting of sensors, actuators, controllers, and
gateways to Platform Tier. The Information and Operations Domains
exist in the Platform Tier bridging the Access and the Service Networks.
The Platform Tier contains data service and platform management, data
distribution, persistence, streaming, aggregation, and transformation.
The Operations Domain is concerned with provisioning, deployment,
metadata, monitoring, telemetry, optimization, and access control. The
Application and Business Domains exist in the Enterprise Tier extending
the Service Network with business analytics, CRM, DSS, BSS, and so on
and enterprise applications, APIs, portals, and enterprise rules.

Figure 2-24. Architectural overlay of functional and implementation
viewpoints

  pen Platform Communications-Unified
O
Architecture (OPC-UA)
Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) is a Microsoft technology aimed
at office automation largely based on Windows operating systems. The
Open Platform Communications (OPC) task force extended OLE for
machine-to-machine control and industrial automation. The task force
formed the OPC Foundation43 in 1996 to maintain the OPC standard. OPC
originally was based on Microsoft Windows-only COM/DCOM technology
which was integrated with the existing OPC communications framework,
resulting in a unified architecture called OPC-UA.
    An industrial IoT network is really a layering of multiple networks
customized to address a particular aspect of industrial operations. A typical
IIoT system will consist of a four-layer system of networks (Figure 2-­25).
The device-level network consists of sensor-actuator devices with real-­time
control of physical world processes, logistics, and mechanics. The protocols
linking nodes at this layer are typically traditional brownfield technologies
such as ProfiNet, EtherCAT, and Modbus. These systems are designed to
operate autonomously taking into consideration safety and reliability.
    The control-level network consists of shop floor controllers that
coordinate the end-to-end flow of the industrial system. The output of one
shop floor device may be consumed as input to another shop floor device.
Shop floor controllers orchestrate the hand off the work item, whether
physical, informational, or both. OPC-UA is a framework for shop floor
machine control. Controllers host multiple device nodes, run real-time
or near real-time operating systems, and support both fieldbus and a
traditional Internet protocol stack based on IP and TCP.

43
   www.opcfoundation.org/

     The third level is the Manufacturing Execution System (MES) that
provides plant-, site-, or factory-level coordination of various shop floor
networks. This network consists of PCs and servers networked using
traditional IP networks. The fourth level focuses on Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) functions that filter data from the MES level for deeper
analytics relating to process improvement, cost optimization, and operational
efficiency improvement. ERP applications may be hosted in an enterprise
data center or a cloud hosting environment such as Microsoft Azure.

Figure 2-25. A four-layer system of networks for IIoT with an OPC-­
UA layer

    OPC-UA is a device-centric technology that connects sensor, actuator,
and PLC (programmable logic controller) devices to each other and to a
larger system of PC and server class platforms. It aims to ensure device-­
level interoperability.

   The basic structure of an OPC-UA network consists of an OPC-Client
connected to an OPC-Server. The OPC-Server connects to sensor, actuator,
and PLC devices. The OPC-Client to OPC-Server connection is typically
based on IP networking. The OPC-Server to control devices is typically
based on a fieldbus technology.

 OPC-UA Framework Architecture
The OPC-UA design goals aim for platform independence, functional
equivalence, and data interoperability through information modeling,
extensibility, and security. Platform independence is achieved by porting
the OPC-UA framework layer to multiple operating systems (e.g., Microsoft
Windows, Apple OSX, Android, Linux) and hardware platforms based on
X86, ARM, PLC, and others. As long as there is a framework instance that
runs on the OS and hardware of interest, IIoT device interoperability exists.
    Functional equivalence is the idea that OPC-UA applications operate
consistently regardless of which operating system and hardware platform
was used. There are six areas of functional equivalence defined:

     (1) Discovery: Devices search for peer devices, servers,
         and networks the OPC-UA application needs to
         perform its function. Plug-and-play behavior can
         be supported but requires application involvement
         to anticipate the type of objects and operations
         needed.

     (2) Address space layout: Devices implement a
         hierarchical object model where files and folders
         contain data that can be read/written across the
         network from one node to another.

     (3) Access control: Data objects have access control
         policies that control reading and writing on a per
         node basis.

      (4) Subscriptions: Client nodes can subscribe to data
          objects monitoring and receiving updates to data
          that changes. Client nodes may specify filtering
          criteria that are applied to monitored data values
          when determining when it is appropriate to notify
          the client.

      (5) Events: Client nodes can receive asynchronous
          responses when data values satisfy a specified
          criterion.

      (6) Methods: Client nodes execute subroutines based
          on server-defined criteria.

     Information models define data access semantics. Each information
model is independent from other information models, meaning each
model has different access control, state, and quality contexts. The OPC-­
UA framework has several built-in information models (Figure 2-26): Data
Access (DA), Alarms and Conditions (AC), Historical Access (HA), and
Programmable state machines (Prog). The Data Access model supports
live (near real-time) access to sensor data. Each data element has a name
and value. There is also a timestamp to indicate when the data was read
and a quality component that determines if the data is valid.
     Historical Access (HA) data is not real-time data, and there could be a
deep history of values stored. SCADA and other systems support devices
that monitor sensor readings over a longer period of time. HA objects can
transfer historical data from sensor to framework node easily. Framework
application may apply analytics to HA data to gain additional insights into
operations over a period of time.
     Alarms and Conditions (AC) data doesn’t have a current value. Rather
it maintains subscriptions to other data where subscribers may specify
conditions in which to send notifications and updates. Notifications have a
timestamp but do not have name and quality attributes.

                             Vendor Information Model
                            Industry Srandards Information Models                                 Information
                    (Companion Specifications: FDI, PLCopen, ISA 95, MDIS, ...)                   Models

                       DA                 AC                HA                Prog

                                 Information Access

                                                                                     Robustness
 Security

                              (Data Model and Services)                                           OPC UA
                                                                                                  Base
            Transport - Protocol Mappings                 Discovery

Figure 2-26. OPC-UA information modeling framework

    Extensibility is achieved through a multilayered information model
that supports vendor-specific, industry standard data models and native
OPC-UA defined data models. Companion specifications define what
information is exchanged, while OPC-UA Information Access layer defines
how information is exchanged.

O
  PC-UA Security
Security is built around two framework layers (Figure 2-27). The session
layer addresses user authorization, authentication, and access control
based on role and permissions. The secure channel layer provides
message encryption and integrity protection when exchanged between
nodes. It also can be used to authenticate applications that connect
with the OPC-UA framework. The security channel layer relies on TLS
(Transport Layer Security) using HTTPS. Though HTTP is also supported.
OPC-UA relies exclusively on X.509v3 certificates to authenticate and
authorize users and applications.

             OPC UA Client                            OPC UA Server
            Application Layer                         Application Layer
            • User Authorization       Session        • User Authorization
            • User Authentication                     • User Authentication

            Communication Layer                       Communication Layer
            • Confidentiality                         • Confidentiality
            • Integrity                Secure         • Integrity
            • App Authentication       Channel        • App Authentication

                                    Transport Layer

Figure 2-27. OPC-UA secure communications

     Auditing is also supported in OPC-UA security supporting forensic
investigation.
     OPC-UA applications undergo a two-step access process where
they first access servers and second access data. Authentication policy
is expressed in terms of server or client identity, while data access is
expressed in terms of read/write permissions on data objects.
     The German government BSI (Bundesamt für Sicherheit in der
Informationstechnik) did an extensive security evaluation of OPC-UA to
determine if it is safe for using in German industry. Their conclusion was
that it was designed with a focus on security and does not contain systemic
security vulnerabilities. This is an important observation because, unlike
other framework approaches we’ve reviewed, security was integral to the
framework design.
     However, the way in which hardware security capabilities such as secure
storage, cryptographic algorithm implementation, and trusted execution
environment enforcement are left as an exercise to implementers. Given
the platform independence design goal, it is possible if not likely different
platforms hosting OPC-UA frameworks could have very different attack

resistance properties. At the time of this writing, OPC-UA did not implement
attestation mechanisms that describe implementation choices linking
framework security to hardware and platform security.

 Data Distribution Service (DDS)
The Data Distribution Service44 (DDS) is a connectivity framework
designed for industrial process control. It is standardized through the
Object Management Group45 (OMG) founded in 1989. The OMG is an
industry standards consortium that produces and maintains specifications
for interoperable, portable, and reusable enterprise applications in
distributed, heterogeneous environments.
     DDS v1.0 was published December 2004. DDS v1.4 was published
March 2015. Companion specifications relating to security, remote
procedure call (RPC), and other topics are continually updated. There are
several proprietary and open source implementations of DDS. OpenDDS46
is a popular open source implementation.
     The primary design goal is summarized as the efficient and robust
delivery of the right information to the right place at the right time. To
accomplish this, a data-centric publish-subscribe (DCPS) approach
was taken. The target applications expect the DCPS framework to be
high-performance, efficient, and predictable. To accomplish these
goals, DDS (a) allows middleware to preallocate resources to minimize
dynamic resource allocations, (b) avoids properties that require the use
of unbounded or hard-to-predict resources, and (c) minimizes the need
to make copies of the data. DDS is a strongly typed system, meaning
the programmer directly manipulates constructs that represent data.
Interfaces are safer due to rigorous type checking, and execution code is
more efficient because type checking enforcement is done at compile time.

44
   w? ww.omg.org/spec/category/data-distribution-service/
45
     www.omg.org
46
      http://opendds.org

      DDS consists of four main entities:

        •   Domains (Figure 2-28): Define a global context
            in which data, data readers, and data writers have
            ubiquitous access. The domain defines the naming
            scope for identifiers. Cross-domain interactions may
            require disambiguation using a domain identity.

                                    Domain

                                     Topic
            Data                                               Data
                         Publish               Subscribe
            Writer                                            Reader

Figure 2-28. DDS publish-subscribe data model

        •   Topics (Figure 2-28): Are objects that conceptually fit
            between data writers and data readers. They define
            the context in which publish-­subscribe interactions
            may take place. Topic names are unambiguous within
            the domain and contain a type and QoS component
            (Figure 2-29). Type and QoS attributes apply to the
            data referenced via the topic context. QoS attributes
            are themselves DDS Topics. Topics allow expression of
            both functional and nonfunctional information.

                                    Name

                                    Topic

                                            QoS
                            Typ
                                e

Figure 2-29. DDS Topics have QoS integration

      •   Data Writers: Correspond to publishers of a publish-
          subscribe interaction pattern and must create a Publisher
          instance object in order to accept subscribers or to
          prepare and publish data. Data writers communicate data
          to its publisher to initiate a publication.

      •   Data Readers: Correspond to the subscribers of a
          publish-subscribe interaction pattern and must create
          a Subscriber instance object in order to register to
          receive publications. Data readers communicate
          interest in a topic to initiate subscription registration.

    Quality of Service (QoS) is a fundamental design consideration that is
intimately integrated into the DDS object model. Each topic may consist
of multiple data values distinguished by a key value. Different data values
with the same key value represent successive values for the same data
instance (e.g., a temperature sensor may maintain a short history of
temperature values sensed over an interval). Different data values with
different key values represent different data instances (e.g., multiple
temperature sensors). QoS and type attributes apply to data instances.
QoS interactions follow a requested-offered pattern where a data reader
requests a particular QoS policy and the data writer tries to accommodate
the request.

    The overall flow of a DDS interaction begins with domain participants
(readers and writers) joining a domain (Figure 2-30). Publishers produce
data to a data partition object, while subscribers retrieve data from the
data partition object. Data writers offer a QoS promise on published data
based on the data reader’s requested QoS level.

       Domain              joins                              joins        Domain
                                        Domain Id
      Participant                                                         Participant

                       produces-in                       consumes-from
      Publisher                         PARTITION                         Subscriber

                                      RxQ QoS Policies
                                       DURABILITY
                                       DEST.ORDER
                     offered           RELIABILITY            requested
                      QoS                                        QoS
      DataWriter                     LATENCY BUDGET                       DataReader
                                        DEADLINE
                                       OWENERSHIP
                                        LIVELINESS

                          writes                             reads
                                          Topic

Figure 2-30. DDS data interaction flow

    The DDS standard defines the set of possible QoS policies. These
include the following QoS types:

         •    USER_DATA: Allows the application to attach
              additional information to the data object so that remote
              entities can obtain additional context that relates to
              application-specific purposes. This aids in refining

    discovery queries and allows selection of appropriate
    security credentials or enforcement of application-­
    specific security policies.

•   TOPIC_DATA: Allows the application to attach
    additional information to the topic object to facilitate
    discovery for application-specific purposes.

•   GROUP_DATA: Allows the application to attach
    additional information to the Publisher or Subscriber
    entity so that application-specific policies may regulate
    the way data reader listeners and data writer listeners
    behave.

•   DURABILITY: Allows data to be read or written even
    when there are no current subscribers or publishers.
    Multiple degrees of data volatility can be defined.

•   DURABILITY_SERVICE: Allows configuration of a
    service that implements durability attributes.

•   PRESENTATION: Controls the scope of access given
    various data interdependencies. Coherent_access
    controls whether the service will preserve groupings of
    changes made by a publisher. Ordered_access controls
    whether the service will preserve the order of changes.
    Access_scope controls the scope of access in terms of
    data instance, topic, or group.

•   DEADLINE: Controls the interval in which a topic
    is expected to be updated. Publishers must supply
    updates within the deadline interval, and subscribers
    can set a timer to check for most recent updates based
    on the interval.

      •     LATENCY_BUDGET: Allows applications to specify
            the urgency of the message by specifying a latency
            duration.

      •     OWNERSHIP: Controls how data writer objects
            interact with published data. Shared access means
            multiple writers can update the data item. Exclusive
            access means only one writer can update it. SHARED-­
            EXCLUSIVE means multiple updaters coordinate their
            updates.

      •     LIVELINESS: Controls mechanisms for determining if
            network entities are still “alive.”

      •     TIME_BASED_FILTER: Allows data readers to see at
            most one change to a topic at a minimum periodicity.

      •     PARTITION: Allows a logical partition inside a
            “physical” partition. Physical partitioning may have
            safety and security benefits, while logical partitions
            may have performance benefits.

      •     RELIABILITY: Allows reliability to be defined in
            terms of levels, BEST_EFFORT being the lowest and
            RELIABLE being the highest.

      •     TRANSPORT_PRIORITY: Allows alignment with
            transport layer QoS capabilities.

      •     LIFESPAN: Allows specification of when a data value
            becomes stale.

      •     DESTINATION_ORDER: Controls how each subscriber
            resolves the final value of the data instance when
            written by multiple writers.

      •   HISTORY: Controls when data instance changes before
          it is communicated to data readers. KEEP_LAST means
          the server keeps the most recent update. KEEP_ALL
          means the server will attempt to deliver all instances of
          changed data.

      •   RESOURCE_LIMITS: Controls how many resources can
          be applied to achieve quality of service objectives.

      •   ENTITY_FACTORY: Controls the flexibility of nodes in
          their ability to replicate or produce additional entity
          instances.

      •   DATA_LIFECYCLE: Controls how persistent or
          temporal data are relative to the availability of either
          the data writer or data reader.

    DDS QoS design is one of its features that most distinguishes it from
other IoT and IIoT frameworks. QoS mechanisms have both safety and
security implications in that they improve data integrity – goals common
to both disciplines. QoS mechanisms must be implemented in ways that
ensure the integrity of the QoS system. Otherwise, the expected quality
of service is suspect. Hence, trustworthy implementation of the DDS
framework is essential to realizing the QoS richness anticipated by its
designers.

 DDS Framework Architecture
The DDS framework layering (Figure 2-31) consists of several layers
beginning with an IP network layer. TCP and UDP transports make up
the next layer followed by the DDS Wire Protocol for Real-Time Publish-­
Subscribe (DDSI-RTPS) layer. The DDS layer defines the data model
abstractions described earlier. The DDS framework defines several
vertically integrated technologies for security, remote procedure call
(RPC), and extensions to its data typing system.

      App-A          App-B                     App-C

  DDS Layer
                                                                 Domains            Topics
                     PIM
                      DDS Security   PIM       PIM

                                                                 Readers

                                               DDS X-Types
                                                                                   Writers
                                     DDS RPC

  DDSI-RTPS Layer                                            Device System Layer

        PIM                                                      Mgmt.       Security        Device
                     PSM             PSM       PSM
        PSM                                                                    RTOS

         TCP                             UDP                 Device Hardware Layer

                     IP                                        Sensor       Actuator         Crypto

Figure 2-31. DDS framework layering

    Implied by the DDS layering architecture is a Device System layer
that implements the IoT device capabilities including native security
and manageability capabilities. These capabilities depend on a Device
Hardware layer that must have ties to the actual sensor, actuator, security,
or other hardware features. The Device System layer exposes native device
capabilities to the DDS framework through available interfaces. Different
DDS framework implementations may make different implementation
choices regarding how to best integrate the framework with a specific
device.
    The DDS specification helps isolate platform-specific elements of
DDS from platform-independent elements by specifying a platform-­
independent model (PIM) and a platform-specific model (PSM) of DDS
structures. The PSM definition ensures porting efforts result in minimal
impact to the semantics and operation of the PIM while still allowing
quality integration with the native platform.

     The PIMs and DDS layer ensure DDS applications can expect a
consistent environment for sharing information that is strongly typed and
syntactically interoperable. A summary of DDS application properties is as
follows:
      •   Applications can autonomously and asynchronously
          read and write data that is decoupled spatially and
          temporally.

      •   DDS data is loosely coupled due to virtualized data
          spaces that are designed for scalability, fault tolerance,
          and heterogeneity.

      •   As with all distributed systems, the data model must
          consider a data consistency model. DDS defines data
          spaces that tolerate inconsistent data but eventually
          becomes consistent. Data readers will eventually see a
          write but may not observe it at the same time.

      •   DDS discovery model isolates discovery from network
          topology and connectivity details so that applications
          may focus on data objects that are most relevant to
          application objectives.
      •   The DDS data model allows location transparency
          since topics, data readers, and data writers are
          conceptually separated from the underlying physical
          devices and network nodes. Integration across Cloud,
          enterprise, plant and mission control, shop floor, or
          device networks doesn’t require redefinition of data
          syntax and semantics.

      •   DDS data spaces (aka domains) are decentralized. A
          DDS system may host multiple data spaces that involve
          readers and writers from any data space. There is no
          central point of failure.

        •   Connectivity among DDS entities is adaptive,
            meaning connections can be established and torn
            down dynamically. The underlying communications
            infrastructure can optimize for the most efficient data
            sharing approach.

     DDS domains have global data space (Figure 2-32), meaning topics
are visible to all data writers and readers that are members of the same
domain. Data writers and readers may be members of multiple domains
simultaneously to allow interaction with topics from different domains. It
is even possible to construct a domain broker that gives the illusion of the
same topic appearing in separate domains.
     DDS domain interactions can become rather complex. This complexity
may be especially appreciated when an access control policy is needed
that places restrictions on various data writer and data reader interactions
that span multiple domains.

                                             DDS Global Data Space

                                                  Domain A                                    Data
                                                                                             Reader
                                                       Topic            Subscribe                  Data
             Data                                        A                 Subscribe              Reader
                                Publish
             Writer                                                           Subscribe                 Data
                                                                                                       Reader

                                     Publish
                                                                   Domain B

                                                                Topic                Topic
                      Data                                        B                    C                      Data
                                             Publish                                            Subscribe
                      Writer                                                                                 Reader

                           Publish      Domain C
                                                                                                  Domain D
                                     Topic
   Data                                D
                Publish                                                                              Topic
   Writer
                                                Publish        Broker               Subscribe          D                  Data
                                                                                                             Subscribe
                                                                                                                         Reader

Figure 2-32. DDS Global Data Space example

D
  DS Security
DDS security consists of three main elements (Figure 2-33): (1) RTPS
messages with security enveloping structures, (2) token-based security
context, and (3) pluggable security modules.

Security Enveloping
Security is closely integrated into the DDS data model. Cleartext DDS data
messages are encapsulated within DDS enveloping structures that support
encryption, integrity, authorization, and authentication. The RTPS system
uses the security enveloping structures as its main messaging structure
so that the real-time publish-subscribe optimizations are preserved even
when security is applied.

                        Message Transformation                        RTPS Header
      RTPS Header
                                                                    SecureRTPSPrefix
   RTPS SubMessage
                         Secure encoding                              SecureBody
    SerializedPayload
                                                                      SecurePrefix

   RTPS SubMessage       Secure decoding                               SecureBody
                                                                     RTPS SubMessage
    SerializedPayload                                                 SerializedPayload

                                                                      SecurePostfix

                                                                    RTPS SubMessage

                                                                        CryptoHeader
                                                    CryptoContent

                                                                     SerializedPayload*

                                                                        CryptoHeader

                                                                    SecureRTPSPrefix

Figure 2-33. RTPS message encoding/decoding with secure
encapsulation

    A cleartext RTPS message consists of an RTPS header and one
or more RTPS submessages each containing a serialized payload. To
prepare a cleartext message for delivery over an unsecure channel, the
cleartext message must be transformed into a secure RTPS message.
Figure 2-32 illustrates the transformation. Integrity-protected RTPS
submessages are wrapped by a secure body and have a secure prefix and
secure postfix component. The prefix defines the integrity protection
mechanism, security context, and algorithms. The secure postfix contains
a hash or signature of the secure body. If the RTPS submessage requires
confidentiality protection, the serialized payload of the submessage is
encrypted, forming a CryptoContent element consisting of a CryptoHeader
and CryptoFooter. The CryptoHeader defines the encryption method,
security context, and algorithms. The CryptoFooter contains the ciphertext
version of the serialized payload. All the RTPS submessages belonging
to the RTPS message are bound together using another layer of security
enveloping consisting of SecureRTPSPrefix, SecureRTPSPostFix, and
SecureBody elements. The second layer of security enveloping ensures
submessages can’t be omitted, appended, or substituted by an attacker.

Security Tokens
All of the privileges obtainable by DDS entities are described using a security
token data structure. There are tokens that facilitate secure discovery,
participant permissions, and secure message exchange. Security tokens
allow exchange of security information using the DDS messaging capability.

      •     Discovery tokens: Facilitate establishment of
            security contexts for subsequent secure interactions.
            The IdentityToken contains summary information
            of a domain participant in a manner that can be
            externalized and propagated using DDS discovery.
            The IdentityStatusToken contains authentication
            information of a domain participant in a manner that

          can be externalized and propagated securely. The
          PermissionsToken contains summary information on
          the permissions for a domain participant in a manner
          that can be externalized and propagated over DDS
          discovery.

      •   Permissions tokens: The PermissionsCredentialToken
          encodes the permissions and access information
          for a domain participant in a manner that can be
          externalized and sent over a network. It is used by the
          access control plugin which manages domain access
          and specific reader-writer interactions.

      •   Message tokens: The CryptoToken contains all the
          information necessary to construct a set of keys to be
          used to encrypt and/or sign plain text transforming
          it into ciphertext or to reverse those operations. The
          MessageToken is a superclass of several message tokens
          used to maintain security context when multiple
          message exchanges are required such as authentication
          and key exchange protocols.

Security Plugin Modules
The DDS framework takes a modular approach to security so that
platform-specific capabilities can be exposed to and utilized by DDS
entities. There are five pluggable security modules (Figure 2-34): (1)
authentication, (2) access control, (3) cryptography, (4) logging, and (5)
data tagging.

      •   Authentication plugin: The principal joining a DDS
          domain must authenticate to a domain controller, and
          peer DDS participants may be required to perform
          mutual authentication and establish shared secrets.

       •      Access control plugin: Decides whether a principal is
              allowed to perform a protected operation.

       •      Cryptography plugin: Generates keys and performs
              key exchange, encryption, and decryption operations.
              Computes digests and verifies message authentication
              codes. Signs and verifies signatures on messages.

       •      Logging plugin: Logs all security relevant events.

       •      Data tagging plugin: Adds data tags for each data
              sample.

                                                    Token                         Token
                                          «discovery»              «discovery»
                                         IdentityToken           PermissionsToken
      «create»
                                                                       «create»
               SecurityPlugin                                                                 SecurityPlugin
            «interface»                                                               «interface»
           Authentication                                                            Access control
                                     «create»
                                                               «use»
                                          «primitive»
                                        IdentityHandle                              «create»

  «create»                      SecurityPlugin                     SecurityPlugin
                                                                                                «primitive»
                                «interface»                 «interface»                      PermissionsHandle
                                DataTagging                   Logging
                                                  + enable_logging(): void
                                                  + log(): void                                                «use»
                                        Token     + set_log_options(): boolean
      «primitive»
  SharedSecretHandle            CryptoToken                                          «use»

             «use»       «create»

                                                             CryptoKeyExchange
                                                               CryptoKeyFactory
                                                                CryptoTransform
                                           «interface»
                                          Cryptographic

Figure 2-34. DDS security plugin module architecture

    DDS security offers a comprehensive well-integrated security solution
that aligns well with DDS design philosophy focusing on data and
publisher-subscriber interactions. Security is modular, enabling platform-­
specific services and hardware to be effectively utilized and incorporated.
    DDS quality of service parameters though originally designed to
meet industrial safety requirements may also help achieve security
objectives. The OWNERSHIP and PARTITION QoS parameters capture
expected data sharing and partitioning semantics. Security mechanisms
used for data isolation and protection may be useful toward meeting
these quality expectations. LIFESPAN and HISTORY properties describe
data persistence characteristics that inform regarding object reuse
requirements and which data may require stronger confidentiality and
integrity protection.
    However, DDS goals toward heterogeneous operation make
assumptions regarding the quality and condition of security plugins.
An attacker might easily compromise the plugin or spoof the plugin
interface allowing an attack plugin to take control. Peer nodes are not
easily able to detect such attacks. For example, DDS doesn’t appear to
support attestation protocols that would query a peer principal’s security
subsystem to provide proof of device provenance and integrity of the
system firmware, software, plugins, and DDS framework layers.

 Framework Gateways
This chapter has focused almost exclusively on open standard IoT
framework solutions, some of which have been omitted here for brevity.
There are tens if not hundreds of brownfield frameworks with varying
degrees of openness and standardization, but many are specific to
an industry vertical. Cloud-connected IoT is another category of IoT
framework integration mostly ignored here as well. Although many
of the open standard frameworks claim interoperability with cloud

environments, the IoT cloud ecosystem largely takes a walled-garden
approach.47 Most have a proprietary IoT framework or support both
a proprietary and open framework solutions with integration to their
proprietary cloud back end. Some of these include Amazon Web Services
(AWS) IoT, Apple Homekit,48 Bosch IoT Suite, Cisco IoT Cloud Connect,
General Electric Predix, Google Cloud, IBM Watson Cloud, Microsoft
Azure, Oracle IoT Cloud, Salesforce IoT, Samsung ARTIK Cloud Services,49
and SAP IoT Platform. Dell’s EdgeX Foundry50 takes a slightly different
approach enabling services at the edge, where edge refers to both the
edge of the IoT network and the edge of the cloud hosting environments.
The ecosystem that traditionally supplies the pipe between IoT device
and Cloud is interested in moving up the IoT stack to add more value. IoT
framework technologies help enable that mobility.
    The IoT framework standards organizations seem to understand
that a multitude of “standard” IoT frameworks hinders one of the main
motivations for IoT frameworks – interoperability! Industry efforts to
consolidate frameworks have taken place already. The AllSeen Alliance and
UPnP Forum have merged with the Open Connectivity Foundation. The
OpenFog Consortium joined forces with the IIC and the IPSO Alliance was
acquired by the Open Mobile Alliance (OMA) to form OMA SpecWorks.51
Collaborations between framework standards organizations also help
resolve interoperability challenges. For example, the OCF is thought to be
working on an OCF52 to OneM2M bridge53 (aka framework gateway).

47
   w? ww.electronicdesign.com/embedded-revolution/iot-frameworks-ties-bind
48
     https://developer.apple.com/homekit/
49
      https://artik.cloud
50
       www.edgexfoundry.org
51
        www.businesswire.com/news/home/20180327005208/en/
        IPSO-Alliance-Merges-Open-Mobile-Alliance-Form
52
         https://wiki.iotivity.org/bridging_project
53
          https://openconnectivity.org/draftspecs/Cleveland/CR2595_Cleveland_
          Bridging_Security_20181004.pdf

But these efforts are solutions to an interoperability problem created
by the industry’s eager response to an IoT interoperability problem.
Ironically, the “success” of IoT seems to have created a more complex
environment for IoT interoperability as both standard and proprietary
“connectivity” frameworks and toolkits proliferate. Framework gateways
naturally come to the rescue, but at what cost to usability, manageability,
and security?

 Framework Gateway Architecture
This section outlines several approaches for gatewaying (aka bridging)
IoT frameworks, considers security implications of each, and suggests an
idealized architecture for secure IoT framework gateways.

 Type I Framework Gateway
A type I framework gateway (Figure 2-35) combines unmodified
framework gateways using a common framework gateway application.
The application performs all necessary object model translations and
data structure mappings to achieve interoperability. The application (i.e.,
developer) must have intimate understanding of data object syntax and
semantics for both (all?) sides of the translation. Some objects in a first
IoT network may not have a suitable corresponding counterpart (sensor,
actuator, controller) in the other IoT network for the applications to
simply “wire” them together. Instead, it must create an abstraction that
approximates an object that is recognizable and considered to be a safe
alternative interaction. For example, a dimmable light bulb in Network A
may support 10 levels of brightness, while a dimmer control in Network
B supports 100 levels of control. The gateway application provides the
mapping function that divides by 10 in one direction and multiplies by
10 in the other direction. In some cases, there may not be a reasonable
mapping, and the gateway application developer may take some other

approach such as exposing the devices to a console interface so that a user
can resolve any mapping conflicts or ambiguities. Polyglot54 is an example
technology that aids in the development of type I IoT framework gateway
applications.

 Type II Framework Gateway
A type II framework gateway (Figure 2-35) expects the network
Connectivity, Node Interaction, and Data Object layers are dissimilar,
but there is a Data Object layer mapping object that relates Framework
A objects with Framework B objects. A gateway application supplies
administrative control such as installing, updating, and monitoring an
object translation component that exists within the Data Object layer.
Typically, designers of each interoperating framework must collaborate
to identify semantically similar but syntactically dissimilar elements
and their mapping functions. The design collaboration may reveal
disconnected design semantics as well that may be clarified in related
gateway-specific specifications or may result in specification revisions
that clarify ambiguities. For example, one framework might expect all
objects to be discoverable through its hosting endpoint device, while
another framework might expect discovery is handled using a dedicated
discovery service. The object translation layer defines the framework-­
specific discovery conventions so that endpoint devices can function
unmodified. This might involve having the gateway device advertising
itself as a discovery service operating on behalf of devices represented in
a foreign network. The OCF-AllJoyn bridging specification55 is an example
type II framework gateway that supports bidirectional bridging and device

54
  h? ttps://github.com/UniversalDevicesInc/polyglot-v2
55
    https://openconnectivity.org/specs/OCF_Bridging_Specification_v1.3.0.pdf

interactions within a common operational domain. See the“Security
Considerations for Framework Gateways” section for more insight on
interdomain bridging considerations.

                                                  Gateway Management App

                                               Data Object Layer

        Gateway Translation App                        Object Translation

                                                Framework A        Framework B
                                                Connectivity       Connectivity
     Framework         Framework
                                                     and                and
         A                 B
                                                 Interaction        Interaction
                                                   Layers             Layers

            Type I Gateway                               Type II Gateway

Figure 2-35. Layering architecture for type I and type II framework
gateways

 Type III Framework Gateway
A type III framework gateway (Figure 2-36) anticipates a common data object
layer is in place. However, because the lower layers are dissimilar, not all
data objects will be common. Therefore a data object translation capability
is also required. The Connectivity and Node Interaction layers are dissimilar,
but there is a message translation model that relates the interface definition
model for Framework A to the interface definition model for Framework B.
An example message translation operation might relate publish-subscribe
messages defined by Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT)56 to
the publish-subscribe model defined by eXtensible Messaging and Presence

56
    QTT Version 3.1.1. Edited by Andrew Banks and Rahul Gupta. 29 September
  M
  2014. OASIS Standard. Latest version: http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/
  mqtt/v3.1.1/mqtt-v3.1.1.html

Protocol (XMPP).57 Another example mapping technology is the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) OSCORE58 specification that maps HTTP
message security to CoAP messages and vice versa.
    A traditional framework may not be regarded as a type III gateway
depending on the set of protocols and message types the framework
supports. If a framework includes support for both HTTP and CoAP, for
example, then mapping between may be a normal IoT framework function.
However, given Framework A support for only HTTP and Framework B
support for only CoAP, the type III gateway translation comes into play.

      Data Object Layer                                   Data Object Layer
                    Object Translation                     Fw-A Objects
                                                                               Fw-B Objects
      Node Interaction Layer

                                                          Node Interaction Layer
     Interface A

                                            Interface B

                   Message Translation
                                                                 Interface A

                                                                         Interface B

             Framework A         Framework B                                           Framework B
             Connectivity        Connectivity             Framework A
                                                                                        Connectivity
                Layer               Layer                 Connectivity
                                                                                              Layer
                                                          Layer

                     Type III Gateway                                Type IV Gateway

Figure 2-36. Layering architecture for type III and type IV framework
gateways

57
   I? nternet Engineering Task Force (IETF) RFC 6120, March 2011. https://xmpp.
    org/rfcs/rfc6120.html
58
     Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) “draft-ietf-core-object-
     security-15,” Expires March 4, 2019. https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/
     draft-ietf-core-object-security/

 Type IV Framework Gateway
The fourth framework gateway class, type IV, considers the case where
Framework A is a superset of Framework B. The superset and subset
frameworks remain unmodified, but applications may interact with
devices from either framework seamlessly. The gateway function
exists when Framework A objects are exposed to Framework B and
when Framework A peers are different from Framework B peers.
Though subtle, this is a system boundary crossing that requires
security controls. An example of this scenario is OneM2M where
LWM2M supplies the device management capabilities for a OneM2M
framework. Nevertheless, LWM2M also may stand alone as an
independent IoT framework. The type IV framework gateway has an
object model where the Framework A object model is flexible enough
to encompass the Framework B object model. Likewise, the interface
definitions in the Node Interaction layer have a superset-subset
relationship, and the connectivity layers are similarly encompassing.
The gateway function may be provided as an application of the
framework or may have embedded mapping operations. The OCF
framework resource naming specification allows resources to be
identified using a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)59 of arbitrary
nesting depth. A LWM2M object identifier is a URI that is constrained
to two layers of nesting, and object names are numeric. The LWM2M
namespace fits within the OCF namespace; hence an OCF to LWM2M
gateway function could be implemented.

59
  I? nternet Engineering Task Force (IETF), RFC 3986, January 2005. https://
   tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986

  ecurity Considerations for Framework
S
Gateways
Framework gateways may facilitate interdomain interactions in addition
to facilitating interoperability between dissimilar IoT frameworks.
Security at the framework gateway should address at least two important
security questions: (1) Does the gateway bridge network domains and to
what extent is the gateway trusted to perform these duties? (2) Where in
the framework layering do authentication, authorization, integrity, and
confidentiality protections begin and end for a given message transiting
the gateway?
     The Industrial IoT Consortium (IIC) describes brownfield-greenfield
security integration in terms of security gateways (Figure 2-37). In this
model, the gateway occupies both an interoperability and a security
function. Legacy IoT endpoints may enjoy intra-brownfield interactions
(often without native security), but when protocol directs interaction
with the Secure Endpoints, the Security Gateway must augment legacy
messages with message protections. This entails encrypting or signing
messages before the Secure Gateway forwards Legacy Endpoint messages
to Secure Endpoints. It may also require authenticating Secure Endpoints
before allowing them to access Legacy Endpoints.
     The Security Gateway function ensures crossing a network domain
doesn’t weaken security. Security gateways may be expected to perform
the following security operations:

      •     Authenticate endpoints to the gateway and gateway to
            the endpoints.
      •     Authenticate endpoints from a foreign domain to
            endpoints in the local domain. This may require
            creation of a virtual endpoint on the gateway device if
            interior endpoints can’t support the needed security
            capabilities.

      •   Integrity and confidentiality protect messages passing
          through the gateway. The gateway may need to decrypt
          then re-encrypt using native domain’s recognized
          security associations, security algorithms, and
          protocols. On rare occasion domains have all these
          security elements in common.

      •   Authorize access to objects in a local domain by
          endpoints from a peer domain.

      •   Inspect and log activity between the domains.

      •   Establish endpoint credentials in the peer network
          environment. Different domains may have dissimilar
          security services for authentication, authorization,
          and key management. The gateway may be required
          to host security services on behalf of a local domain so
          that a peer domain can utilize its chosen set of security
          services.

      •   Perform data structure translation and protocol
          mapping functions previously described. Modification
          to data objects and protocol message that are integrity
          and confidentiality protected necessarily implies the
          gateway is authorized and trusted to perform these
          transformations.

    In general, the gateway is expected to be one of the most trusted nodes
in the network. Since it connects multiple domains, it likely needs to be the
most trustworthy node across all the connected domains.
    To achieve the preceding security goals, a Security Object layer
(Figure 2-40) is needed in addition to the framework’s Data Object layer.
The Security Object layer must be common to all domains that connect
through the framework gateway; otherwise, there is little confidence that
security for the domains is correct.

                                           Secure Core Protocols

                     1      2          3
                                                                          4        5       6
                     Security Gateway
                                                                           Secure Endpoints

                                                      Legacy
                                                      Protocols

            1       2                      3

                    Legacy Endpoints                               Legacy Protocols protected by
                                                                   physical & L2/L3 security

Figure 2-37. Framework gateway as a secure endpoint/proxy to
unsecure legacy endpoints

 Security Endpoints Within the Gateway
When a message enters a framework gateway, it arrives with security
protections specific to its native network. Those protections terminate
somewhere within the framework gateway where it is assumed the
gateway will preserve the security properties throughout until the
message emerges on another network where the destination network’s
native protections are applied. The framework gateway must satisfy
authentication, authorization, integrity, and confidentiality protections in
a manner that is consistent with both source and destination networks as
the message transits through the gateway. The place where the network’s
native protection mechanism ends or begins is referred to as a security
endpoint. The place where confidentiality protection (i.e., encryption)
ends (or begins) is the confidentiality endpoint. The place where network
native authorization protection ends is the authorization endpoint and

so forth. The various framework gateway types have different semantics
and make different assumptions about security endpoint termination and
origination. This section highlights some of these differences.

Security Endpoints in Type I Gateways
The security endpoints in a type I gateway (denoted by up arrow and down
arrow in Figure 2-38) could in theory terminate at or near the application
interface since the gateway translation and mapping functions are applied
at the application level. Given a scenario where security protections are
applied directly to framework objects rather than to protocols or interfaces,
the data confidentiality and integrity protections may persist until the
last possible moment before the framework hands off the data to the
application.
     Most IoT frameworks require security endpoint termination within
the framework layers or in protocol layers beneath so that the framework
data objects can be manipulated. This implies the data will be unprotected
through some portion of framework layering before handing off to the
Gateway Translation Application and again in the reverse flow. The
security expectation for type I gateways is the framework architecture
must strictly isolate resources belonging to Framework A from resources
belonging to Framework B. Attacks originating from Framework A should
be ineffective at compromising Framework B resources without first
compromising the gateway or the Framework Translation Application.
This simplifying assumption can be quite powerful because there are few
if any exceptional cases. Exceptional cases have a tendency to expose
security weaknesses that lead to exploits.
     Note that within each framework context, native network operations
may require authentication endpoints for network packet delivery that
terminate within the framework. This differs from security endpoints
associated with application layer message confidentiality and integrity
protection.

                                       Gateway Management App

                                     Data Object Layer

        Gateway Translation App               Object Translation

                                      Framework A          Framework B
                                      Connectivity         Connectivity
      Framework        Framework
                                           and                  and       Cleartext
          A                B
                                       Interaction          Interaction
                                         Layers               Layers      Ciphertext

            Type I Gateway                     Type II Gateway

Figure 2-38. Security considerations of type I and type II gateways

Security Endpoints in Type II Gateways
A type II gateway requires translation at the Data Object layer implying
security endpoints must exist at the base of the Data Object layer or below.
The gateway application largely doesn’t participate except to provide
administrative oversight; hence there isn’t an expectation the Gateway
App should be privy to object data.
     Framework A resources at the Interaction and Connectivity layers
are strictly isolated from Framework B. However, because the object
translation logic is shared across Network A and Network B, the Data
Object layer, compromise of this layer implies access to both A and B
networks. The authors feel the Data Object layer should be a third isolation
environment where access to Framework A or Framework B isolation
environment doesn’t imply, automatically, access to the Data Object layer
isolation environment. Rather, the respective isolation environments
should have well-understood interfaces and semantics for crossing
environment boundaries. Object translation steps necessarily invoke
environment boundary-crossing primitives.
     Note that in cases where framework design choices result in a security
endpoint terminating in the connectivity or interaction layer, for example,
if Transport Layer Security (TLS) is used for confidentiality. The isolation
environment must preserve confidentiality of data as it passes between the
various isolation environment boundaries.

Security Endpoints in Type III Gateways
A type III gateway (Figure 2-39) requires message protocol translation at
the Node Interaction layer and may require object translation at the Data
Object layer. Managing security endpoints that terminate at different
layers can be tricky. If confidentiality endpoint occurs within the Data
Object layer, then message translation can proceed in the Node Interaction
layer since message payloads are opaque at this layer. Nevertheless, an
authentication or authorization endpoint is required at this layer that
authorizes a boundary crossing, for example, from Framework A to
Framework B.
    However, if A and B disagree on data object format, then the payload
transits to the Data Object layer for object translation before it is
repackaged into a Framework B message body. The Data Object layer must
correctly apply confidentiality endpoint processing, possibly resulting in
application of a Framework B–specific confidentiality endpoint before
transitioning back to the Node Interaction layer. All of this security context
must be preserved and must resist confused deputy attacks.
    Isolation of respective connectivity layer environments from Node
Interaction and Data Object environments seems reasonable from a
security isolation perspective but appears concerning from a performance
optimization perspective.

Security Endpoints in Type IV Gateways
A type IV gateway (Figure 2-39) expects data objects, interfaces, message
formats, and network connectivity are a subset of the first framework.
Therefore, data object, interface, and message translation might not
even be needed. If it is needed, it occurs on the context of the superset
framework, meaning the security endpoints that are valid for the subset
framework are also valid for the superset framework. This is a nice
simplifying assumption that allows for flexible isolation strategies. The
point where the security endpoint begins can largely be configurable.

     One important consideration is whether or not interaction with
Framework B allows access of superset data objects not normally part
of subset objects by Framework B. Given this scenario, the boundary
crossing occurs at the line where superset and subset objects intersect.
Gateway isolation mechanisms should allow separation of resources
along these lines. Success or failure at applying the isolation mechanism
falls largely along two vectors: (a) the degree of modularity found in the
implementation of the frameworks and (b) the level of granularity with
which the isolation mechanism is able to conscribe resources.

       Data Object Layer                                   Data Object Layer
                     Object Translation                     Fw-A Objects
                                                                                Fw-B Objects
       Node Interaction Layer

                                                           Node Interaction Layer
      Interface A

                                             Interface B

                    Message Translation
                                                                  Interface A

                                                                          Interface B

              Framework A         Framework B                                           Framework B
              Connectivity        Connectivity             Framework A
                                                                                         Connectivity   Cleartext
                 Layer               Layer                 Connectivity
                                                                                               Layer
                                                           Layer                                        Ciphertext

                      Type III Gateway                                Type IV Gateway

Figure 2-39. Security considerations of type III and type IV gateways

Security Framework Gateway Architecture
This section describes an idealized security framework gateway
architecture (Figure 2-40) that more easily would support the security,
isolation, performance, and flexibility requirements needed to facilitate
framework gateway challenges. The meaning of an idealized architecture
is it attempts to describe IoT framework architecture where security
is central to the design and integrated from the start. It may serve as a
guidepost from which to better evaluate security hardware and software
solutions presented in subsequent chapters.

    A prominent feature in our idealized framework architecture is the
addition of the Security Object layer containing commonly understood
and specified security objects and data model representations. In our
experience, many IoT framework architectures cite industry standards
such as X.509, TLS, and COSE in response to questions of security
interoperability. However, they do not capture the semantics of what it
means to be secure. There have been attempts at defining security policy
languages such as XACML and SAML, but these, or something similar,
have not yet been integrated into IoT frameworks.

       Security Object Layer
                                                          Ingress
                  Common Security Model

       Data Object Layer
                                                           Secure Execution

                   Object Translation

      Node Interaction Layer
    Interface A

                                          Interface B

                  Message Translation

             Framework A       Framework B                 Egress
             Connectivity      Connectivity
                                                         Security             Cleartext
                Layer             Layer
                                                        Hardware              Ciphertext

Figure 2-40. Idealized security framework gateway

    Secure execution is another component to our idealized architecture.
Secure execution is a hardware-supported mode of execution enterable
when a security endpoint in the framework is required to perform security-­
related functions and exits upon completion. Since a security endpoint
could exist at any framework layer, secure execution can be entered at
any framework layer. Framework data are in cleartext while in the secure
environment and ideally, confidentiality and integrity protected while
outside the environment.
    Framework context is maintained across ingress and egress transitions
so that layer crossings can be recognized as these may correspond to
network boundary crossings in a gatewaying usage context. The Security
Object layer use of the Secure Execution resource preserves its isolation
properties with respect to the other layers. Data passing between
framework layers, which have layer isolation requirements, relies on
the Secure Execution environment technology to enforce isolation
requirements, these include decryption upon ingress, tenant-specific
resource isolation while in the SE environment and encryption upon egress.
    Although the authors are not aware of a secure execution technology
that fully implements the idealized framework architecture, there are
a few technologies that come close. For example, Intel Software Guard
Extensions (SGX), ARM TrustZone, and virtualization have compelling
potential. Chapter 3 explains in greater detail various Intel hardware
security features and how they apply to IoT.

S
  ummary
IoT frameworks occupy an important position in IoT system design as
an effective strategy for empowering IoT application developers to more
easily construct rich distributed IoT applications. Many of the connectivity
challenges resulting from fragmented brownfield systems are hidden
behind IoT frameworks. IoT applications simply expect the dissimilarities

in machine control networks, process control systems, manufacturing
execution systems, and cloud integration are conveniently “simplified” for
all intents and purposes.
     Nevertheless, the IoT ecosystem hasn’t settled on a single IoT
framework technology that satisfies every industry and meets every need.
Neither is there consensus over standardization of open IoT frameworks
as there are multiple framework standards efforts. New and existing
proprietary approaches also seem to have gained ground as the size
of IoT grows. The recent proliferation of IoT frameworks, toolkits, and
middleware combined with existing brownfield IoT suggests greater
challenges to come for interoperable applications in a heterogeneous
distributed world of IoT.
     IoT framework standards organizations seem to recognize these
challenges and have responded by merging organizations and standards.
They have developed gatewaying and bridging technologies that let
framework application interoperate through dissimilar frameworks.
Noted mergers include OCF, AllJoyn, UPnP, IPSO, OMA, IIC, and OCF.
There is continued interest in framework gateway interoperability
among remaining frameworks, but it isn’t clear that the industry needs
to converge to a single or even a small number of frameworks as security,
safety, reliability, and other factors may in fact motivate keeping some
parts of IoT systems separated.
     Framework gateways are positioned on the edges of IoT networks
addressing interoperability needs but also should be considered the most
trusted security control points since crossing organizational domains often
coincides with translating from one IoT network protocol to another.
     This section highlighted several IoT frameworks showing how
various IoT system integration and interoperation requirements may
be addressed. We considered challenges facing framework application
interoperation in an environment of multiple frameworks. The industry’s
eager embrace of IoT frameworks has led to the need for framework

gateways that reassert the desire for interoperability, but also for security.
We further consider ways to secure framework gateways looking at various
approaches and trade-offs.
    In summary, frameworks appear to offer significant value for enabling
interoperable IoT applications by hiding much of the complexity of
multiple connectivity technologies, messaging solutions that incorporate
multiple hundreds or thousands of nodes, and data schemas that present
consistent, declarative, and vendor-neutral expressions of IoT objects.
We’ve shown that frameworks are great tools to manage IoT device
complexity, but the security robustness or hardening can only be achieved
by leveraging the underlying HW security capabilities dealt with in detail
in Chapter 3 and are exposed via API and different framework and protocol
layers by the SW as detailed in Chapter 4. The external interactions that an
IoT device experiences during the lifecycle depend upon the stimulus from
myriad connectivity interfaces, and this is dealt with in detail in Chapter 5.

                Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms
                of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included
in the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise
in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder.

