CHAPTER 3

Base Platform
Security Hardware
Building Blocks
      Every distraction is a possibility, Every downfall is an
      opportunity.
                                                               —Ria Cheruvu

Historically, the attacks on platforms have been transitioning from
application-level software (SW) to user mode SW to kernel mode SW to
firmware (FW) and now hardware (HW). The frequency of HW- and FW-
level vulnerabilities increased substantially from 2003 to 2019 and therefore
reinforces a concrete need for HW-based security to harden the platform.
This is evident from the data cataloged in the National Vulnerability
Database (NVD) organized as CVEs; more information about NVD can
be found at https://nvd.nist.gov/. The Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures (CVE) is a list of entries with the information that identifies a
unique vulnerability or an exposure and is used in many cybersecurity
products and services including the NVD; more information about CVE
can be found at https://cve.mitre.org/. The NVD has been mined to
derive the statistics and visualizations with pertinent search terms such

© The Author(s) 2020                                                          149
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8_3

as Firmware and Hardware. It is evident from Figure 3-1 (a) that the
firmware-related CVEs have increased significantly and 2017–2018 saw the
biggest jump when the hacker community started attacking the FW on the
platforms. Similarly Figure 3-1 (b) shows that during the same time period,
the HW-related CVEs also hit a peak. Please note that all these CVEs need
to be investigated carefully for the impacted areas within a platform. But the
trends are clearly pointing toward the HW as the last line of defense.

    Search Parameters:
     x???Results Type: Statistics
     x???Keyword (text search): Firmware
     x???Search Type: Search All

                                                                                 Total Matches By Year (Snapshot from April 2019)
                                                           500
      # of Vulnerabilities Meeting Specified Limitations

                                                           400

                                                           300

                                                           200

                                                           100

                                                            0
                                                                 1999          2001          2003          2005          2007          2009          2011          2013          2015          2017          2019
                                                                        2000          2002          2004          2006          2008          2010          2012          2014          2016          2018

                                                                                                                                       Year

Figure 3-1. (a) Firmware vulnerability trend chart1

1
 h? ttps://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search/statistics?form_type=Advanced&
  results_type=statistics&query=Firmware&search_type=all

    Search Parameters:
      x???Results Type: Statistics
      x???Keyword (text search): Hardware
      x???Search Type: Search All

                                                                           Total Matches By Year (Snapshot from April 2019)
                                                             50
       # of Vulnerabilities Meeting Specified Limitations

                                                             40

                                                             30

                                                             20

                                                             10

                                                              0
                                                                  2001          2003          2005          2007          2009          2011          2013          2015          2017          2019
                                                                         2002          2004          2006          2008          2010          2012          2014          2016          2018

                                                                                                                                 Year

Figure 3-1. (b) Hardware vulnerability trend chart2

   This chapter describes the technologies involved in securing an IoT
device anchored to a Hardware Root of Trust (HWRoT) and ultimately
booting into a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE). Security in an IoT
environment generally involves four areas of focus:

      •                                                     Protecting the device

      •                                                     Protecting user identity

2
 h? ttps://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/search/statistics?form_type=Advanced&
  results_type=statistics&query=Hardware&search_type=all

      •     Protecting the data

      •     Managing the security at runtime

    Each of these areas are worthy of detailed explanation in itself. This
chapter delves into the rich set of security and privacy technologies
Intel has available in their product lines and how they may be used to
implement secure IoT systems. Intel’s discrete CPU-PCH or System-on-
Chip (SoC) products have two classes of security features; one class of
features are implemented in the CPU as New Instructions (NI) with some
examples being AES-NI, SHA-NI, and so on. The second class of security
features are implemented in the isolated security engines with examples
including Converged Security and Manageability Engine (CSME).

 Note Please note that by the time this book is published, some
 new security features may be released by Intel, and therefore please
 refer to Intel web site or contact the relevant OEM/ODMs for latest
 information.

 Background and Terminology
Before the actual security capabilities can be described, it is important to
understand the terminology, the threat pyramid, the relevance of end-
to-end security, and Intel Security Essentials for leveraging built-in HW
security technologies.

 Assets, Threats, and Threat Pyramid
Security design begins with the process of identifying a set of assets
that are to be protected and classifying these assets according to the
different levels of protection based on strategic or other pertinent value

vectors. A real-life scenario of protecting assets in our home would be
to protect our house keys (hang on wall), wallets (place in an enclosed
cabinet), passports, and jewelry (in a safe in the master bedroom). For
IoT deployments, security is also determined by the return on investment
(ROI). Figure 3-2 depicts the relationship between them.

      •   Assets (A): Anything valuable to us that is worth
          protecting. What assets are we protecting? It is
          pertinent to classify the assets and prioritize. Example
          asset profile = {physical devices, internal fuses, keys,
          content, data at rest/in transit, etc.}

      •   Threats (T): What are we protecting against? Become
          aware of threat surfaces, the areas of exposure to
          threats.

      •   Vulnerabilities (V): What are the known weaknesses in
          the system that can be exploited?

      •   Mitigation: How are we going to protect?

      •   Robustness rules: Specific to assets/threats.
          Documented conditions/criteria for protecting specific
          assets against specific threats.

      •   Threat modeling: A process to evaluate the threat
          scenarios considering the vulnerabilities for specific
          assets. This process is iterative and is expected to be
          done whenever the bill of materials (BOM) list in a
          platform changes.

   Threats
                                       Threat Surface

                                       Threat Surface
                              V2
                                       Threat Surface

                                              A1

                         V3              A2   V2   A3

                                                        V4

                  V1

Figure 3-2. Relationship between assets, vulnerabilities, and threats

 Inverted Threat Pyramid
The threat pyramid shown in Figure 3-3 depicts the surfaces/layers
vulnerable to cyberattacks (both physical and remote) in an IoT device.
The volume of attacks is high at the top and requires fewer resources,
whereas the volume of attacks at the bottom is lower and requires a high
amount of resources. In other words, the attack surfaces have varying
degree of exposure and mandate a defense in depth approach at the
platform levels.

                                               Apps/Framework
                                                                                 Volume of attacks
                                                  Middleware                     is high with low
                                                                                 complexity
                                                   User mode

                                                     Kernel

                                                   OS loader

                                                   Hypervisor
      Prevalent                                BIOS/Boot Loader

      Attack                                  Mutable Flash parts

      Pyramid                      Physical ports (PCIe DMA bus master, DDR
                                                 analyzer, etc.)
                                              Security/P-unit FW
                                                                                 Volume of attacks
                                                                                 is low with high
                                        Fuses (under/over voltage, etc.)
                                                                                 complexity
                                   Chip top layer scraping, Differential Power
                                                  analysis, etc.)

Figure 3-3. Attack pyramid

    The rectangle outlines the IA value additions where the related
security IP capabilities exemplify the assets that can be used to protect
customer’s assets. The effort to create exploits at the top of the inverted
pyramid is low, and the ROI on the compromised assets is also low. Due
to this low effort, the number of exploits is also significantly higher. As we
traverse down the inverted pyramid, the effort it takes to create exploits
increases significantly along with the cost, and thereby the number of
exploits is typically lower and targeted in nature. The bottom six layers
could be qualified as HW, and side-channel attacks plus physical attacks
are relevant. The discussion of such side-channel and physical attacks is
outside the scope of this book.

 Sample IoT Device Lifecycle
The IoT device lifecycle pertaining to security is complicated with security
involved in every phase of an IoT device lifecycle (Figure 3-4). During the
build phase, the security SDK/API is critical for simplifying the device

build. The provisioning/configuring phases would require tools that
scale across different CPU families and involve assigning a persona to the
IoT device. The deployment phase should be flexible for seamless and
potential anonymity. The connectivity should comply with the relevant
security standards and specifications. The management of these devices
must be secure and seamless. The retirement or decommissioning phase is
equally critical for an IoT device due to the integration of different assets/
secrets from multiple vendors in the system. For a detailed supply chain
interactions during the lifecycle, refer to the Secure Device Onboarding
technology.3
     IoT devices have different security needs as they go through their
lifecycle (on average it is many years significantly more than traditional
PCs). Security is pivotal to enable IoT devices and sustain those on the
market. Each stage of the device lifecycle has its specific requirements,
starting from providing what is needed for onboarding a device during
the start of its life to security management functions that secure runtime
operations. Intel has a critical role with enabling design-in the best
practice HW security model with solutions and ecosystem relationships.
Intel targets to enable security capabilities and solutions for each phase
working with the ecosystem. Security is not one-off, it evolves along the
lifecycle with each stage having unique needs. Best practices are required
to secure the entire lifecycle.

3
 w? ww.intel.com/content/www/us/en/internet-of-things/secure-device-
  onboard.html

                                           Develop
                                           • Simplicity
                                             (SDK/API)
             Retire
                                                                   Build
             • Salvage the
               sensitive data upon                                 • Tools that scale
               Decommission                                        • OxM customization

       Manage                                                              Configure
       • FW updates, recovery                                              • Tools that scale
       • Device Management                                                   across CPU/SoC and
                                                                             OSs

                      Connect                             Deploy
                      • Multiple PHY/MAC                  • Seamless/Anonymous

Figure 3-4. IoT device lifecycle

 End-to-End (E2E) Security
While security pertaining to an IoT device is important, a practical IoT
deployment warrants scaling security across an E2E spectrum starting with
edge/Things connected to Network and then fog or Cloud. The typical E2E
security involves edge/Things ➤ Gateway/Network ➤ Fog ➤ Cloud. Refer
to Figure 3-5.

                                                                                                          Fog
                       Things                                          Network                                                       Cloud
                                                                                                       Onsitecloud
                                                            Gateway Devices

  Security     Management       Data   API Libraries,                                                     3rd Party
                             Processing APIs, SDK                                                          Cloud
                                                         Security    Management                                          Data      Batch & Stream     Storage
                                                                                                                      Management      Analytics

             Local Area Network Connectivity                                             Network
                                                           Data      API Libraries,   Infrastructure
                                                        Processing    APIs, SDK

                                                                                                                       Security     Management      API Libraries,
                                                                                                                                                     APIs, SDK

             Wide Area Network Connectivity

Figure 3-5. Typical E2E security components

     Assets exist at different stages and often cross trust boundaries.
     A typical flow (for a sensing application) is explained with
confidentiality (encryption/decryption) and integrity (sign/verify)
attributes:

               1. The device securely identifies with the Gateway/
                  Cloud (could be one time or periodic depending
                  upon the policy enforcement).

               2. The device has/interfaces to sensors (smart/dumb)
                  and actuators, collects the data, and controls the
                  sensors and drives the actuators.

               3. Device may run some local analytics and optionally
                  store the data encrypted.

               4. Device encrypts or signs (or both) (depending on
                  the policy) the data and sends it to Gateway.

               5. Gateway decrypts/authenticates the data.

               6. Gateway may run some local analytics.

      7. Gateway encrypts/signs and sends the data to fog/
         Cloud.

      8. The instances on fog/Cloud decrypt/authenticate
         the data.
      9. Cloud applications run analytics.

     10. Cloud applications encrypt/sign and store the data
         in databases.

S
  ecurity Essentials
Security Essentials is an Intel brand initiative that defines a set of
foundational security capabilities that Intel processors and Systems on
Chips (SoCs) will support in order to establish a secure baseline upon
which the ecosystem can build rich, secure usage models (see Figure 3-6).
Security Essentials establishes a set of capabilities along with technology
options for implementing each of the targeted capabilities. This allows
us to project a common security posture across all supported platforms,
establish a baseline for security that the industry can rely upon, and
promote reuse and consistency in Intel-based security solutions. Intel
provides training, collateral, technology summits, and Technology
Alignment Programs with customers and ecosystem partners. In
some cases, Intel partners with Independent BIOS Vendors (IBVs) and
Independent boot loader vendors to enable the ecosystem with fast,
secure, and functionally safe boot loader solutions.

                              Device Attack Surfaces                                      “Baseline Trust Capabilities”

  High Volume,

                                                             Transitive Trust Chain
                                         Applications                                               Trusted Execution
  Low Complexity
                                                                                                                                    “Ingredients”
                                                                                            Protected Data, Keys, Identity
                                                                                                                                    used for a variety
                                       Operating System
                                                                                                                                    of security usage
                                                                                                                                    models
                    Threats

                                        Virtual Machine
                                                                                           Crypto                  Protected Boot
                                           (Optional)
  Low Volume,
                                          Hardware
  High Complexity                                                                     THIN GS       N ET W O R K        C LOUD      Consistent
                                                                                                                                    implementation
                                                                                                                                    platforms

                               Security technologies should be rooted in HW to harden the platform

Figure 3-6. Trusted secure foundation

   Security Essentials focuses on four buckets of capabilities: Device
Identity, Protected Boot, Protected Storage, and trusted execution
environment. These are later explained briefly.

 Device Identity
A hardware identity refers to an immutable, unique identity for a platform.
The identity has to be somehow inseparable from the platform. A hardware
embedded cryptographic key, also referred to as a Hardware Root of
Trust, can be an effective device identifier. The Trusted Computing Group
(TCG) defines hardware-roots-of-trust as part of the Trusted Platform
Module (TPM) specification. All TPM vendors are required to implement a
hardware root of trust for storage. Intel® Platform Trust Technology (PTT)
implements TPM functionality using a security engine integrated in many
of its SoC products.
     The IEEE community defines a device identity specification, IEEE
802.1AR, that has been adopted by the TCG. This means TPM-based device
identity complies with interoperable and industry-accepted approach for
secure device identity.
     A software (SW) identity refers to a cryptographic fingerprint (SWFP)
that describes important software that may execute on a platform. The
SWFP can be reliably verified given a whitelist of SWFP values known to

be legitimate. SWFP is an important aspect of securely booting a platform
where the goal of secure boot is to detect malicious changes to software
images before they are loaded into memory.
     The TCG defines methods for securely booting a platform where
the SWFP of each software image loaded into memory is measured (aka
cryptographically hashed) into a Platform Configuration Register (PCR),
which is securely stored by a TPM. PCR measurements are available for
comparison with whitelist values during the boot process and are available
for attestation after the platform boots. Attestation is a protocol for
proving to a peer platform that it booted a particular way. The attestation
verifier might also use the whitelist to verify a peer platform node booted
satisfactorily.
     An IoT system that enforces a common and attested secure boot policy
is a way to establish trust in a distributed set of IoT nodes. Distributed trust
is an important component to establishing a secure IoT network.

 Protected Boot
This capability defends against sophisticated bootkits and rootkits which
have been demonstrated that reside in very early boot code and are able
to launch a variety of attacks on the system. These attacks materialize
without the knowledge of OS and thereby are invincible to be detected by
the anti-malware entities. The TCG defines an architectural requirement
for secure platform boot by defining a root-of-trust-for-measurement
(RTM) where the platform must provide a secure platform reset and initial
boot executive that is implemented in hardware, but TCG stopped short of
defining a particular implementation.
     The Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) forum defines an
interface where the UEFI BIOS boot image can be integrity verified by the
RTM before it can execute, thereby ensuring the remainder of the BIOS boot
process can be performed according to TCG defined secure boot principles.

    Intel® TXT (Trusted Execution Technology) anticipates scenarios
where a hard power reset, as a way to return to a trusted environment, is
infeasible. Instead, Intel® TXT transitions the CPU to a secure operational
mode using an IA instruction, then proceeds to boot a hypervisor or OS
without invoking BIOS.
    Intel Boot Guard is the hardware-based root of trust for system boot
process. It provides an architectural enforcement of OEM boot policies and
a protected initial measurement & verification of first OEM component.
OEM boot policy is provided in FPF programmed by the OEM.

 Protected Storage
The Storage Networking Industry Association (SNIA) defines storage
security as

      Technical controls, which may include integrity, confidentiality
      and availability controls that protect storage resources and
      data from unauthorized users and uses.

    Protected storage is a fundamental security capability required to
support many other security capabilities. The Trusted Platform Module
(TPM) implements secure storage primitives for several types of security
objects including cryptographic keys, configuration registers, and whitelist
values. Protected storage encompasses the following properties:

       •    Data confidentiality: Unauthorized entities cannot read
            the data.

       •    Data integrity: Unauthorized entities cannot modify
            the data or unauthorized data modification can be
            detected.
       •    Anti-replay protection: Unauthorized entities cannot
            replay/reuse stale data to storage.

     Intel® Platform Trust Technology (PTT) is an implementation of
the TCG Trusted Platform Module specification in a SoC that relies on
hardware isolation of flash and other memory to prevent access outside
of the TCG defined interfaces. Intel® QuickAssist Technology (QAT) is a
hardware data encryption accelerator that also implements key storage
protections. A common approach for building secure storage for data that
exceeds the capacity of hardened secure storage resources calls for bulk
data encryptions that allow ciphertexts to be stored on traditional storage
media, but where encryption keys are stored in hardware. It is common
to build a hierarchy of data encryption keys so that different access and
lifecycle controls can be applied to different data. In some cases the key
hierarchy itself is too large to fit into hardware-protected storage; therefore
intermediate keys may be used to encrypt data encryption keys and so on
until the top most keys of the hierarchy can be stored in hardware.

 Trusted Execution Environment (TEE)
In general, a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) refers to an execution
environment that is isolated from the normal general-purpose execution
environment. For example, the core CPU is a general-purpose execution
environment, and a security coprocessor is an isolated environment.
Trusted execution environments may include HW/SW/FW that establishes
an isolated environment. By carefully controlling the infrastructure that
produces the HW/FW/SW that implements it, the TEE can have strong
guarantees regarding safe and reliable execution of TEE workloads.
Typically workloads that involve the use of cryptographic keys to ensure
confidentiality and integrity protection of data as it is transformed to and
from ciphertext are performed using a TEE.
    There are several TEE technologies available across a variety of
architectures. ARM® TrustZone creates an isolated execution environment
within the ARM core. Intel® Software Guard Extensions (SGX) takes a
similar approach and allows multiple instances of trusted execution

environments for different applications and tenants. Intel® Converged
Security and Manageability Engine (CSME) is a security coprocessor that
is integrated into Intel chipsets. The CSME can be used to offload security-
sensitive operations to shield them from possible attacks from the normal
CPU environment. Intel® TXT allows trusted execution using CPU cache
lines as RAM to minimize dependencies on external resources. It can be
used for general-purpose TEE operations when cache coherency isn’t
needed. Intel® Virtualization Technology (VT) suite offers another form
of TEE where a trusted hypervisor creates execution environments with
distinct thread, memory, interrupt, and IO contexts. Virtualization allows
full OS and application images to run which may be counterproductive
to security due to increased attack surface of a large OS and application
framework. Therefore, it may yet be appropriate to employ some other TEE
capability in concert with virtualization.

B
  uilt-In Security
Built-in security features are essential to protect, detect, and correct the
security issues in a platform. These features depicted in Figure 3-7 enable
to protect the identity and data assets on the platforms from attacks,
detect when attacks are launched, and then aid in deploying the corrective
measures to make the platforms resilient.

   Build-in Silicon Security
   Hardware Solutions for User Problems...
                             Protect                                        Detect                           Correct
        Identity                   Data Protection                      Anti-Malware                      Resiliency

     Simple access                                                       Malware finds                       Securely
                                        Data safe from
     with enhanced                                                      nowhere to run or                updated, more
                                       theft or alteration
        security                                                             hide                       resilient systems
        Intel® Identity                Intel® Data Protection                        Intel® Platform or Device
   Protection Technologies                  Technologies                              Protection Technologies

Figure 3-7. HW solution pillars for user problems

     The identity is based on HW and possesses immutable properties
and simplified access. The data asset protection includes data at rest and
in transit. The detection mechanisms constitute anti-malware FW/SW
components to find the malware and then pipeline into deploying the
corrective measures via FW and/or SW over the air updates. Intel’s value
proposition includes three layers of ingredients as shown in Figure 3-8.

    Intel’s Security Value Propositions
                                         Protect, Detect, and Correct               Deliver Best-in-class Security
          Solutions                      solutions for Consumer and                 Software Solutions & Services
                                                  Enterprise

                                         For OEMs, ISV’s, SI’s, Security                      Create New Security
          Platforms
                                                Practitioners                           Platforms and Ecosystems

          Architecture                                                                        Drive Built-In Security
                                   Architecture for Secure Experiences                      into Silicon Architecture
                                         and Security Workloads

Figure 3-8. Security value propositions

    At the bottom layer, the Intel Architecture allows leveraging built-in
security features to build the platforms at the middle layer and, at the top
layer, create ecosystems enriched with deployment of best-in-class security
software solutions. These solutions at the top layer enable the protection,
detection, and corrections in both consumer and enterprise class solutions.
Intel security assets and solutions enable building and deploying an end-to-
end system of systems as depicted later. The end-to-end system starts with
edge devices or things on the left possessing minimal compute capacity and
less robust security features; these edge devices are connected to Gateways/
Network, to fog, and then connected to the cloud back ends.
    The scalable strategy as shown in Figure 3-9 is to provide a minimally
viable set of security capabilities that scale from low compute MCUs to
atom class to Core and to Xeon server, microserver class products. Across
the product lines, the four groups of security technologies are available in
different capacities for implementing security features. The device identity
based on HW is key for an IoT device, and protected boot ensures that only
well-known FW/SW is being executed and protected storage ensures the
storage of secrets and/or data securely. The trusted execution environment
allows execution of code at runtime in an isolated and protected
environment immune from SW and HW attacks.

                                                                       Fog

               things                             network                      Cloud

                   Consistent HW security “capabilities” implemented across products
             Software            Device                   Protected          Protected   Trusted
             Identification      Identification           Boot               Storage     Execution

                               ATOM                CORE               XEON
          PROTECTED BOOT        9                   9                  9
      PROTECTED STORAGE         9                   9                  9
       TRUSTED EXECUTION        9                   9                  9
   HW & SW IDENTIFICATION       9                   9                  9

Figure 3-9. Consistent HW security capabilities

 Base Platform Security Features Overview
Let’s review the security features present in the base platform profiles
of IA CPU/SOC at a very high level. As alluded to in previous sections,
the security features are implemented in CPU and on dedicated security
engines as shown in Figure 3-10.

                                             Dedicated Security Engine:
                                         •   ME for Core products
                  CPU                    •   TXE for Atom products
                                         •   SPS for Xeon products

Figure 3-10. CPU and dedicated security engines

    Intel CPUs come standard with a suite of cryptographic operations
that can be performed on the main CPU. Secure, protected encryption
starts with a random number seed, typically provided by a pseudorandom
number generator within the client. Intel® Secure Key provides a clean
source of random numbers through generation in hardware, out of sight
of malware. Intel® SGX provides TEE with smallest TCB within the CPU
boundaries for application to utilize.

 CPU Hosted Crypto Implementations
These features include CPU new instructions for encryption/decryption,
sign/verify, and random number generation: AES-NI, SHA-NI, SHA1 and
SHA256, RDRAND, RDSEED, ECC. This section describes the Security
features/primitives New Instructions (NI) as supported in the Intel CPUs

(as opposed to in an isolated security engine IP block). CPU crypto
capabilities are supported by the CPU and the fabric. In the following
sections, we will learn how the hardware-enhanced security strengthens
Anti-Malware Defenses via the OS Guard (SMAP, SMEP), performing
encryption/decryption, sign/verify, and random number generation.
CPU security features and accelerators are available to trusted execution
environments implemented by the CPU as well including Intel® SGX,
Intel® VT, and Intel® TXT.

 Malware Protection (OS Guard)
Intel CPU/SoCs expose HW features for OS to defend the platform against
malware attacks. The particular and effective features include CPU new
instructions to enable Supervisor Mode Execution Prevention (SMEP) and
Supervisor Mode Access Prevention (SMAP). The SMEP feature prevents
the code executing in privileged mode (ring 0) from executing code in
application mode (ring 3). SMAP is a CPU-based mechanism for user-
mode address-space protection and prevents supervisor accesses to data
on user pages.

 OS Guard (SMEP)
SMEP when enabled prevents a specific (important) privilege escalation
attack vector which is supervisor mode execution from user pages. The
OS can set CR4.SMEP to enable this feature, and no changes are required
to applications or other OS software. However, there might be some
compatibility issues with third-party ring 0 software. The changes in VMM
are limited to supporting/virtualizing CR4.SMEP bit and corresponding
CPUID bit. It is important to note the non-objectives so that platform-level
protections can be deployed appropriately. SMEP doesn’t prevent “all”
privilege escalation attack vectors, nor does it prevent a specific class of
vulnerability (e.g., buffer overflow).

 OS Guard (SMAP)
SMAP extends the protection that previously was provided by SMEP and
was developed with the Linux community, supported on kernel 3.12+
and KVM version 3.15+. The support depends on OS or VMM being used,
and the CR4.SMAP has to be set to enable the feature. SMAP is analogous
to SMEP (supervisor mode execution prevention) for data. There are
legitimate instances where the OS needs to access user pages, and SMAP
does provide support for those situations. Code executing in ring 0
(supervisor mode) is prevented from accessing the data in ring 3 (user
mode). When/if CR4.SMAP = 1, CPU generates Page Fault (#PF) for the
following accesses: accesses to data (not instruction fetch), data is on user-
accessible page (U/S bit is 1 in all relevant paging structure entries), access
is made with supervisor privilege which normally means CPU Privilege
Level (CPL) < 3, applies also to supervisor accesses made with CPL = 3
(e.g., loads from GDT on segment loads). The resulting #PF establishes
error code in the normal way.

 Encryption/Decryption Using AES-NI
AES is a symmetric encryption standard that’s widely used in the following
use cases: full disk encryption, data in transit encryption, and enterprise
application–specific security. All the modern compilers support the AES
HW accelerators, and developers can also use via C/C++ intrinsics. Intel®
Advanced Encryption Standard New Instructions (Intel® AES-NI) is a set
of seven new instructions in the Intel® processor series. Four instructions
accelerate encryption and decryption. Two instructions improve key
generation and matrix manipulation. The seventh aids in carry-less
multiplication. By implementing some complex and costly substeps of the
AES algorithm in hardware, Intel AES-NI and PCLMULQDQ accelerate

execution of the AES-based encryption. The result is faster, more secure
encryption, which makes the use of encryption feasible in new use-cases.
Some of the properties are outlined here:

        •   Improve the compute efficiency of cryptographic
            algorithms.

        •   Vector AES is a promotion of AES-NI to vector form,
            enables two (256-bit) or four (512-bit) lanes, and
            increases AES throughput of cores.

        •   FIPS197 compliant.

        •   Compilers, libraries, and emulator platforms are all
            available now.

        •   AESENC, AESENCLAST, AESDEC, AESDECLAST.

        •   AES Encrypt Round, AES Encrypt Last Round, AES
            Decrypt Round, AES Decrypt Last Round.

        •   Instructions have both register-register and register-
            memory variants.

        •   AESIMC and AESKEYGENASSIST: Assist with AES Key
            Expansion, AES Inverse Mix Columns, and AES Key
            Generation Assist.

   The platform support for AES can be determined by inspecting cpuinfo
output and openssl commands as shown in the following:

$ grep -o aes /proc/cpuinfo

      To verify the proper cipher order, use the following command:

"openssl ciphers -v"

   See the following list that shows AES at the top of the list:

Openssl speed aes-256-cbc
Openssl speed –engine aesni –evp aes-256-cbc

   http://ask.xmodulo.com/check-aes-ni-enabled-openssl.html

openssl  speed –elapsed aes-128-cbc
openssl  speed –elapsed –evp aes-128-cbc

   h­ ttps://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/improving-openssl-
performance

 Sign/Verify Using Intel® SHA Extensions
The Intel® SHA Extensions are a family of seven Streaming SIMD
Extensions (SSE)–based instructions that are used together to accelerate
the performance of processing SHA-1 and SHA-256 on Intel® Architecture
processors (Figure 3-11). Given the growing importance of SHA in our
everyday computing devices, the new instructions are designed to provide
a needed boost of performance to hashing a single buffer of data. Using the
SHA Extensions, the Intel® SHA Extensions can be implemented using direct
assembly or through C/C++ intrinsics. The 16-byte aligned 128-bit memory
location form of the second source operand for each instruction is defined to
make the decoding of the instructions easier. The memory form is not really
intended to be used in the implementation of SHA using the extensions
since unnecessary overhead may be incurred. Availability of the Intel® SHA
Extensions on a particular processor can be determined by checking the
SHA CPUID bit in CPUID (EAX=07H, ECX=0):EBX.SHA [bit 29].

      •   New instructions in CPU to encrypt/decrypt data.

      •   The Intel® SHA Extensions are comprised of four SHA-1
          and three SHA-256 instructions.

      •     There are two message schedule helper instructions
            each, a rounds instruction each, and an extra rounds-
            related helper for SHA-1.

      •     FIPS Pub 180-2 compliant.

 Instruction          Op 1        Op 2            Op 3          Opcode
                             SHA1 New Instructions
 SHA1RNDS4            xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    imm8          OF 3A CC /r ib

 SHA1NEXTE            xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    NA            OF 38 C8 /r

 SHA1MSG1             xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    NA            OF 38 C9 /r

 SHA1MSG2             xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    NA            OF 38 CA /r

                          SHA256 New Instructions
 SHA256RNDS2          xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    <xmm0>        OF 38 CB /r
                                                  (implicit)
 SHA256MSG1           xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    NA            OF 38 CC /r
 SHA256MSG2           xmm (rw)    xmm/m128 (r)    NA            OF 38 CD /r

Figure 3-11. SHA instruction family

    The availability of the SHA Extensions in a platform can be detected
using the code in Listing 3-1. It is always a good idea to check the available
HW crypto capabilities before leveraging them.

Listing 3-1. Detecting the SHA Extensions

int CheckForIntelShaExtensions() {

    int a, b, c, d;
    // Look for CPUID.7.0.EBX[29]
    // EAX = 7, ECX = 0
    a = 7;
    c = 0;

    asm volatile ("cpuid"
    Intel® SHA Extensions: New Instructions Supporting the
    Secure Hash Algorithm on Intel® Architecture Processors
    14
    :"=a"(a), "=b"(b), "=c"(c), "=d"(d)
    :"a"(a), "c"(c)
    );
    // Intel® SHA Extensions feature bit is EBX[29]
    return ((b >> 29) & 1);

}

I? ntel® Data Protection Technology with Secure Key
(DRNG)
This section explains about the usage of Digital Random Number
Generator (DRNG) with the new instructions supported in IA CPUs. For
any IoT device, the ability to generate high-quality cryptographic keys
is crucial. Two such instructions RDRAND and RDSEED are explained
along with the method to determine the support and the associated
programming usage. Intel® Secure Key constitutes the Intel® 64 and IA-32
Architectures instructions RDRAND and RDSEED and the underlying
Digital Random Number Generator (DRNG) hardware implementation.
High-quality keys for cryptographic protocols can be generated using
the RDRAND instruction, and the RDSEED instruction is provided for
seeding software-based pseudorandom number generators (PRNGs).
RDRAND retrieves a hardware-generated random value from the NIST
SP800-90A compliant Digital Random Bit Generator (DRGB) and stores
it in the destination register given as an argument to the instruction. The
size of the random value (16-, 32-, or 64-bits) is determined by the size
of the register given. The carry flag (CF) must be checked to determine
whether a random value was available at the time of instruction execution.

RDRAND is available to both OS modes: system (ring 0) or application
(ring 3) software running on the platform. There are no hardware ring
requirements that restrict access based on process privilege level. As such,
RDRAND may be invoked as part of an operating system or hypervisor
system library, a shared software library, or directly by an application.
Before using the RDRAND or RDSEED instructions, an application or
library should first determine whether the underlying platform supports
the instruction and hence includes the underlying DRNG feature. This
can be done using the CPUID instruction. In general, CPUID is used to
return processor identification and feature information stored in the
EAX, EBX, ECX, and EDX registers. For detailed information on CPUID,
refer to References CPUID A and B. To be specific, support for RDRAND
can be determined by examining bit 30 of the ECX register returned by
CPUID, and support for RDSEED can be determined by examining bit
31 of the EBX register. A bit value of 1 indicates processor support for
the instruction, while a value of 0 indicates no processor support. The
Intel Digital Random Number Generator (DRNG) is a high-quality, high-
performance, HW-based random number generator.

      •     It supports NIST SP 800-90 A, B, and C compliant
            functionality and is FIPS 140-2 Level 2 certifiable.
      •     It generates random numbers at a rate of 1 byte per
            clock.

      •     It is available early in the system boot/OS load process.

    Both RDRAND and RDSEED return random numbers that are
compliant to the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
standards on random number generators (Figure 3-12).

 Instruction                 Source                                          NIST Compliance

 RDRAND                      Cryptographically secure pseudorandom number    SP 800-90A
                             generator

 RDSEED                      Non-deterministic random bit generator          SP 800-90B & C (drafts)

Figure 3-12. NIST compliance for RDRAND and RDSEED

    As depicted in Figure 3-13, the RDRAND instruction is handled
by microcode on each core. This includes an RNG microcode module
that handles interactions with the DRNG hardware module on the
processor chip. The entropy source (ES) produces random bits from a
nondeterministic hardware process. HW AES in CBC-MAC mode distills
the entropy into high-quality nondeterministic random numbers. The
deterministic random bit generator (DRBG) is seeded from the conditioner.

                                      Processor Chip
                           Random Number Generator
                                                                                   Hardware
                                                                      Seed

                                               Hardware
                             Raw

               Hardware                                                            SP800-90
                                               AES-CBC-
                Entropy                                                            AES CTR
                                              MAC Based
                Source                                                              Based
                                              Conditioner
                                                                                     DRBG

                                                         RDRAND
                  Core 0                                Instruction

                                                          RDRAND
                  Core N-1                               Instruction

Figure 3-13. Random number generator inside the chip

    The availability of RDRAND and RDSEED can be detected using the
following register bit decoding (Table 3-1).
    More information can be found at: https://software.intel.com/
en-us/articles/intel-digital-random-number-generator-drng-
software-implementation-guide

Table 3-1. Feature Information Returned in the ECX Register
Leaf   Register Bit    Mnemonic Description

1      ECX       30    RDRAND       A value of 1 indicates that processor
                                    supports the RDRAND instruction
7      EBX       18    RDSEED       A value of 1 indicates that processor
                                    supports the RDSEED instruction

    With the information from Table 3-1 and by leveraging the code in
Listing 3-2, the availability of RDRAND and RDSEED can be detected in a
platform.

Listing 3-2. Detecting DRNG Support

/* These are bits that are OR'd together */
#define DRNG_NO_SUPPORT 0x0 /* For clarity */
#define DRNG_HAS_RDRAND 0x1
#define DRNG_HAS_RDSEED 0x2
int get_drng_support ()
{
    static int drng_features= -1;
    /* So we don't call cpuid multiple times for
     * the same information */
    if ( drng_features == -1 ) {
        drng_features= DRNG_NO_SUPPORT;

        if ( _is_intel_cpu() ) {
            cpuid_t info;
            cpuid(&info, 1, 0);
            if ( (info.ecx & 0x40000000) == 0x40000000 ) {
                drng_features|= DRNG_HAS_RDRAND;
            }
            cpuid(&info, 7, 0);
            if ( (info.ebx & 0x40000) == 0x40000 ) {
                drng_features|= DRNG_HAS_RDSEED;
            }
        }
    }
    return drng_features;
}

    One of the advantages of security hardening and acceleration
capabilities applied to the core architecture is that performance
enhancements derived from core silicon manufacturing process
improvements also apply to security features. In many cases, this approach
ensures security features’ manufacturing costs scale with the other core
features.

  onverged Security and Manageability Engine
C
(CSME)
This describes the Converged Security Engine capabilities including the
silicon, FW, and SW ingredients. This is similar to a security coprocessor
which has its own ROM, RAM, instruction set, and an isolated execution
environment. Refer to a simplified architecture diagram in Figure 3-14. An
excellent deep dive can be found in the book Platform Embedded Security
Technology Revealed (www.apress.com/9781430265719).

                         CPU

                         PCH
                                                    Flash
                      CSME

Figure 3-14. CSME block diagram

    Features are implemented in the isolated security execution engine
or equivalent to a security coprocessor. CSME is an embedded subsystem
in Platform Controller Hub (PCH). It is a mini SoC within the PCH and
contains a small processor, SRAM, crypto blocks, and I/O’s. CSME serves
three main platform roles: chipset (secure initialization/survivability),
security (boot/runtime protection and enable trusted execution of
platform applications), and manageability (optional extensions for out-of-
band network management).
    CSME supports the following:

      •     Crypto operations, boot, DAL, manageability (AMT, in
            above atom).

      •     The CSME supports crypto operations, HW Root of
            Trust–based secure boot (verified and measured),
            Active Manageability Technology, and other features.

      •   Content Protection: PAVP, Digital Rights Management
          (DRM)-Widevine, PlayReady, and Adobe Access. The
          CSME supports multiple DRMs for protecting the
          premium audio/video content by encrypting and/or
          digital watermarking.

      •   Secure Debug: DFX, JTAG lock. The CSME supports
          secure debug and manages access to DFX register
          space by allowing locking and unlocking of JTAG
          interface through which ICE emulators could be
          plugged in for debugging during pre/postproduction
          and to debug the field return parts.

      •   Identity Protection Technology: The CSME also
          supports protecting user’s identity via multifactor
          authentication, biometrics, iris, and others.

 Secure/Verified, Measured Boot and Boot Guard
Protecting the boot flow is critical to ensure that the device is not running
compromised code whether it is the FW on the flash components or SW
running from the mass storage device. Secure/verified boot is a process
where a device authenticates the different FW/SW ingredients in the
boot chain and establishes a chain of trust. Measured boot is a process
where the device authenticates to a network for admission. To implement
measured boot, the device stores the hash values of the boot chain
ingredients, and SW entities collect these values and transmit them to a
server for attestation.

 Trusted Execution Technology (TXT)
The TXT is prominent in the server and microserver domain where a
comprehensive security strategy is employed including a Measured
Launch Environment (MLE) and instrumented OS. More about this will be
discussed in the “Runtime Protection – Ever Vigilant” section.

 Platform Trust Technology (PTT)
PTT is a FW implementation of the Trusted Computing Group (TCG)
Trusted Platform Module (TPM) and complies with the TPM 2.0
specification. This FW is executed on the CSME or CSE on atom platforms.
This feature is the most important for an IoT device which has board-level
constraints imposed by BOM cost and real estate. PTT is essential for
measured boot and attestation mechanisms.

 Enhanced Privacy ID (EPID)
The EPID allows a device to possess an immutable “privacy preserving
platform identifier” – in many use cases, it isn’t required that the particular
instance of the CPU be known, only that the platform is of a particular class
or origin. In these situations, trust can be established without sacrificing
privacy. Through this immutable identity, more secrets can be provisioned
in the field during the course of the IoT device lifecycle including
anonymous identification for provisioning of secrets, premium content,
DRMs, and operation.

 Memory Encryption Technologies
In future processors, Intel plans to introduce two new in-memory data
protection capabilities including Total Memory Encryption (TME) and
Multi-Key TME, or MKTME. TME technology encrypts the platform’s
entire memory with a single key.

T? ME
When enabled via BIOS configuration, this will help ensure that all
memory accessed from the Intel CPU is encrypted, including customer
credentials, encryption keys, and other IP or personal information on the
external memory bus.

M
  KTME
The second new technology extends TME to support multiple encryption
keys (Multi-Key TME, or MKTME) and provides the ability to specify
the use of a specific key for a page of memory. This architecture allows
either CPU-generated keys or tenant-provided keys, giving full flexibility
to customers. This means virtual machines (VMs) and containers can
be cryptographically isolated from each other in memory with separate
encryption keys, a big plus in multitenant cloud environments. VMs and
containers can also be pooled to share an individual key, further extending
scale and flexibility. This includes support for both standard DRAM and
NVRAM. Refer to the following for more information.[4, 5]

 Dynamic Application Loader (DAL)
DAL technology allows building, deploying, and managing the lifecycle
of a small trusted applet (Java-based applets) using the DAL SDK and
Runtime environment.

4
  h? ttps://software.intel.com/en-us/blogs/2017/12/22/intel-releases-
   new-technology-specification-for-memory-encryption
5
    https://software.intel.com/sites/default/files/managed/a5/16/Multi-
    Key-Total-Memory-Encryption-Spec.pdf

  oftware Guard Extensions (SGX) – IA CPU
S
Instructions
SGX constitutes a new set of CPU instructions, kernel/user mode drivers
and Runtime environment, and API/SDK. This framework allows
developers to build the trusted parts of the application code into enclaves.
The inherent assumption is that the partition of the application into
trusted and untrusted domains is already done prior to implementing
SGX. SGX can be used to seal legitimate software inside an enclave to
protect from attacks by the malware, irrespective of the privilege levels
whether it is ring 0 or ring 3.

I? dentity Crisis
With the projected 50 billion IoT devices on the network, wouldn’t it be
ultracritical to ensure that a device is talking to the right device at the other
end? A masqueraded device can do lot of damage. A method to prevent this
is to implement a device identity that’s immutable and use this identity to
attest and provision initial secrets and additional secrets in the field during
the course of the device’s life. The same phenomenon applies to human
identity as well. It is vital to realize that a masqueraded device is substantially
hard to detect and quarantine. Intel Identity Protection Technology (IPT)
uses Dynamic Application Loader (DAL) to implement mechanisms to
protect the user identity via multifactor authentication and others.
     The device identity (ID) decision tree can be used to select the right
ID for a particular implementation. As shown in Figure 3-15, a security
architect/engineer can decide the right identity based on the platform
requirements and use cases. If an identity is required but mutable
(changeable), a SW identity may suffice, but immutable identity requires
identity to be in HW. If this identity now has to be anonymous, select EPID,
else the identity as supported in PTT/TPM may be adequate. The EPID’s
cryptographic properties are briefly explained in the following section.

                                 Immutability                              Select
  Is identity required?   YES                   YES   Anonymous?   YES
                                  required?                                 EPID

          NO                          NO                 NO

                                   Select               Select
          NA
                                 SW based ID           PTT/TPM

Figure 3-15. Device identity decision tree

 Enhanced Privacy Identifier (EPID)
The EPID is a novel technology that addresses all aspects of the active
anonymity problem: authentication, anonymity, and revocation. Intel®
Enhanced Privacy ID (Intel® EPID) provides an immutable hardware
root of trust, enabling IoT networks to confidently identify devices and to
secure their communications.

A
  nonymity
Intel EPID also offers sophisticated privacy capabilities that enable
anonymous communication to safeguard networks and customers’
data. EPID is an anonymous digital signature scheme with the following
attributes (Figure 3-16): a private key for signing and a single group public
key for verifying signature of multiple keys. EPID is an open standard: ISO/
IEC 20008/20009 and TCG Mature Technology, shipping since 2008, 2.4B
keys since 2008.

             PKI Public Key            EPID Public Key

                                                         …

                                pvt-       pvt-                pvt-
                               key 1      key 2               key n

            PKI Private Keys           Millions of Private Keys

Figure 3-16. PKI system vs. EPID

    As depicted in the figure, the PKI is a system with a public-private key
pair, whereas the EPID is a system with one public key associated with
many private keys formed into a group. In both cases, the private keys are
provisioned into the devices, and the public keys are available to the back-
end servers for authentication/admission.

 PTT/TPM
The Endorsement Key (EK) supported in the Intel® PTT or discrete Trusted
Platform Module (TPM) serves as a direct identity for IoT devices. An
Endorsement Key is a special purpose TPM-resident RSA key that is never
visible outside of the TPM. An EK certificate is used to bind an identity, in

terms of specific security attributes, to a TPM. The primary use of an EK
certificate is to authenticate device identity during Attestation Identity Key
(AIK) certificate issuance.

 Device Boot Integrity – Trust But Verify
Imagine the IoT device booting an image that’s not the original from boot
storage. In this circumstance, any protections that you deploy at higher
layers wouldn’t be adequate to protect the device. Once the immutable
identity is ensured as explained in the previous section, it becomes vital to
follow through by booting securely. The boot loaders such as BIOS, UEFI,
coreboot, and FSP can be classified into pre-OS boot loaders and will be
referred as such. Let’s unravel the ∗boot chaos with many terms employed
in the industry today:

      •   Trusted Boot: Definition varies according to industry.
          Used to characterize a trusted system with a chain of
          trust.

      •   Secure Boot: HWRoT based. Authenticates starting with
          the first instruction executed on host (Core/Xeon/Atom).
      •   UEFI Secure Boot: UEFI Boot manager ensures device
          boots only signed FW and OS loaders. UEFI Driver
          signing and protocol extensions. This is also known as
          BIOS as Root of Trust.

      •   Windows Secure Boot: Leverages UEFI Secure Boot to
          continue into Windows OS, a Windows certification
          requirement.

      •   Direct Boot: An OS image such as Linux bzImage is
          loaded from stage 2 of the pre-OS boot loader.

       •     Verified Boot: Cryptographically verifies the Initial Boot
             Block of the pre-OS boot loader or UEFI or BIOS using
             boot policy key. A verified boot using Intel Boot Guard
             is shown in Figure 3-17.
       •     Immutable Root-of-Trust exists in the hardware.

       •     Root-of-Trust protects the initial boot process.

       •     It uses cryptographic keys to authenticate and validate
             the integrity of the Initial Boot Block (IBB).

       •     IBB maintains a secure boot chain by passing control
             to the next stage boot image after authentication and
             integrity verification.

       •     The final stage boot image passes control to the OS
             after authentication.

       •     Measured Boot: Measures the Initial Boot Block (IBB)
             and subsequent stages into platform storage such as
             Trusted Platform Module (TPM) or firmware-based
             TPM or secure storage.

                              verify         verify                   verify
      Root of Trust               IBB       OBB                        OS/Apps

                Intel BootGuard          UEFI Secure Boot Or Other Mechanism

Figure 3-17. Verified boot flow with Boot Guard

   The following terms will be useful to understand the following
sequence that describes the process of Measured Boot using Boot Guard as
shown in Figure 3-18:

       •     Hashing algorithms typically employed include Hash_
             alg = SHA1, SHA256, SHA384, SM3.

       •     Extending: It is a process of updating a PCR with a hash.

•   PCR: Platform Configuration Register hosted
    inside PTT/TPM. The PCR 0–7 are used for pre-OS
    environment, and PCR 8–15 are used for OS and
    beyond. Refer to the TCG TPM specification for
    recommended PCR allocations.

•   The new PCR value can be computed with PCR_new =
    Hash_alg(PCR_old || Hash_alg(data_new)).

•   Logging: Keeps a log of all measurements in an ACPI table.

•   ACM: Intel Authenticated Code Module, integrated
    in the BIOS/UEFI/boot loader for authenticating and
    measuring the IBB.

1. Upon power ON, CSME starts by computing the hash
   of ACM, and the hash of the ACM is stored in PCR 0.

2. The ACM computes the hash of IBB and extends it
   into PCR 0.

3. The IBB computes the hash of OEM Boot Block
   (OBB) aka the second stage pre-OS boot loader and
   extends the hash into PCR 0 and stores the hash of
   Platform Config Data into PCR 1.

4. The OBB computes the hash of OS loader and stores
   the corresponding hash into PCR 4. It stores the
   hash of Firmware Boot Policy in PCR 7.

5. The OS loader computes the hash of OS kernel and
   stores the hash into PCR 8.

6. The OS kernel can compute the hash of the user
   mode drivers/libraries and applications and extend
   the respective hashes into PCR 8-15 to meet the
   platform chain of trust requirements.

                           Power
             CSME
                            ON
             ACM

                                PCR 0 : BtGuard Policy, ACM, IBB

                                       PCR 0 : CSME, OBB
             IBB

                                   PCR 1 : Platform Config Data

                                           PCR 4 : OS Loader
             OBB

                                     PCR 7 : Firmware Secure BP
                               PCR [0-7] : Separator bet’n Firmware/OS
            Loader

                                        PCR 8 : OS Kernel
              OS
            Kernel

                                    PCR 8-15 : OS Dependent
             OS

Figure 3-18. Measured Boot sequence

 Secure Boot Mechanisms
The stack below describes the lowest layer to be the HW layer, and above
that is the firmware layer which includes the modules required to handle
the HW IP blocks and Digital Rights Management. Above that is the
boot loader/UEFI used to initialize the CPU and chipset. The optional
hypervisor supports the Virtual Machine Manager (VMM) functionality.
The upper layers include the OS ingredients for kernel and User mode.

Above that layer are the middleware/frameworks and applications. This
diagram (Figure 3-19) also illustrates the security goal that trust begins
at the lowest layers and must be extended into the layers above – and
that doing so requires conscious techniques to get it right. If/when those
techniques fail, the stack recovers by falling back to lower layers.
     The stack includes booting into application TEEs and the need to
distinguish security-sensitive function and workloads that should be
separated from “traditional” function and workloads. We can refer to
the TEE and lower layers as the trusted computing base upon which the
rest of the stack depends. The stack also supports networking and the
idea that lower layers implementing the TCB can be linked (in an IoT
use case) so that a Distributed TCB (DTCB) can be formed that supports
distributed trusted workloads such as key management/migration, device
management, SW/FW update of an IoT fog/network, and so on.

                            App Trusted Execution
                             Environment (TEE)
                                  Applications

                                  User Mode

                                 Kernel Mode                 OS
                                   OS Loader

       Chain of Trust          Optional Hypervisor

                              Stage2 Boot Loader             Pre-OS
                              Stage1 Boot Loader

                                Secure Boot FW
             Authenticate                                    HW
                                    HW Rot

Figure 3-19. Describes the boot flow on a core along with the chain
of trust and signing implications

 Secure Boot Terminology Overview
Secure Boot Types: With the Field Programmable Fuse (One Time
Programmable) profile options within the SoC, you can configure the
device in an unsecured boot where the boot ingredients in stages are
assumed to be trusted and no authentication is performed, referred to in
Figure 3-20.

      •     Verified Boot: Boot policies are enforced during
            the boot process. Starting with the Root of Trust for
            verification, the currently executing module verifies
            the next module against a policy. The boot process
            is stopped if secure boot guarantee is violated. It is
            important to note that this only provides assurance that
            the boot policy was enforced.

      •     Measured Boot: Integrity measurement is placed
            into the TPM. Starting with the Root of Trust for
            measurement, the currently executing module places
            the integrity measurement of the next module into
            the TPM. Computer is not stopped if secure boot
            guarantee is violated and provable to remote systems
            via attestation.

      •     Secure Boot: A boot process which implements either
            Verified Boot, Measured Boot, or both. Verified Boot
            is often referred to as Secure Boot; Measured Boot is
            often referred to as Trusted Boot (also refers to TBoot
            sometimes).

 Unsecured Boot                                                                                                TPM
        Reset
             Assumption

                                                                                            OS/
                   Execute             Assumption       Execute              Assumption
                                                                                           Apps

                          Verifies against Manifest during / after boot.
 Measured Boot            • Local Attestation: TPM Enforces Policy                                   IT
                          • Remote Attestation: TPM Key signs                             Verifies against manifest
        Reset               measurements.

                                                                                            OS/
                   Execute        Measure               Execute            Measure
                                                                                           Apps

 Verified Boot
                                                 Policy applied
        Reset                                    starting here
                                                                                                          IT
                                                                                                   Has no proof of
                                                                                                    proper boot
                                    Verify                                  Verify          OS/
                   Execute                              Execute
                                                                                           Apps

Figure 3-20. Types of boot

    IOT devices are inherently vulnerable to physical attacks primarily due
to their ability to connect to billions of devices. A first step in building a
robust device is to ensure that the very first component of the boot loader
is authenticated. This is implemented by a method known as secure boot
which is based on a hardware root of trust in a platform. The immutable
code running on on-die ROM in an isolated environment on a security
engine forms an anchor. This ROM code loads the stage 1 of the boot
loader into security engine’s SRAM and cryptographically authenticates
the image before executing it on the host CPU. The secure boot method
on Intel Architecture is explained in detail including the HW and
cryptographic blocks. Refer to Figure 3-21.

  verview of BIOS/UEFI Secure Boot Using Boot
O
Guard Version 1.0 (BtG)
The verified boot flow using FSP+coreboot leveraging the Intel Boot Guard
version 1.0 on Skylake platform is shown in Figure 3-21. The terms are
explained followed by the sequence.
     IPF: Infield Programmable Fuses also known as Field Programmable
Fuses (FPF) represent storage inside the CPU/SoC for policy configuration
and are One Time Programmable (OTP). The provisioning tools are
provided by Intel for programming these fuses in the manufacturing flow.
     Platform Power Sequence: Includes starting boot sequence for power
rail stabilization.
     Authenticated Code Module (ACM): Intel provided FW module loaded
from flash, authenticated and executed in CPU’s cache as RAM (CAR).

  Sky Lake FSP/coreboot Verified Boot (BtG 1.0)

  Reference Flow: Core Boot + FSP + UEFI + Windows
                                                    Core Boot                     Core Boot              Core Boot
       Platform                                      Stage-1                       Stage-2                Stage-3
                                                                                                                                      Windows
        Power                   ACM                (BootBlock)                   (RomStage)             (RamStage)                                    Windows
                                                                                                                                       Loader
      Sequence
                                                                             OEM               Option             UEFI
                                                                            Manifest    FSP    ROMs              Payload
                                                                     IBB
                                                                                                   Hash
                                                                                                                                          UEFI
             IPF                        Key                       Boot Policy                      OEM                         UEFI
                                                                                                                             Key Store    Variable
                                      Manifest                     Manifest                       Manifest                                Services
            OEM                                                                                                                 KEK
                                         OEM                          IBB
          Public Key                                                                             Components                      PK
                                     BP Key Hash                     Hash
            Hash                    PubK                                                            Hash                        DB
                                                                                                                                DBX
          Boot Policy                                             PubK
                                                                                              ACM FW authenticates the public key
                        Signed     PrvK                                                       ACM FW authenticates the IBB
                        By OEM                                     Signed                     Core Boot Stage-1 authenticates the Core Boot Stage-2
                                                           PrvK    By OEM BP
                        Private Key
                                                                   Private Key                Stage-2 authenticates the Stage-3
                                                                                              Stage-3 authenticates OS Loader via UEFI key store or Mok List
                                                                                              OS Loader authenticates the Kernel via UEFI key store or Mok List
                                                                                              Kernel authenticates the Apps via UEFI key store or Mok List

Figure 3-21. FSP/coreboot-based verified boot on Skylake using Boot
Guard 1.0

    The sequence is outlined here:

      •   ACM authenticates Core Boot Stage-1.

      •   Core Boot Stage-1: Authenticates Core Boot Stage-2
          using the BPM.

      •   Core Boot Stage-2: Authenticates Core Boot Stage-3
          using the OEM Manifest.

      •   Core Boot Stage-3: Authenticates OS Loader (Windows
          or Grub/ELILO or others).

      •   OS Loader (Linux or Windows or RTOS): Authenticates
          kernel image.

      •   Kernel: Authenticates the user mode and applications.

    Refer to this link for starting with coreboot: www.coreboot.org/Lesson1
    Firmware Support Package (FSP) is provided by Intel for initializing
Intel silicon, designed for integration into a boot loader of the developer's
choice. FSP source code can be leveraged for ideas and references for
implementing verified and measured boot using Intel Boot Guard and
PTT/TPM; more information can be found at: https://firmware.intel.
com/learn/fsp/about-intel-fsp

  ata Protection – Securing Keys, Data at
D
Rest and in Transit
At rest: Storing data/secrets/content securely on the storage and whole
disk encryption is the most popular example. This also is a very important
problem. If a malware or even a legitimate application can access the
secrets that it’s not authorized, it causes an unstable device. Certain
regulations such as General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) mandate
protecting the privacy of the data both at rest and in transit. For more
information on encryption-related protection of data, refer to

https://ec.europa.eu/commission/sites/beta-political/files/
data-­protection-­factsheet-sme-obligations_en.pdf. Section (83) calls
for encryption for confidentiality in: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-­
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN
    Article 6, 4 (e) also calls for encryption or pseudonymization
of personal data which ensures reidentifying only with additional
information. This is in contrast to anonymity where the anonymized data
can no longer be reidentified.
    Runtime protection problem: How do we protect the data and the
code from each other in the system during Runtime? TEEs are an excellent
method for this. Examples include SGX.
    It is useful to think about theft threats and the idea that attackers
are able to perform brute force crypto hacking as they have access to all
the encrypted data and wrapped keys and so on. Encrypting using AES
before storing the data on a disk makes it harder for attackers to reverse
engineer and steal the secrets. An example use case for this is the Windows
BitLocker technology which implements the whole disk encryption with
strong passwords. There are increased threats due to persistent memory
technologies supported by Optane and 3D Xpoint. These are persistent
storage technologies making them subject to theft threats. Memory
encryption is a mitigation where any/all data that goes out of the CPU/SOC
on bus is encrypted whether it’s destined for DRAM or SSD. The encryption
technologies such as AES XTS 265 and secure boot existing in Optane + 3D
Xpoint can be utilized to protect assets concerning flash-­based memory.

 Intel Platform Trust Technology (PTT)
Intel® PTT is a implementation of the Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
2.0 specification in firmware. CSME/TXE Engine is used as cryptographic
processor for TPM implementation. SPI flash (TXE/CSME filesystem) is
used as secure storage. PTT currently implements only mandatory and
recommended TPM 2.0 commands mentioned in MSFT “signal and profile
document.”

    As shown in Figure 3-22, the PTT includes random number generator,
encryption/decryption, sign/verify, secure key generation, secure key/data
storage, device identity both unique and anonymous, and device attestation.

                                 Random
                                 Number
                                Generator

            Device                                    Encryption
          Attestation                                  (Signing)

                                  Intel
                                Platform
                                  Trust
                               Technology
        Device Identity
                                                     Secure Key
           Unique/                                   Generation
          Anonymous

                               Secure Key/
                               Data Storage

Figure 3-22. PTT components

 Windows PTT Architecture
On Windows as shown in Figure 3-23, the host SW components include the
Trusted Base Services (TBS), the TPM.sys kernel mode driver, and ACPI
which interact with PTT FW through Memory Mapped IO (MMIO)–based

PTT interface. The PTT interface in turn calls into the TXE or CSME. The
SPI storage is used as the secure storage where the keys and other secrets
are stored encrypted and signed to ensure confidentiality and integrity.
The CSME contains internal crypto engines and SRAM and uses SPI flash
to store the keys in an encrypted format.
     Pre-OS environment (BIOS/UEFI/coreboot) implements the following:

      •     Selects between available PTT/TPMs

      •     Enables/disables PTT/TPM

      •     Issues TPM clear (PPI)

      •     Logs measurements in TPM and ACPI for OS

                       Host SW                           BIOS
                                                                 BIOS
               TBS

                                      ACPI                      PTT EFI
             TPM.sys                                             Driver

  System
                                         PTT Interface
  Memory

  CSME                                                                  SPI

                             PTT FW
                                                                   Secure
                                                                   Storage

            Crypto Engines                      SRAM

Figure 3-23. Windows PTT stack

 Linux PTT Software Stack
As shown in Figure 3-24, in Linux OS stack, a PTT-based application
has multiple mechanisms to interact with PTT including PKCS #11 and
Feature API, and an expert application developer can directly interact with
System API.

      •   TPM Device Driver (TDD) handles physical data
          transmission in ring 0/kernel mode.

      •   TPM Command Transmission Interface (TCTI) handles
          marshalling and unmarshalling of full TPM commands.

      •   System API (SAPI) enables creation and handling of
          TPM objects, sessions, and policies.

      •   Enhanced SAPI (ESAPI) enables management of the
          created objects, sessions, and policies.

      •   Feature API (FAPI) designed to capture 80% of
          common use cases combining operations with profile
          definitions.

      •   TAB controls access to the TPM in multiple application
          scenarios.

      •   RM manages the limited TPM resident memory.

      •   PKCS #11 – WIP on TPM 2.0.

   TPM through SAPI specifications and implementations are mature,
while ESAPI and FAPI implementations are still developing.

                                           Application
                                PKCS #11
           Expert                                    Feature API (FAPI)
       TPM Application
                                                 Enhanced SystemAPI (ESAPI)
                                                                                  BIOS
                                    System API (SAPI)                                     BIOS
                          TPM Command Transmission Interface (TCTI)
                                          TAB
  User space                       Resource Manager                                      PTT EFI
                                                                                          Driver
  Kernel space                       TPM Device Driver (TDD)

                   System
                                                                  PTT Interface
                   Memory

                   TXE Engine                                                                    SPI

                                                    PTT FW
                                                                                            Secure
                                                                                            Storage

                                Crypto Engines                            SRAM

Figure 3-24. Linux PTT stack

 Runtime Protection – Ever Vigilant
Most of the IoT devices spend their life in this phase where the device is
functional and performing its intended persona. This phase is critical for
devices that are “always on.” The assets to be protected include data, code,
and identity. Once the chain of trust is stable (secure booted), to maintain
the stable chain of trust, every bit and byte must be authenticated before
admitting into the system on every supported interface (USB, serial, BT/
Wi-Fi). This objective can be achieved with high robustness level using
a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE). The technologies available for
implementing Runtime protections include Intel VT, SGX, CSME, and TXT.

 Intel Virtualization Technology (Intel VT)
Virtualization abstracts hardware that allows multiple workloads to share
a common set of resources. On shared virtualized hardware, a variety of
workloads can colocate while maintaining full isolation from each other,
freely migrate across infrastructures, and scale as needed.

     CPU virtualization features enable abstraction of the full prowess
of Intel® CPU to a virtual machine (VM). All software in the VM can run
without any performance or compatibility hit, as if it was running natively
on a dedicated CPU. Live migration from one Intel® CPU generation to
another, as well as nested virtualization, is possible.
     Memory virtualization features allow abstraction, isolation, and
monitoring of memory on a per virtual machine (VM) basis. These features
may also make live migration of VMs possible, add to fault tolerance, and
enhance security. Example features include direct memory access (DMA)
remapping and extended page tables (EPT), including their extensions:
accessed and dirty bits and fast switching of EPT contexts.
     I/O virtualization features facilitate offloading of multicore packet
processing to network adapters as well as direct assignment of virtual
machines to virtual functions, including disk I/O. Examples include
Virtual Machine Device Queues (VMDQ), Single Root I/O Virtualization
(SR-IOV, also a PCI-SIG standard), and Intel® Data Direct I/O Technology
enhancements (Intel® DDIO).
     Graphics Virtualization Technology (Intel® GVT) allows VMs to have
full and/or shared assignment of the graphics processing units (GPU)
as well as the video transcode accelerator engines integrated in Intel
System-on-Chip products. It enables usages such as workstation remoting,
desktop-as-a-service, media streaming, and online gaming.
     Virtualization of security and network functions enables
transformation of traditional network and security workloads into
compute. Virtual functions can be deployed on standard high-volume
servers anywhere in the data center, network nodes, or Cloud and smartly
colocated with business workloads. Examples of Intel® technologies
making it happen include Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK), Intel®
QuickAssist Technology, and Hyperscan.
     Intel® Virtualization Technology for Connectivity (Intel® VT-c) is a key
feature of many Intel® Ethernet Controllers. With I/O virtualization and
Quality of Service (QoS) features designed directly into the controller’s

silicon, Intel VT-c enables I/O virtualization that transitions the traditional
physical network models used in data centers to more efficient virtualized
models by providing port partitioning, multiple Rx/Tx queues, and on-­
controller QoS functionality that can be used in both virtual and nonvirtual
server deployments.
     As shown in Figure 3-25, the isolation capability enabled by VT
technology is being utilized to create an architecture with a Trusted
Execution Environment (TEE). The TEE is implemented as a secure VM
with privileged execution and access to resources; examples include
Microsoft VSM and Trusty (https://source.android.com/security/
trusty/).
     Virtualization and VM Isolation components include Intel® VTx (CPU),
Intel® VTd (I/O), VmFunc (Hypervisor).

                                              TEE
               App                            App

                     Rich OS             TEE OS

                               VMM

                                                VTd
               USB             I2C
                                                                         1
            Device       Device

Figure 3-25. TEE using virtualization environment

   TEE OS: Thin OS running alongside rich OS. Examples are Microsoft
VSM, Android Trusty, and so on.
   Rich OS: Regular OS that executes non-security-sensitive workloads.
Examples are Microsoft Windows, Linux, Android, and so on.
   Trusted computing base (TCB): VMM + TEE OS + TEE App.
   Isolated execution: VMs are isolated from each other by the VMM.
   Trusted Input/Output: Can be implemented by assigning I/O
Controllers to different VMs.

 Software Guard Extensions (SGX)
This section explains the usage of Software Guard Extensions (SGX) for
implementing a Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) with the new
instructions supported in IA CPUs. For any IoT device, the ability to
execute code that handles secrets/assets in a protected environment is
crucial. SGX leverages the partitioning of code into trusted and untrusted
domains which interact with each other via well-defined SGX instructions.
    How does SGX work as shown in Figure 3-26? The following model
describes the interactions between the application and the SGX enclave.

      1. Application is built with trusted and untrusted parts.
      2. Application runs and creates enclave which is
         placed in trusted memory.

      3. Trusted function is called; code running inside
         enclave sees data in clear; external access to data is
         denied.

      4. Trusted function returns; enclave data remains in
         trusted memory.

                                 Application
                   Untrusted Part                 Trusted Part
                       of App                        of App
                                          Call Gate

                   Create Enclave                     Execute

                                                      Return
                  CallTrusted Func.

                   (etc.)

                            Privileged System Code
                            OS, VMM, BIOS, SMM, ...

Figure 3-26. SGX in action

   It is important to understand the software development model for the
benefit of the developers (Figure 3-27):

      •     Sensitive code and data are partitioned into an
            “enclave” module which is a shared object (.so).

      •     Define the enclave interface and use tools to generate
            stubs/proxies.

      •     SGX Libraries provide APIs (C/C++) to encapsulate
            heavy-lifting implementation.

      •     Use a familiar toolchain to build and debug.

                 Untrusted           Tools              Trusted

                 App Code

                 Processing
                 Component

             SGX           Stub/                Stub/           SGX
           Libraries       Proxy                Proxy         Libraries

                 Processing
                 Component
                                             Enclave

           ptrace            uRTS                Security Services

                       SGX driver
        Kernel

        Intel SGX enabled platform

Figure 3-27. SGX SW development model

   For further details, please refer to SGX web portal at: https://
software.intel.com/en-us/sgx

 Intel CSE/CSME – DAL
Intel Converged Security Engine in CSE/CSME is a dedicated engine
for security and provides a HW root of trust for the platform. Dynamic
Application Loader (DAL) exposes a general-purpose execution

environment and is in production use since 2011 (Sandy Bridge) and
exists in almost every Intel-based platform. It extends the CSE FW
by dynamically loading signed CSE applications at Runtime. It allows
faster deployment of FW applications by decoupling the application
development from the platform development lifecycle. The FW
applications are stored on host filesystem, thus avoiding flash size
considerations. DAL enables binary-level portability for applications and
is based on a virtual machine; DAL applications are written in the Java
programming language. Refer to Figure 3-28.

                   Open to malware and                       Isolation of sensitive
                    rooting/jailbreaking                             assets

            Host Operating System (REE)                                        CSE - TEE
                                                          Trusted        Trusted        Trusted
                                                            App            App            App
                                                         Payment         Content        Identity
                                                                        protection     protection

              Apps                                                                                   TA Service
                                                                                                      Manager
                                         TSM
                                         Proxy                      TEE Internal API

            TEE Client API          Trusted App
                                       mgmt                                                    Micro Run Time
                                                  IPC\HECI                                      Environment
                                        API

                      Rich OS                                             Secure OS

                         Hardware Platform                          HW Secure Resources

Figure 3-28. DAL architecture

 Isolation from Rich Execution Environment
All the trusted applications (TAs) run in an isolated environment as
supported by DAL and with the following attributes:

      •   TAs run in separate Java-like VM environment.

      •   TA-to-TA snooping is prevented using sandboxing.

      •   DAL prevents TA direct access to resources of other TAs.

 Authenticity and Security
The DAL applications or TAs are subjected to the following robustness rules:

      •   DAL allows installation of signed and encrypted DAL
          TA in the CSE (security coprocessor).

      •   The TA can use the secure services, that is, secure
          storage to access SPI flash.

      •   Intel or OEM signed TAs can be installed.

 Portability
The TAs have the binary-level portability subjected to the following scope:

      •   DAL is based on a virtual machine; DAL applications
          are written in Java.

      •   DAL enables binary-level portability for FW
          applications across the OS and HW platform.

      Following are sample applications where DAL is deployed:

        •   Intel® Identity Protection Technology (Intel® IPT).

            •     Identity protection and e-payment: OTP (one-
                  time password), PTD (protected trusted display),
                  PKI (public key infrastructure), NFC (near field
                  communication).

            •     Intel® PKI (PEAT) for IT market: Symantec
                  Managed PKI, Intel IT.

            •     McAfee (Intel Security): MFAb (Multifactor
                  Authentication for Business), True Key – using IPT.

        •   Intel® Security Assist (ISA): A self-updater service
            which recommends security products to end users.

        •   China UnionPay (CUP): Implementing a Tap and Pay
            e-Commerce solution.

        •   Intel® Software Guard Extensions (Intel® SGX): The
            “Secure Enclaves” technology consumes CSME
            platform services using DAL.

        •   IOT Retail SmartPOS (Point Of Sale): Based on Atom
            platforms with Android.

 Intel Trusted Execution Technology (TXT)
Intel® Trusted Execution Technology (Intel® TXT) provides hardware-­
based security technologies to help build a solid foundation for security.
Built into Intel’s silicon, these technologies address the increasing and
evolving security threats across physical and virtual infrastructures by
complementing Runtime protections such as antivirus software. Intel
TXT also can play a role in meeting government and industry regulations
and data protection standards by providing a hardware-based method of
verification useful in compliance efforts.

    As shown in Figure 3-29, Intel® TXT capable processors and
chipsets allow establishing of the “root of trust” and “Measured Launch
Environment” (MLE) to support trust decisions; within the computing
platform, a MLE is needed. A “root-of-trust” is also needed which
should be established first at the silicon level and then extended to the
entire solution stack. The technology draws upon a rich set of security/
virtualization features embedded into the IA processors and also
integrated into the BIOS as well as other platform ingredients.

                 EM                        1. SYSTEM POWERS ON AND INTEL TXT
               ST
             SY                               VERIFIES SYSTEM BIOS, CRITICAL
                                              FIRMWARE AND THEN HYPERVISOR

                                                                               2. HYPERVISOR MEASURE MATCHES
                             T  XT
                      IN TEL                                                                        3. OS AND APPLICATIONS ARE
                                    RE
                                 WA                                      CH
                                                                                                       LAUNCHED, PLATFORM
                                D
                            HAR
                                                                     M AT                              TRUST STATUS ATTESTABLE
                                                                                                       I
                                                                                  ISO
                                                                                     R               OS PS
                                                                                RV
                                                                              PE WARE                 AP
                                                                          H Y                I
                                                                            HA
                                                                               RD          OS PS
                                                                                            AP
                                                C    H
                                            MAT                                                                R
                                         NO                  R                                          RV
                                                                                                           ISO
                                                                                                      PE WARE
                                                         ISO                                        Y
                                                      RV                                           H
                                                                                                       RD
                                                  Y PE WARE                                          HA
                                                H
                                                     RD
                                                  HA

 2. HYPERVISOR MEASURE
    DOES NOT MATCH                                                             R
                                                                            ISO
                                                                          RV RE
                                                                       PE
                                                                     HY DWA
                                                                         R
                                                                      HA
             3. POLICY ACTION ENFORCED, UNTRUSTED
                STATUS ATTESTABLE                                                        www.intel.com/txt

Figure 3-29. TXT flow

     Figure 3-30 depicts the critical enabling requirements for the
technology in server implementations. Intel TXT is specifically designed
to harden platforms from the emerging threats of hypervisor attacks,
BIOS, or other firmware attacks, malicious rootkit installations, or other
software-based attacks. It increases protection by allowing greater control
of the launch stack through a Measured Launch Environment (MLE) and

enabling isolation in the boot process. More specifically, it extends the
Virtual Machine Extensions (VMX) environment of Intel® Virtualization
Technology (Intel® VT), permitting a verifiably secure installation, launch,
and use of a hypervisor or operating system (OS).

 A chain-of-trust built on top of Intel® TXT
                     Intel Kernel      Intel-generated project that is useful for extending integrity
                     Guard Tech        verification solutions into runtime environments.
                                       Intel contributes optimizations to these widely used libraries for
                      OpenSSL
        Open                           performing cryptographic processing.
       Source           Tboot
                                       Intel-maintained project that is widely used to OS or VMM
                                       infrastructures capable of trusted boot.
                         Open          Intel-maintained project (internally known as Intel CIT 2.0) which can
                      Attestation      be used to remotely verify platform’s trust status & create trust pools

                    Cloud Integrity
                                       Intel-developed solution used to verify run time integrity of workload
       Binary       Technology 3.0
      Licensed      Platform Trust     Intel-developed tool that can be used to remotely activate and
                     Enabler Tool      configure Intel TXT on multi-vendor server platforms

    Platform         Intel Trusted Execution     Enabled in Intel Silicon, BIOS & Platform – to establish a chain-
   Integrated         Technology [Intel TXT]     of-trust 1st in Silicon, and then extend to the entire solution stack

Figure 3-30. TXT chain of trust

    Intel TXT gives IT and security organizations important enhancements
to help ensure more secure platforms; greater application, data, or virtual
machine (VM) isolation; and improved security or compliance audit
capabilities. Not only can it help reduce support and remediation costs,
but it can also provide a foundation for more advanced solutions as
security needs change to support increasingly virtualized or “multitenant”
shared data center resources.

T? hreats Mitigated
Intel assets as described earlier can be leveraged to improve the robustness
and to defend against both zero-day and other attacks. Refer to Figure ­3-­31.

        IoT Threats-Edge to Cloud Portfolio Protections
                                      Device           Edge
               IoT Applications                                                   Network                        Data Center & Cloud
                                     Endpoint       Management

                                                                                                          IT & OT Device
                  Security                           Gateways &                  Secure                    Management        Data & Analytic
                                       Things
                Development                         Fog Compare               Communication                  Back-end       Service Providers

                  Zero Day           DDOS         Key Password         Sniffers    Man in       Key      Zero Day     Anonymity
                                                                                                                                Ransomware
                  Exploits          Attacks     Attacks Attacks        Attacks     Middle     Attacks   App Exploit     Proxy
    Types of
    Attacks

    Recent
      IoT
    Attacks

      The                                               Solutions Rooted In HW Security
    Solution

Figure 3-31. Mitigation of IoT threats

Z? ero-Day Attacks
Attacks that are designed to exploit a previously unknown vulnerability are
referred to as zero-day attacks.6 These attacks are harder to detect in time
to minimize the damaging impact.
    IoT applications: The impact of a compromise due to zero-day
attacks can be minimized by handling all the high-value assets/secrets in
a protected Runtime environment such as a TEE. DAL, SGX, and Trusty
provide such defenses. Examples include remote car control in the jeep
scenario and Ukraine power grid.

           •   Mitigation: Intel® Security Essentials, Intel Stratix®
               FPGA, protected boot, and attested software
               measurements can be implemented to mitigate the
               risks resulting from the preceding zero-day attacks.
               These solutions also enable a simplified TEE-based IP
               protection for ecosystem.

6
  https://csrc.nist.gov/glossary/term/zero-day-attack

 Other Attacks
Other high impacting attacks include the distributed denial of service
(DDOS), network attacks, and attacks on cloud infrastructures which hold
rich troves of data.
    Device Endpoint and Edge Management: The DDOS/key/password
examples include CCTV Hijack and Mirai botnet.

      •     Mitigation: Intel® Secure Device Onboard can be
            deployed to mitigate the risks resulting from the
            preceding attacks. This is accomplished by not
            shipping devices with default credentials and
            instead use EPID identity designed-in for privacy
            preserving provisioning model to eliminate human
            misconfiguration with automated onboarding.

    Network: Sniffers and man-in-the-middle examples include Tornado
Siren Hijack, WPA CRACK, and Heart Bleed.

      •     Mitigation: Intel® Security Essentials API, Intel®
            Platform Trust Technology, Intel® Software Guard
            Extensions. Simplified HW secured key management
            and provisioning APIs. HW secured SSL transport APIs.
            PTT or TEE protected data and key storage.

    Data Center and Cloud: Anonymity Proxy and ransomware examples
include Infotainment VIN Online service app, Reaper, Thermostats, and
WannaCry.

      •     Mitigation: Wind River Helix Device Cloud. Automated
            Over-the-Air (OTA) updates for firmware and software,
            provisioning, credential management, suspend,
            decommission, and firewall policy update to isolate/
            quarantine.

