CHAPTER 4

IoT Software Security
Building Blocks
Oleg Selajev from Oracle Labs is famous on Twitter for saying, “The ‘S’ in
the IoT stands for security.”1 Oleg does not spell poorly; instead, he was
bemoaning the sad state of affairs in IoT security. Despite the truth in
Oleg’s statement, security does not have to be absent in IoT.
    Chapter 3 took a comprehensive look at the hardware security
offerings in the Intel Architecture. Putting these hardware features
to use in an IoT platform requires software. This chapter looks at the
software components used to secure IoT systems and how those software
components make use of the underlying hardware security features
described in Chapter 3.
    In this chapter we define a software stack, building on top of the
hardware all the way up to the IoT applications, and describe how to
put the “S” back into IoT. As a way to guide our exploration of software
security in IoT, the opening section introduces a generic architectural
model that graphically depicts software components of a secure IoT
device or gateway. A more detailed section is then dedicated to each
component in our model, and we will define the necessary security

1
 w? ww.cnet.com/news/iot-attacks-hacker-kaspersky-are-getting-worse-and-
  no-one-is-listening/
© The Author(s) 2020                                                   213
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8_4

features as well as how those features contribute to the overall IoT device
security. Our architectural model is a generalization of IoT devices, and
no generalization is ever perfect; as Alexandre Dumas once said, “All
generalizations are dangerous, even this one.”2 Therefore, in Chapter 6, we
look at some actual Intel and open source software products and compare
them with our generic model.
    Due to the breadth of the software topic, this chapter is the longest
in the book. For this reason, we have organized the sections so that
they do not need to be consumed in a linear fashion, although they
do build on one another. Figure 4-1 provides a map of the sections,
and the topics covered in each one, including the security concerns
discussed. The reader is encouraged to review the figure to find topics
that are most relevant or interesting to them. Throughout the chapter,
we provide forward and backward references to other sections that may
contain additional relevant information, making navigation to the most
interesting information a bit easier.

2
  Alexandre Dumas, quote, www.brainyquote.com/quotes/alexandre_dumas_136868

    OPERATING SYSTEMS                           Execution Separation - Processes & Threads
                                                Memory Separation - Memory Attributes & Memory Domains
                             Zephyr RTOS
                                                Programming Error Protections - Stack Protections
                                                Privilege Levels - User & Supervisor Privileges
                  Wind River Pulsar Linux
                    Ubuntu IoT Core Linux       Update Consistency - Packages, RPMs, Snaps & Bundles
                        Intel® Clear Linux

    HYPERVISORS
                                                Extended Application Containment - Virtualization
                              Intel® ACRN
                                                Access Controlled Secrets Protection - RPMB

    SOFTWARE SEPARATION & CONTAINMENT
                          Kata Containers
         Intel® Software Guard Extensions       Extended Application Containment - Containers & TEE’s
                           Android Trusty

    NETWORK STACK & SECURITY MANAGEMENT
         Intel Data Plane Development Kit       End-to-End Security - Message & Packet Encryption, TLS, IPSec
                                  (DPDK)        Network Restrictions - Firewall, IP Tables & TCP Dump

    SECURITY MANAGEMENT
         Secure Device Onboarding (SDO)         Device Provisioning - Secure Authorization of Any Device to Any Cloud
              TPM2 Software Stack (TSS)         Platform Integrity - Device Health & Platform Software Identification
                          TCP Wrappers          Network Defense - Network Firewalls & Configuration
                        Snort & Suricata        Attack Detection - Network packet logging
        McAfee® Embedded Control (MEC)          System Authorization - File System Privileges

    DEVICE MANAGEMENT
                           Mesh Central
                                                System Control & Authorization - SSH and Sys Admin Authorizations
                         Wind River Helix

    SYSTEM UPDATE SERVICE

                      Secure RPMs / WUS
                                                System Repair & Recovery - TCB Recovery
                       Intel® Turtle Creek

    LANGUAGE FRAMEWORKS
               JavaScript, Node.js & Sails
                           Java & Android       Software Services - Application Availability to HW Security
                           EdgeX Foundry

    MESSAGE ORCHESTRATION
             Message Queuing Telemetry
                        Transport (MQTT)
                  OPC Unified Architecture      Message Protection - Spoofing, Deletion, Delay & Misdirection
          Constrained Application Protocol

Figure 4-1. Section outline and security topics

  nderstanding the Fundamentals of Our
U
Architectural Model
Before we explore the details of IoT software security building blocks, let
us take a quick tour through our architectural model to establish a context
for each of the building block components and how they fit together to
create an IoT device. Our architectural model is shown in Figure 4-2 and
is divided in four quadrants, where each quadrant contains software
for a different purpose. Vertically, the figure is divided into platform
software, which is the software that creates the platform environment,
and application software, which is the software that creates the platform
behaviors of the system. Horizontally, the figure is divided between the
management plane, which handles management of the system, and the
application/data plane, which is everything else not management related.

                                  Application/Data Plane                                                     Management Plane

                                 Applications
                                                                                          Network Stack

                         Actuation           Data
                                                                                                               System Update Service

                                                                                                                                                           Security Management

                        & Command          Reporting
                                                                                                                                                                                 Application Software
                                                                                                                                       Device Management

                          Artificial
                                            Analytics
                                                                             Databases

                        Intelligence
                                                                                          Network Security

                                                          Authorization
                           Message Orchestration         & Msg Security

       Security API        Language Frameworks
                                                                                                                                                                                 Platform Software
                                                                                         Network
                                                                            System

                                                                                         Drivers

                  Software Containment
                                                                              File

                                                              TEE

      Key Store                             Operating System / Hypervisor                                                              Secure Boot

                                                        Hardware

Figure 4-2. Generic IoT stack diagram

    Beginning at the bottom is the hardware covered in Chapter 3. All
hardware is implied by this element, including the processor, memory
subsystems, flash and other storage, security coprocessors, wired and
wireless communication hardware, or anything else physically connected
to the processing unit and its motherboard. This chapter does not cover
any of these elements, but refers back to the content in Chapter 3 where
appropriate.
    Directly above the hardware is the operating system/hypervisor
element which is the system software in direct control of the hardware and
may be a commercial or open source operating system, or it may be an
hypervisor that creates one or more virtual hardware devices for the rest of
the software to operate within.
    The software containment element is optional, but if provided on
the system includes technologies like containers and Trusted Execution
Environments (TEE). This level of additional containment improves
security by reducing privileges and controlling unintended interactions
between applications. Both containers and virtualization with hypervisors
provide containment. We devote a bit of time to discuss the differences
and benefits of each.
    Figure 4-2 also shows two components that are not covered
individually, but will be interspersed among the other platform software
components: the filesystem and the network drivers. These are shown
in the diagram to aid in understanding the connection between the
application part of the stack and the platform software.
    Moving up from the platform software to the application software, we
look at the management plane. The management plane software is made
up of security management, device management, and the system update
service. It also includes the network stack.
    The network stack is most often included in the system software or
part of the operating system. However, for our purposes, including it in
the operating system obscures it and diminishes its importance to IoT
systems. The network stack deserves its own separate treatment because it

actually enables a system to communicate with other devices, turning that
system into an Internet of Things device. Additionally, the network stack is
the entry point for the majority of attacks on IoT systems. It straddles both
the application/data plane and the management plane, because it is used
extensively by both. It includes communication protocols and network
interfaces. The network stack subsection covers software elements needed
to secure the network stack, like firewalls and intrusion detection systems
(IDS). Chapter 6 is dedicated to covering the network protocols themselves.
    Security management is the management software that performs
security relevant management operations and used when exercising
security management procedures and controls. The functionality in
security management includes device identity and attestation, key
distribution and certificate management, access control policy, logging
rules, configuring and querying the system update service, and policy for
network security, firewalls, virus scanners, and host intrusion detection
software. Oftentimes these features are included as part of the actual
software that performs device management. In our treatment, security
management is separate from other management features to highlight
adherence to the least privilege principle.3 Security management features
should require a higher level of privilege and additional authentication for
an administrator to activate.
    The device management element includes all the management
features that are not part of security management. This includes querying
and managing the state of the device, rebooting/restarting the platform,
examining and downloading log files (but not deleting log files or stopping
logs from being generated, as this is a security management function),
starting and stopping and restarting applications, configuring applications,
managing databases, and configuring message queues and software
orchestration settings.

3
   altzer and Schroeder. The Protection of Information in Computer Systems. 1975.
 S
 This paper defines several foundational security design principles which are
 referred to throughout this chapter.

     The system update service is the last component of the management
plane. While this element is controlled by the security management
element (or the device management element in some platforms), it is
typically composed of platform and operating system–specific elements
in order to update more than just the application software and execution
containers on the system. Updates to system and device firmware, boot
loaders, and BIOS normally require special software and services to
properly coordinate the version dependencies and be able to set the
platform into the state where such components can be updated. The
system privilege to update firmware and trusted software on the device
must be strictly separated from everyday management functions.
     The application/data plane contains the software that creates the
actual behavior of the IoT device. This includes language frameworks,
message orchestration, databases, and the applications themselves. Our
discussion of these elements is limited, because we focus only on the parts
of these elements that leverage hardware security features.
     The language frameworks contain libraries and services used by
application software. Examples of these include the Android framework in
Java, Node.js libraries, and the Sails framework in JavaScript.
     Message orchestration enables applications on the same platform to
communicate, but more importantly enables machine-to-machine (M2M)
communications over the network. Protocols like MQTT, message queue,
and publisher-subscriber frameworks (pub-sub) like Kafka fall into the
message orchestration bucket.
     Databases are an important part of IoT systems, as they allow the data
that is generated, manipulated, and consumed by IoT systems to be stored,
collated, and massaged. There are multiple different types of database
systems, including SQL and NoSQL. The types of operations possible
on data and the security and privacy of that data are dependent on the
database chosen.

     The last element of Figure 4-2 is the applications themselves. This chapter
is not able to cover all types of applications due to the broad diversity of
IoT. However, in Chapter 6, several IoT use cases are explored, including a more
detailed discussion of the security interactions and trade-offs between the
platform and the software that is required to compose a working IoT system.
     The next sections will look at each of these IoT software components in
varying detail, and in each primary component section, we will introduce
security topics relevant to that component.

O
  perating Systems
When considering software security in any platform, the first consideration
should be the operating system. The operating system traditionally is the
lowest, most base level of software on any system. It controls what hardware
is activated and limits what other software can do. The operating system
provides the baseline feature set for all the other software on the platform. If
the operating system does not provide some basic feature, or does not allow
other software to control or access some aspect of the system (hardware or
software), then no other part of the platform can make up for that gap. If a
particular security feature is missing from the operating system, then the
rest of the software on the platform is likely exposed to significantly more
threats. In this section, we take a look at some basic features of operating
systems and discuss what security capabilities the operating system should
be contributing to the security of the platform. The following is a basic list of
security services that an operating system should provide:

      •     Execution Separation: Provides structures and
            mechanisms to separate different execution units of
            programs, so that their execution does not interfere
            with other executing programs; this separation
            includes processes, threads, interrupt service routines
            (ISRs), and critical sections.

•   Memory Separation: Provides mechanisms to separate
    the different types of memory used by executing
    programs; this type of separation normally includes
    process memory, thread-only stacks, shared memory,
    and memory mapped I/O.

•   Privilege Levels: Provide structures to separate
    executing programs into different privilege levels;
    this separation includes task identifiers for executing
    programs, user and group identities to own executing
    programs, and administrator vs. user privilege levels.

•   System authorization: Provides structures and
    mechanisms to assign rights to objects and verify the
    privilege level of execution units against those rights;
    this includes setting the default privilege level assigned
    to programs and then enforcing those privileges when
    programs access system resources, by either permitting
    or restricting certain operations. This system
    authorization mechanism allows the implementation
    of the least privilege principle.3 In systems with human
    users, this extends to authentication of users and
    assignment of privileges to programs under the user’s
    control.

•   Programming Error Protections: Provide structures
    and mechanisms to stop errors in executing programs
    from enabling attackers to manipulate those errors and
    take over the platform; these typically include stack
    overflow protection, detection and prevention of heap
    corruption, and restriction on control flow redirection.
    All these mistakes result in software attacks that
    allow a hacker to inject arbitrary code and take over a
    platform. Control flow protections include protection

            from Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) and Jump-
            Oriented Programming (JOP) (see sidebar for detailed
            explanation[4, 5]).
       •    Access-Controlled Secrets storage: Provides
            mechanisms to store program secrets and prevent
            those secrets from being accessed by unauthorized
            users or programs, including the administrator; the
            system normally provides this through a hardware-­
            backed secure storage.

                                WHAT IS ROP/JOP?

    Return-Oriented Programming (ROP) and Jump-Oriented Programming (JOP)
    are two techniques used by attackers to create exploit code without having to
    download large binaries to the target platform. Buffer overruns have been used
    since the Morris Internet Worm to inject code onto a platform and cause that
    code to execute.

    However, various countermeasures, including DEP (Data Execution Prevention)
    and ASLR (Address Space Layout Randomization), as well as network defenses
    that detect and prevent downloads of large binary data, have made such
    attacks more difficult. Instead of downloading new code, attackers use ROP
    and JOP techniques to reuse code already on the target platform, allowing
    attackers to construct their attack code on the fly. Since most software
    today includes shared libraries, the attacker leverages this to find gadgets in
    software and libraries already existing on the platform and strings the gadgets
    together into attack code.

4
  J? onathan Pincus and Brandon Baker. Beyond stack smashing: Recent advances in
   exploiting buffer overruns. Security & Privacy, IEEE, 2(4):20–27, 2004.
5
    N. Carlini and D. Wagner. ROP is still dangerous: Breaking modern defenses. In
    USENIX Security Symposium, 2014.

   Gadgets are very small segments of code in existing libraries that perform
   meaningful subfunctions, like moving data into a register or setting up for a
   system call. Gadgets either end in a return statement or a jump statement,
   allowing the attacker to string multiple gadgets together to craft a new control
   flow, that, overall with many gadgets, accomplishes their evil task. ROP uses
   return statements, while JOP uses jump statements. Both are effectively the
   same attack.

    Choosing an operating system for an IoT platform is primarily about
choosing the one with the best services that also executes reliably on the
chosen platform hardware. The capabilities provided by the underlying
hardware often affect what the operating system is capable of providing.
Some operating systems are designed for servers, or even specifically for
cloud deployments, while others are designed to be used in the smallest
IoT devices. Small devices typically do not have the computing power or
hardware features necessary for an advance operating system to execute.
Operating systems designed for low-power processors typically do not
have a rich set of services, because the power and performance budget
available on the processor just will not support it. CPUs in constrained
devices might not have a full memory management unit (MMU) with
advanced features like total memory encryption (TME) or memory
integrity technology. These types of features are common in server
CPUs. Without these hardware capabilities, the operating system is left
to provide best-effort security services. In coming to a final decision on
what operating system to use for an IoT system, it is also important to
evaluate the threats to the operating system and what countermeasures
the operating system provides to neutralize those threats. You can then
determine if the hardware chosen for your device is powerful enough to
resist the attacks the device is likely to encounter.

 Threats to Operating Systems
Operating systems run at the highest privilege level, with access to
nearly everything on a platform. A successful attack on an operating
system can garner the attacker complete control of the platform,
often with privileged access to other platforms on the same network.
Table 4-1 shows the products (not just operating systems) with the most
number of distinct reported vulnerabilities, with data accumulated
from 1999 through 2018. As this table shows, there are a large
number of different attacks on operating systems. In fact, operating
systems make up more than half of the top 50 products with the most
vulnerabilities. Although there are numerous types of attacks, it is
possible to organize operating system threats into threat classes, all of
which execute in similar patterns.
Table 4-1. Products with Highest Reported Number of Vulnerabilities
over a 20-Year Period
      Product Name          Vendor Name Product Type Number of Vulnerabilities

1     Linux Kernel          Linux         os            2124
2     Mac Os X              Apple         os            2084
3     Android               Google        os            1925
4     Firefox               Mozilla       Application   1741
5     Debian Linux          Debian        os            1670
6     Chrome                Google        Application   1546
7     Iphone Os             Apple         os            1495
8     Ubuntu Linux          Canonical     os            1123
9     Windows Server 2008 Microsoft       os            1110
10 Flash Player             Adobe         Application   1060

6
  www.cvedetails.com/top-50-products.php. Retrieved 9 September 2018.

    Attacks typically follow a common pattern, called a cyber kill chain®,
shown in Figure 4-3, where an attacker executes a series of steps to
compromise a target. The attacker begins by observing the target (Step 1),
and then deciding how to attack the system, by fashioning some type of
weaponized code (Step 2).
    The weaponized software might be a program that runs from a web
server or a crafted response packet in a protocol. The attacker delivers
the attack in Step 3, which might entail a spear-fishing email, or hijacking
a network connection, or injecting spoofed packets for a protocol. The
actual attack occurs in Steps 4 and 5, and those steps can be iterative,
where the attacker pivots from one compromised application or piece
of software and uses that as a base to attack another piece of software or
system service. Each pivot intends to increase the attacker’s control of the
platform or penetrate deeper into the network in order to gain complete
control of the platform and the entire system.
    With the background of the cyber kill chain in mind, we will review
different classes of attacks on an operating system and describe how
these attacks demonstrate an attacker pivoting progressively deeper into a
system, as one attack builds on another. The following five items represent
the common attack pattern used in Step 4, exploitation:
      •   Fault Injection: A fault injection creates or forces
          an execution fault in a process or thread; part of the
          responsibility for this threat rests on the applications
          themselves, but because fault injection is the first
          step to overcoming the operating system itself, the OS
          must take some responsibility to protect against the
          vulnerabilities that create this threat. The operating
          system uses containment to prevent these types
          of threats from growing into greater threats to the
          platform, but usually allows the fault to stop the
          execution of the attacked process or thread. From our

            basic list of security services, the operating system uses
            programming error protections, including control
            flow protections and stack smashing protections, to
            mitigate this threat.

Figure 4-3. Cyber kill chain7

      •     Arbitrary Code Execution: Arbitrary code execution
            is the injection of an attacker’s code into a process
            or thread on the platform, causing the injected code
            to run in place of the existing process or thread,
            effectively taking on that process or thread’s identity

7
   yber Kill Chain Diagram, www.lockheedmartin.com/en-us/capabilities/
 C
 cyber/cyber-kill-chain.html

    and authorizations. Arbitrary code execution
    clearly violates execution separation by allowing
    unauthorized code to corrupt an execution unit, but
    also violates the memory separation guarantee of an
    operating system, by allowing what should be data
    to corrupt the code executed by the platform. If fault
    injection succeeds, either because the application
    mitigations were not effective or the operating system
    did not provide any protections against fault injection,
    then the typical escalation of a fault injection is
    arbitrary code execution. An attacker places code into
    the data used to trigger the fault and constructs the
    fault injection to force execution of, or redirection to,
    the injected code as part of the fault. Buffer overflows
    and heap corruption are common mechanisms used by
    attackers to create arbitrary code execution exploits.

•   Breech of Containment: Breech of containment is
    code in one execution unit observing or interfering
    with the code or data in another execution unit. Once
    an attacker has achieved arbitrary code execution,
    the next step is to leverage that power to extract
    data or further corrupt other execution flows within
    the platform. Side-channel attacks are a common
    mechanism used by attackers to extract data and
    observe program execution. Side channels are so
    dangerous because they allow a lower-privileged
    execution unit to observe a higher-privileged
    execution unit, potentially extracting secrets like
    passwords and cryptographic keys from those other
    execution units. These attacks violate memory

            separation by allowing one program to view or infer
            data from another program; oftentimes, the way a
            program breeches the memory separation is through
            attacks on the execution separation. A common
            example of this execution separation breech is
            speculative branch prediction, although there are
            other examples as well.

      •     Escalation of Privilege: Escalation of privilege is
            overcoming the operating system’s authorization
            mechanisms or code that is able to assume a level
            of privilege in the operating system that should not
            have been allowed. After breeching containment
            and extracting secrets from other execution units,
            an attacker can leverage those secrets to assume a
            higher privilege level. In some cases, it is possible for
            the attacker to inject a fault into the operating system
            itself and force it to grant a privilege that should not
            have been given to the attacker’s code unit. In both
            cases, the attacker has escalated the privileges that the
            operating system grants to the attacker’s process. This
            escalation violates the expected behavior of the system
            authorization mechanisms.

      •     Rootkit: A rootkit is malware that penetrates into
            the operating system itself and subsumes some of
            its operations. Following arbitrary code injection,
            an attacker can chain subsequent arbitrary code
            injections, containment breeches, and/or escalation
            of privilege attacks to eventually inject the attacker’s
            code into the operating system itself. In some cases,
            the attack is a simple one-two chain; in other cases,
            it may be a series of more complex actions. If the

           attacker can then modify the operating system
           code on disk or in flash, the attacker can remain
           permanently on the system. Once an attacker has
           achieved this level of penetration into the system,
           it is often extremely difficult to remove the attacker
           from the system without a complete rebuild of both
           the software and firmware on the device. With rootkit
           access, an adversary can normally overcome even the
           access-controlled secrets protections provided by
           the platform, making all secrets and execution units
           on the device manipulable by the attacker. A rootkit
           can actually change the behavior of the operating
           system, by modifying access control decisions, hiding
           execution units, and reducing or removing memory
           protections between different execution units through
           changes to page table allocations.

    As this list illustrates, one of the most basic threats to a computing
system is code and data corruption. The cyber kill chain outlines the
attacker’s steps to take over a system, which usually involve a chain of
attacks escalating an attacker’s position from injecting code into a single
application, to interfering with another running application, to eventually
changing the entire operating system’s behavior. The importance of code
and data corruption protections cannot be overstated. Extrapolating from
Turing’s theory of computation, given enough time, modifications to code
can result in serious consequences, as has been demonstrated by various
academic papers on ROP and JOP.8

8
   inh Tran, Mark Etheridge, Tyler Bletsch, Xuxian Jiang, Vincent Freeh, and Peng
 M
 Ning. On the expressiveness of return-into-libc attacks. In Recent Advances in
 Intrusion Detection, pages 121–141. Springer, 2011.

    In the following sections, we examine several operating systems
used in IoT systems and discuss the security features available in those
products. Rather than repetitively inspect the same features on several
operating systems, we select different security topics on each operating
system to inspect in depth. However, for each operating system, we provide
a summary to review their protections, the mitigations they have chosen,
and their shortcomings.

 Zephyr: Real-Time Operating System for Devices
The Zephyr operating system is an open source OS designed for
constrained devices running on microcontroller units (MCUs) or in other
minimalistic environments. Zephyr runs on many different chips and
architectures, including Intel® x86, ARM® Cortex-M, Tensilica® Xtensa, and
others. Many IoT devices at the edge utilize these small processors with
limited memory. The Zephyr documentation can be found at http://
docs.zephyrproject.org/.
     In this section, we want to focus on the basic operating system
responsibilities of containment and privilege. Since an RTOS is severely
limited in what it can provide, these most basic features comprise almost
all of what an RTOS can offer. Since Zephyr may not be familiar to most
readers, it is an interesting OS to explore, and Zephyr’s simplicity makes
it easy to highlight the limits of these protections and where usages can
go wrong.
     Zephyr, like most real-time operating systems (RTOS), is built as
a single monolithic binary image; this means that both the operating
system and the applications are compiled into one binary that is run on
the platform. But unlike most other RTOS systems that were designed
purely for size and performance requirements, Zephyr’s documentation
states that during design, careful thought was put into the security of
the operating system. Figure 4-4 shows the Zephyr operating system
decomposed into application code, OS services, and the kernel. The next

few subsections will review how Zephyr operates and compare the security
architecture9 against the security properties that an operating system
should exhibit. Zephyr version 1.12.0, which is the most current version as
of this writing, is used for this review.

                                                                                        Application
       Application Services

                                                                        Smart Objects / High Level APIs / Data Models

                                      ...                              LWM2M                            MQTT                                HTTP                          CoAP

                                                             DTLS                                                                                    TLS

                                                                                                                              TCP/UDP
                                                    Thread
                              Management

                                                                        RPL
                                Device

                                                                                                                              IPv6/IPv4
                                                                           6LoWPAN

                                                             15.4                 BLE                                      Wi-Fi                     NFC                       ...
       OS Services

                                                                                        Low Level API
                                                                                                           Logging/Debug
                                                                                          File System

                                                                                                                               Properties
                                                                                                                               Database/

                                                                                                                                                                     Sensors
                                                                                                                                            Crypto
                                                    UART

                                                                GPIO

                                                                                                                                                           IPC
                                            SPI
                              I2C

                                                                                                                                                                                     ...
                                                                          ...

                                                                                Kernel Services / Schedulers

                                                                                     Power Management
       kernel

                                                                                                Platform

                                                  Radios                        Sensors                                    Crypto HW                         Flash

Figure 4-4. Zephyr system architecture10

 Zephyr Execution Separation
Even though the Zephyr OS and the applications are built into a single
binary, the OS still provides execution separation. In Zephyr, the primary
execution unit is a thread. An application is composed of multiple threads
that run forever in an endless loop. The application is defined and built

9
  http://docs.zephyrproject.org/security/security-overview.html
10
    Zephyr System Architecture Diagram, http://docs.zephyrproject.org/
    security/security-overview.html

at compile time using CMake and make; the system’s threads are defined at
compile time or can be created dynamically at Runtime. Each thread is
separated from other threads in time and space.
     The Zephyr OS separates threads in time through scheduling, and
the OS saves and restores thread state automatically when threads are
put to sleep. Scheduling of threads is organized through a hierarchy of
priorities, allowing more important threads to preempt lower-priority
threads, ensuring that the most important jobs are completed without
interruption. Each thread is scheduled by the OS according to its priority.
The highest-priority threads are cooperative threads whose priority is set to
a negative number. Cooperative threads run until completion or until they
voluntarily yield the processor using k_yield(). Preemptive threads have a
positive priority value and are given a certain amount of time to run or are
preempted when they perform an action that makes them not ready to run,
like waiting on a semaphore or reading from a device or file. Cooperative
threads must cooperate with the system and yield back to the OS so other
things can run; if they misbehave, they can starve a system and force
even higher-priority threads (threads with a numerically lower priority
value) from running. Cooperative threads should only be used for high-­
priority tasks that cannot be interrupted. If a cooperative thread has a long
operation to execute, it should break up the long operation into smaller
pieces with a call to k_yield() at a convenient point. k_yield() returns
back to the operating system, and the cooperative thread gets rescheduled
if there is a higher-priority thread with something more important to do. If
there is no higher-priority thread waiting, k_yield() just returns back to
the thread and the long operation can continue.
     Zephyr provides other refinements to the scheduling policy, including

      •     k_sched_lock() and k_sched_unlock() to define
            critical sections in preemptive threads, temporarily
            preventing them from being preempted.

      •   k_busy_wait () which prevents a cooperative thread
          from being preempted when it performs some type
          of wait action that would make it unready and would
          normally cause it to be preempted.

      •   CONFIG_METAIRQ_PRIORITIES which is a configuration
          setting to define the numerically lowest cooperative
          thread priorities, making them act like IRQs and
          actually preempt other cooperative threads.

      •   Threads can change their thread priority, or another
          thread’s priority, to a higher priority level (lower
          number numerically), even changing it from a
          preemptive thread to a cooperative or Meta-IRQ
          thread, if they are executing with privileges.

     In addition to thread execution priorities used to enforce time
separation of threads, Zephyr assigns a thread privilege to each thread.
There are only two privileges, supervisory and user. By default, threads
are assigned the supervisory privilege. This gives threads the ability to see
all devices and access all of memory. A thread can drop its supervisory
privilege and become a user-privileged thread by calling k_thread_user_
mode_enter(), but once becoming a user-privileged thread, it cannot
regain its supervisory privileges. Threads can temporarily perform an
operation at the user privilege by spawning a new thread to perform the
task and setting that new thread’s privilege to the user privilege level.
     Operating all or many threads at the supervisory privilege level is
dangerous, since all of memory is exposed to those threads, even sensitive
memory used by the kernel. User-privilege threads should be used as often
as possible because Zephyr provides memory separation for user-privilege
threads. Memory separation for user-privileged threads is discussed in the
next section.

    Since all of Zephyr’s applications and libraries are enumerated at
compile time, and there is no dynamic loading of applications or dynamic
linking of libraries or other code, Zephyr reduces the attack surface created
by interfering applications and library code conflicts.
    Why does all this matter for security? Creating threads at the right
privilege level is important for a system to remain stable in the face of
an attack. If all threads are running at the supervisory privilege level,
an attacker only has to find a single thread that it can attack via a buffer
overflow and then gain control of the whole system. An attacker with
control over a supervisory thread can see all memory, halt other threads,
or modify stack values to create gadgets for ROP and JOP attacks, allowing
the attacker to create their own programs with new, potentially destructive,
functionality.
    But even if user-privileged threads are enabled, if the right
segmentation of memory partitions is not performed, user threads will be
able to corrupt each other’s memory partitions.
    If user threads are enabled and restrictive memory partitioning is used,
this will severely limit the types of attacks a remote adversary can perform.
This is especially true if the threads that access the network and perform
the bulk of the work on the system are user threads. But even if an attacker
cannot gain access to an administrative thread, if they can take over a high
enough privileged user thread, then by using k_sched_lock(), the attacker
can starve out other threads. This situation can be mitigated by using the
system’s watchdog timer or even creating your own watchdog thread at the
Meta-IRQ level to monitor and correct misbehaving threads. A detailed
discussion of this is found later in the “Security Management” section.

 Zephyr Memory Separation
In Zephyr, all threads have their own stack region, and their state is
swapped out when they are removed from the running state. This provides
basic (space) separation between threads. However, this protection does

nothing to stop a misbehaving supervisory thread which has access to all
of memory; and recall that by default all threads are given supervisory
privileges. This means that thoughtful, security-aware design is required to
build a secure system with Zephyr.
    Zephyr provides user threads to address this problem of too much
privilege. Zephyr allows threads to be created as user-privilege threads,
or allows threads to drop their supervisory privilege and become user
threads. Memory access afforded to user-privilege threads is restricted.
User-privilege threads are granted access to a specific set of memory
locations by assigning a thread to a memory domain. A memory domain
contains one or more memory partitions. A memory partition is a
contiguous segment of memory with defined access rights (i.e., read,
write, execute). Thus, a memory partition can be defined as read-only,
and another memory partition can be defined as read-write. Both these
memory partitions can be added to the same memory domain, and one
or more user threads can be assigned to the memory domain. All threads
assigned to a memory domain have the same access to that memory. A
thread can belong to more than one memory domain. Memory domains
can be created at compile time or created dynamically at Runtime.
    For x86, the definitions for memory domain rights are found in the
Zephyr source tree at arch/x86/include/mmustructs.h. x86 allows
partitions to be defined as read-only, read-write, read-execute, and even
the dangerous read-write-execute. And partitions can be defined to restrict
access to user threads, but if a permission is granted to a user thread for a
particular memory partition, then privileged threads also have the same
access to that memory partition. It is important, then, to structure your
applications with as few supervisory threads as possible. This follows the
least privilege principle.

 Zephyr Privilege Levels and System Authorization
As we already discussed, Zephyr defines two privilege levels: user and
supervisor. The previous section discussed the impact privilege levels have
on memory access. This section reviews how the privilege levels affect
access to logical structures, devices, and files.
    Zephyr allows for the construction of various logical structures,
including FIFOs, LIFOs, mailboxes, and message queues. These logical
structures allow different threads to communicate and share data. All
these structures are mapped to memory addresses. This means that access
to these structures can be restricted to only certain user threads, but any
supervisory thread can access these structures as long as they know the
address.
    Physical devices, such as USB ports, SPI controllers, I2C interfaces,
Ethernet ports, and GPIOs, are controlled by device drivers. Device drivers
are accessible via APIs and are not restricted. Any thread merely links to
the appropriate header file (i.e., i2c.h) and then can access the device.
Zephyr does not implement any restrictions or authorization for device
access.
    Zephyr supports several different filesystems, including Newtron Flash
File System (NFFS), FATFS support, and FCB (Flash Circular Buffer). The
FATFS is an open source implementation of the well-known File Allocation
Table (FAT) filesystem from the old PC DOS. The implementation supports
creation of a filesystem in RAM, on MMC flash, or through a USB drive.
No file permissions are supported on FAT, but read-only, hidden, and
system file attributes are supported.
    The Newtron Flash File System (NFFS) is a minimal filesystem for flash
devices and provides no protections or attributes for files. The source code
for Newtron can be found at http://github.com/apache/mynewt-nffs.

      Since Zephyr does not implement any user or persistent thread
identity, no authorization mechanisms are found in the logical structures,
device drivers, or for the filesystem. This can represent a security problem
if a thread is taken over by an attacker and manipulated to perform
malicious actions, since the thread can be modified via arbitrary code
injection to access resources it normally would not access, and the
operating system enforces few limitations.

 Zephyr Programming Error Protections
Zephyr does implement several safeguards to protect threads from being
taken over by remote attackers. These safeguards include stack protections
and memory protections. The previous sections have discussed the
memory protections; this section reviews the stack protections.
     Programming errors can create vulnerabilities in software that allow
untrusted input to overrun or underrun buffers, writing this untrusted
data into memory. Specially crafted inputs can result in buffer overruns
or underruns that rewrite elements on the stack, or rewrite code pages
in RAM, allowing an attacker to change a thread’s flow or the code that
it executes. Zephyr implements stack protection to detect overruns on
the stack, and then halt a thread to prevent it from executing from a
modified stack.
     Other protections, like Intel’s® Control-Flow Enforcement Technology
that protects against ROP and JOP, are not yet implemented in Zephyr, but
may be added in the future.

 Zephyr’s Other Security Features
While Zephyr does not directly provide secure storage, it does provide a
few other security additions, including a cryptographic library and API for
security modules and TEEs.

    Zephyr includes an embedded cryptographic library written by Intel,
called TinyCrypt. This can be found in the Zephyr source tree at ext/lib/
crypto. TinyCrypt includes basic cryptographic functions including

      •     AES symmetric encryption using CBC, CTR, CMAC,
            and CCM modes11
      •     Elliptic curve asymmetric cryptography using Diffie-
            Hellman (DH) or the Digital Signature Standard (DSA)

      •     HMAC and direct use of the hash function, SHA2-­256

      Zephyr also includes the latest mbedTLS from ARM, which includes
TLS v1.2 (Transport Layer Security) and many more cryptographic
functions. Details on mbedTLS can be found on the web site http://tls.
mbed.org.
      Zephyr also includes an API to access a hardware random number
generator, based on the processor on the particular board that is being
used. This allows access to true hardware entropy if the hardware supports
it. If there is no hardware entropy source, an interface to a pseudo entropy
function is provided (see /ext/lib/crypto/mbedtls/library/entropy_poll.c).
      Currently, the APIs for hardware crypto, Trusted Platform Modules
(TPMs) and Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs), are very limited.
Future versions of Zephyr are planning to implement APIs for these
devices.

   BC = Cipher Block Chaining, CTR = Counter mode, see https://csrc.nist.
 C
11

 gov/publications/detail/sp/800-38a/final
   CMAC = Cipher-based Message Authentication Code, see https://csrc.nist.
gov/publications/detail/sp/800-38b/final
   CCM = Counter with CBC for Message authentication, see https://nvlpubs.
nist.gov/nistpubs/legacy/sp/nistspecialpublication800-38c.pdf

Z? ephyr Summary
Table 4-2 includes a summary of Zephyr compared with our operating
system security requirements.

Table 4-2. Zephyr RTOS Security Summary
Operating System      Grade Comments
Security Principles

Execution             A    Zephyr provides all the standard separation
Separation                 capabilities of a standard operating system, with
                           flexible application of those structures to address
                           real-time concerns.
Memory Separation     C    Although some memory separation is provided, the
                           ability of supervisory threads to see all of memory
                           is a major weakness. Memory domains provide
                           reasonable protections especially for the class of
                           processors used by Zephyr.
Levels of Privilege   B    Two levels of privilege are common in systems
                           today and even in popular operating systems,
                           like Microsoft Windows, which has access to
                           multiple different rings, but makes use of only
                           two ring levels. There are however examples of
                           extra protections – special supervisory modes and
                           TEEs – that are currently lacking in Zephyr and thus
                           warrant a slightly lower grade.
System                D    Without any real system authorization, Zephyr
authorization              leaves a significant gap for attacked threads
                           to misbehave. While this is normal in MCUs,
                           improvement is required.
                                                                   (continued)

Table 4-2. (continued)

Operating System      Grade Comments
Security Principles

Protection from    C         Basic stack protection is the new normal. Control
programming errors           flow protection is the bar set by the industry today,
                             which is lacking in Zephyr.
Access-Controlled     F      With the combination of no filesystem authorizations
Secrets storage              and no special secrets storage, Zephyr leaves a
                             system vulnerable to any attacked thread. Systems
                             with secrets should use a Secure Element or TPM to
                             protect secrets, but this requires custom additions
                             to Zephyr’s device support.

     While Zephyr provides some basic security features, like memory
regions, and separate threads with stack protections, and user and
privilege modes, Zephyr is limited in the services and protections that
are available due to its focus as a minimalistic RTOS. But, even in other
more powerful operating systems, similar process and thread structures
are used, leading to similar attacks and pitfalls, so Zephyr is instructive to
analyze. Our security lessons from Zephyr are applicable to all platforms
and operating systems. Threads can be attacked and therefore should run
at the lowest privilege possible. Privileges can be abused, maliciously or
unintentionally, and therefore guards should be in place to check proper
behavior of the system. Memory subsystems and filesystems can be
exploited to leak or corrupt data; therefore, cryptographic protections such
as encryption and integrity protection should be used. As we explore other
software on our generalized IoT system, we will highlight how a defense
in depth approach can work to minimize risk and reduce the impact of
successful attacks.

 Linux Operating Systems
Linux is a common operating system used for both cloud and IoT instances.
It is feature rich and comes in many different distributions (distros) that
enhance or embellish one capability or another. The security properties of
Linux are well known, and there are complete tomes that do an excellent
job of covering this topic,12 so this section will not repeat that material here.
Instead, this section looks at the concept of enhanced containment, but
we do so from the perspective of an interesting IoT problem – updating the
operating system and application software on a platform. The Linux distros
covered here include Wind River Pulsar, Ubuntu IoT Core, and Clear Linux.
      It is important to understand the update problem before progressing
into the details of the distros. The update problem encountered in operating
systems is one of both synchronization and access. Synchronization
between different software elements of a system, and between the software
and hardware of the platform, is required. An update to a system can destroy
this synchronization. Access relates to the permissions and capability to
update all parts of the system, including the operating system kernel, the
boot software, and all types of firmware on the device.
      A bad software update creates an incompatibility between two
different software components on your device or an incompatibility
between the software and the hardware of your device. An update
problem is observed when two or more software components interfere
with one another. The result of any of these conflicts can be a slowdown
in operation, the failure of one or more services, a computer shutdown
during operation (i.e., a crash), or even a failure to boot the device. It is
not uncommon for some Linux updates to cause a failure to boot after a
kernel update, which then requires a rebuild of the boot device in order
to remedy the situation. A good software update requires synchronization
between the hardware and all the software on the platform.

12
   Multiple Linux topic books by Apress, www.apress.com/us/open-source/linux

     The word all introduces the other part of the update problem: Access.
We defer the access issue until the section on secure updates, but it is
important to understand the complexity of the update problem here
and realize that the distributions we discuss now do not solve the whole
problem. The access problem is caused by some updatable software on
a device that resides in one or more difficult to reach hardware storage
areas, normally referred to as firmware. The operating system itself may
not be able to reach all these firmware locations. The device may need to
be placed into a special operating mode, or an update must be submitted
at a particular time during the boot process for the firmware update to be
successful. This special access required to update firmware may be difficult
or impossible to do without human intervention. If some part of the
device’s regular software is updated, and it depends on a newer version of
firmware that is not present on the device, the instability of a bad software
update may be the result.
     If an operating system update causes an IoT platform to fail to reboot,
or to crash so often that a new update cannot be pushed to the device,
this requires a human being to go out to the device and repair or replace
it. This physical maintenance drives up the cost for IoT deployments,
resulting in an erosion or destruction13 of the return on investment (ROI)
for the IoT system. Driving operational costs down to preserve ROI
requires the elimination of such physical interactions.
     All three of the distributions covered in this section attempt to address
the software update problem for IoT but do so in different ways. As we
review these different solutions, we find the commonality is all about
containment and finding ways to isolate the inconsistent dependencies.

13
    estruction of the ROI can occur when many devices are impacted by a bad
  D
  system update, either simultaneously or repeatedly over time. The cost of “rolling
  a truck” to repair devices can drive operational costs to completely consume any
  profit or efficiency gained by the IoT system.

 Pulsar: Wind River Linux
Wind River provides various different operating systems for embedded
sectors, including IoT. VxWorks14 is a family of products representing their
RTOS offerings. Pulsar15 is Wind River’s small, high-performance Linux
distribution designed for manageability and IoT.
    Pulsar is a binary distribution of Linux based on the Yocto Project.
A primary focus of Pulsar is to provide a regular cadence of updates for
the packages that are included in Pulsar, including the kernel. As shown
in Figure 4-5, Pulsar is a container-based Linux, allowing the download
of different features and functionality as containers. However, within the
containers, updates are managed in a traditional manner using software
packages.

                  Wind River                Package                                 Device
                Security Shield            Repository                             Applications

                                                                                                  Secure Updates
                                           Wind River   3rd Party                                Package Updates

                                         Pulsar                        Pulsar         Pulsar
                                        Headless                      Desktop        Gateway
                                         Device                     Environment     Middleware
                Pulsar Essential        Container                    Container       Container
                  User Space
                                          Pulsar Containers Management

                                  Wind River Pulsar Linux Kernel
                                                                                                 Technology Base
                           High
                                              Real Time                      Security
                        Availability

                        Packaged and Tailored for Selected Hardware

Figure 4-5. Pulsar Linux architecture and service updates16

14
     ind River VxWorks, www.windriver.com/products/vxworks/
   W
15
    Wind River Pulsar, www.windriver.com/products/operating-systems/pulsar/
16
     From www.windriver.com/products/product-overviews/
     Pulsar-Linux-Product-Overview/

    Using containers as a separation capability reduces destructive
interactions between applications and makes the whole platform more
stable. Additionally, by using containers, there is greater security in the
platform as a whole, since the containers have a reduced privilege on the
platform, making an attack on an application in a container less likely to
leak out and affect the whole device. Pulsar can update whole applications
on the device seamlessly by just replacing a container.
    Wind River addresses the issue of stable updates by providing an
update service over a secure channel, where the updates themselves
are comprised of RPMs (Red Hat Package Manager), a common Linux
update mechanism. All RPMs are signed with a Wind River RSA17 private
key, ensuring the RPMs are genuine and not modified from what Wind
River intended. All updates on Wind River’s package repository have gone
through extensive testing to ensure they are stable on the Pulsar-supported
platforms. Constant reviews of the published Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures (CVE) databases, and the open source mailing lists, ensure the
latest defects and issues are addressed in the quarterly updates.
    Wind River Linux includes the following features, discussed elsewhere
in the chapter:

       •    Wind River Helix Device management system

       •    Mosquitto MQTT

       •    OCF and IoTivity (See Chapter 2 Consumer IoT
            Framework Standards)

       •    UEFI or MOK Secure Boot (See Chapter 3, Device Boot
            Integrity - Trust But Verify)

       •    Support for Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
            (See Chapter 3, PTT/TPM)

17
    SA (Rivest-Shamir-Adleman) is an asymmetric cryptographic algorithm that
  R
  uses a private key to digitally sign data and a separate public key that anyone can
  use to verify the signature.

   Pulsar includes the following other technologies that improve the
security on the device:

        •    Virtual private network (VPN) provided by the open
             source StrongSwan IPSec/L2TP/PPTP project.
        •    STIG scripts: System lockdown scripts are included in
             Pulsar to configure the system for secure deployment,
             using the US government’s Security Technical
             Implementation Guide (STIG)18 scripts.

                                     CONTAINERS

     Containers are a type of software separation technology that allows one or
     more applications, and their dependent libraries, packages, and services, to
     run in an operating system created namespace.

     In an operating system, certain resources are organized into namespaces.
     For example, all the users are in a namespace; this means you can have only
     one user named root and one user named dave (users are actually based on
     numeric identifiers, but the concept still holds). If there are two users both
     named dave, they would be the same user. Likewise, the same namespace
     concept exists with devices, file paths, and certain logical resources, like
     network ports and process identifiers.

     Inside a container, the operating system gives the container its own
     namespace for certain types of resources. So one container can open port
     443 for a web server to listen to incoming traffic, and a different container
     can also open port 443, and there would be no conflict. Outside the container,
     some type of mapping must be done to disambiguate the two network traffic
     flows (see the “Containers” section for details). In our example with the user
     identities, two containers can both have the user dave, and they would not

18
   STIG Home, https://iase.disa.mil/stigs/Pages/index.aspx

   be associated to the same user; thus there would be no conflict between
   the containers and no privilege leakages or access overlap between the
   applications in the containers.

   Containers also use another kernel feature called cgroups. Cgroups create a
   kernel structure that limits the amount of memory and CPU processing that
   is available to processes within a cgroup. This can be used to ensure the
   processes in a cgroup do not starve out other groups. This ensures that all
   containers get a fair amount of processing time, and one container cannot hog
   the CPU and prevent applications in other containers from executing.

   Different containerization engines package these features in different ways
   to allow an environment to be created and managed that provides usable
   software separation for applications. These are all referred to generally as
   containers, but different containerization engines may have slightly different
   properties and controls.

 Ubuntu IoT Core
Ubuntu is a popular Debian Linux distribution that includes desktop,
server, and cloud versions. Ubuntu IoT Core is a new distribution that
is headless, meaning that it does not include the elements an operating
system normally provides for a screen, keyboard, and mouse – there is no
user interface. Ubuntu IoT Core is intended to be used on devices that do
not have buttons; they are intended to be turned on, and the device just
does its thing, whatever that is.
    Ubuntu IoT Core runs differently from the normal Ubuntu
distributions. It uses a construct called a snap. Everything in Ubuntu
Core is a snap, even the kernel. Developers create snaps that contain all
the dependencies for their application or service. Users download snaps
from the snap store and can add in (snap in) any snap they want to their
system. Each snap is separated from the others in Ubuntu IoT Core, using

similar separation constructs as containers! One difference however is
that snaps are transactional and can be rolled back easily if there is a
problem. Thus, trying out a snap leaves no artifacts on the system, and a
snap can be completely removed at any time. (reference for diagram in
Figure 4-6. https://computingforgeeks.com/install-snapd-and-snap-
applications-on-fedora/).

                                  Snap Confinement

                                           Snap package
                     Private
                     storage
                       area                   Binaries

                                                            Interfaces

                                                     Third-party snap

                                               Interfaces
                                                 OS

Figure 4-6. Ubuntu IoT Core snap architecture

     A snap is actually a filesystem (the SquashFS filesystem) along with
a YAML file that contains the snap’s metadata. A snap is completely
relocatable and does not depend on having specific libraries or
configurations in a particular directory, like the /etc directory. The snap
must carry all its dependent libraries with it in the SquashFS, kind of
like a TAR or ZIP file with everything it needs packaged up inside it. The
code for the snap in SquashFS filesystem is read-only, but once the snap
is installed, a writeable section of the filesystem is created. When a snap
is installed, it can be granted permissions to access things outside its
filesystem, like the network or devices. If the system does not grant those
permissions, then the install fails. In this way, a snap is similar to an app in
the Android operating system.

    Ubuntu IoT Core is claimed to be more reliable and more secure.
Snaps are signed with cryptographic keys, just like Pulsar’s RPMs, but
snaps manage their own dependencies and are separated from other
applications. Ubuntu IoT Core creates isolation between applications
(snaps) using AppArmor and Seccomp.
    AppArmor19 is a security model built into the Linux kernel as part of
the Linux Security Modules (LSM) framework. Other models supported
by LSM include SELinux, Smack, TOMOYO Linux, and Yama. AppArmor
allows the definition of security profiles that restrict the behavior of
applications, and access to files (inodes), based upon a set of mandatory
access control (MAC) policies. AppArmor comes installed with various
preconfigured profiles to protect the system and applications, but these
are modifiable by an administrator. Applications that do not have a policy
defined execute in an unconfined manner (no special MAC restrictions).
Policies reside in /etc/apparmor/ and user-specific profiles are defined in
${HOME}/.apparmor/.
    Seccomp20 is a Linux kernel mode used to limit the kernel system
calls available to a process. Seccomp is short for secure computing
and reduces the attack surface that the Linux kernel exposes through
system calls. Seccomp was originally designed to expose only a certain
set of kernel APIs available, but Seccomp 2 added filtering, allowing
more flexible definitions of what kernel APIs are allowed to be used by
a process. Seccomp is effective in restricting the actions an attacker can
perform through injected code attacks, because a call to a restricted
system call sends the SIGKILL to the process, terminating the offending
program.
    The combination of AppArmor and Seccomp allows Ubuntu
to restrict the allowable actions of installed snaps. The inherent
restrictions of a snap simplify the policy for these security tools, which

19
  h? ttps://gitlab.com/apparmor/apparmor/wikis/home/
20
    www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/prctl/seccomp_filter.txt

can be complex. Additionally, the filters that restrict the snap’s actions
actually document how the snap is supposed to behave, and what the
app can and cannot do, which acts as a type of disclosure to the system
administrator. In conclusion, the containerization of snaps includes a
separate filesystem, special permissions with AppArmor and Seccomp,
and documented interfaces to connect to other applications and
services on the platform through the snapd service.21 Using these strong
security protections, and the ability to rollback misbehaving snaps,
Ubuntu IoT Core provides a secure and stable operating system for IoT
deployments.

I? ntel® Clear Linux
Clear Linux22 addresses the operating system update problem by
allowing frequent updates to the operating system, reducing the time a
platform lacks the most recent updates, and preventing incompatible
updates from being downloaded and installed on a system. Clear
Linux is designed for a Linux distribution maintainer and provides
tools allowing the maintainer to directly consume upstream projects,
add them to their distribution, and maintain the distribution on an
update server that keeps all the connected systems updated. It is easy
to see the value of Clear Linux to an IoT deployment that is using a
customized Linux kernel.

21
  h? ttps://tutorials.ubuntu.com/tutorial/advanced-snap-usage#1
22
    Clear Linux, https://clearlinux.org/

                greengrass-

                              Azure-iot-
                                                          ...

                                                                  server-
                                           control
                                           cloud-

                                                                   basic
                                                                   web-
                   aws-

                                 sdk

                                                                                       zsh
                    iot

                                             Bundles

                                                                             Cloud Integrated

                                                                               Orchestrator
                                                     Dm-verity

                                                                 Telemetry

                                                                                Advanced

                    Kata Container                                                              swupd
                        Engine

                                           Linux Kernel

                                             Hardware

Figure 4-7. Clear Linux deployment chain

    Clear Linux manages all the applications and software on the
system using bundles instead of packages. Packages are hard to manage
because of all the dependencies, and oftentimes different packages have
dependencies on different versions of other packages. When two different
packages are installed, and each requires different versions of another
dependent package, installing both of those packages creates contention.
Either one package will be able to use the newer (or older) version of the
dependent package, or the application will break. Pulsar addresses this

contention by putting applications and services into containers, which
separates the dependencies from each other; Ubuntu uses a similar
approach with snaps. Clear Linux removes the contention with bundles,
which is just a different containment mechanism. A bundle removes
the outside dependencies and includes all the software needed for an
application.
      In Clear Linux, the operating system is completely made up of bundles.
When one bundle is updated, it creates a completely new version of the
OS. This new OS version is built and tested as a whole – there is no extra
package to be added later. For the distributor, this makes updating simpler
and guarantees that the OS update will work and will not brick the system.
It is also the reason that updates need to be easier and happen more
frequently.
      Just making updates come faster is not really a solution. Updating an
entire operating system every week could kill a system, not to mention
bog down the network. Clear Linux solves this problem by including tools
to allow updates to be smaller. Rather than an update requiring a full
reinstall, the update can be a binary diff between versions. This is critical
for IoT deployments, because sending down a new kernel that is multiple
megabytes in size is just not practical over certain network connections.

L? inux Summary
Linux supports strong security capabilities in both the kernel and the
application space. Although we did not cover all of Linux’s security
features, Table 4-3 provides a summary of the operating system security
features of Linux for comparison with Zephyr in our previous section.

Table 4-3. Linux Security Summary
Operating System         Grade    Comments
Security Principles

Execution Separation     A        All Linux distributions discussed here support
                                  the standard separation capabilities (process,
                                  threads, ISRs) of operating systems.
Memory Separation        A        Linux utilizes the hardware memory
                                  management unit (MMU) to provide paged
                                  memory separation for all processes, with
                                  read-write-execute permissions. Unlike Zephyr,
                                  even a process running as root is restricted.
Levels of Privilege      A        Linux, like Microsoft Windows, has access
                                  to multiple privilege rings, but makes use of
                                  only two ring levels. Linux also supports other
                                  special supervisory modes and TEEs; for details
                                  see the section on containment.
System authorization     A        Linux provides authorization for structures
                                  using a common user-group-other identity
                                  structure with read-write-execute privilege
                                  bits. Extensions for other security models
                                  through the Linux Security Modules (LSM) and
                                  other frameworks, like AppArmor and Seccomp
                                  covered in the Ubuntu section, are readily
                                  available and integrated into the Linux kernel.
                                                                    (continued)

Table 4-3. (continued)

Operating System         Grade    Comments
Security Principles

Programming Error        B        Basic stack protection is provided in the Linux
Protections                       kernel since version 3.1423 and is turned
                                  on automatically in version 4.1624 – strong
                                  stack protections are also an option. Control
                                  flow protection is not yet fully upstreamed in
                                  the kernel, but patches exist for 64-­bit user
                                  applications.25
Access-Controlled        C        Linux does not directly provide standard
Secrets Protection                features for secrets storage, but support for
                                  the Trusted Platform Module (TPM), Secure
                                  Elements, and hardware security modules
                                  (HSM) are prevalent.

     In this section, our discussion focused on the update features provided
in different Linux distributions and how the distros are solving the problem
of interfering applications and overly complex dependencies. These
solutions used different forms of containment to solve the update problem.
Clear Linux solves the problem by creating a new package format for
updates called a bundle and then uses a series of tools to ensure the different
bundles create a stable system. If an instability is found, a new update is easy
to create by correcting a bundle. System updates are made less burdensome
by incorporating special binary diff updates that take less time to download.

23
   h? ttps://lwn.net/Articles/584225/
24
     www.thomas-krenn.com/en/wiki/Linux_Kernel_Versions
25
      https://lwn.net/Articles/758245/

    Pulsar and Ubuntu take a different approach and use advanced
features of Linux to construct special containment for applications and
even parts of the operating system itself (in the case of Ubuntu, anyway).
These containment features are used to create Linux containers, which we
look at in a bit more detail in a future section.
    We also noted that even with these features, the problem of access
required to update firmware on the platform is not solved by this
approach, and additional capabilities are needed. We look at solutions to
the access problem in the section on secure software updates.

H
  ypervisors and Virtualization
Virtualization is a generic term applied to several techniques that increase
resource sharing and hardware utilization in a computer system. Modern
operating systems like Linux provide virtualized memory, where more
memory appears to be available than is actually physically present. Parts
of memory used by idle processes are stored on disk, freeing more physical
memory for the currently running process; short delays are incurred when
the idle process becomes active and the operating system reloads physical
memory with the contents from disk. Although some delays are incurred,
they are outweighed by the benefit of having more physical memory
available to the running process.
     Platform virtualization works in much the same way, allowing multiple
operating systems to run simultaneously on a single computer. Memory
is virtualized, as well as the processor, storage, graphics, and other I/O
devices on the platform. A small control program, called a hypervisor or
Virtual Machine Manager (VMM), manages the virtualized hardware and
mediates between the different virtual machines (VMs). Figure 4-8 shows
a generic virtualized system. Each VM runs a guest operating system
and application software that are logically separated from each other by
hardware and software controls managed by the hypervisor.

                 Virtual            Virtual             Virtual
                Machine            Machine             Machine
                 VM-1               VM-2                VM-3

               Virtualized        Virtualized         Virtualized
               Hardware           Hardware            Hardware
                                  Hypervisor

                                Server Hardware

Figure 4-8. Generic virtualization architecture

     There are actually two different types of hypervisors. Figure 4-8
depicts a Type 1 hypervisor or native hypervisor that runs directly on
the hardware. Type 1 hypervisors are typically more performant and can
utilize the hardware better, because they have complete control of the
hardware. VMWare, Xen (for Linux), and Hyper-V (Microsoft) are examples
of Type 1 hypervisors.
     There are also Type 2 hypervisors, which run on top of an existing
operating system. This allows a regular OS to run virtual machines too.
VirtualBox by Oracle is a Type 2 hypervisor that runs on Linux. KVM is a
Red Hat hypervisor that runs as part of the Linux kernel; some regard it is
Type 2 hypervisor since other things can run on the Linux OS, but Red Hat
claims it is a Type 1 hypervisor since it has direct control of the hardware
through the kernel. Either way, it is a pretty good hypervisor. There is a
question that frequently comes up relating hypervisors to containers. The
question is: Which is better, containerization or virtualization? We discuss
this later in the “Software Separation and Containment” section. For now,
we focus on virtualization.
     How does virtualization work? In Intel Architecture, virtualization
is supported by the Virtual Machine Extensions (VMX) mode. This
mode defines two privilege levels, one for the hypervisor, called VMX
root operations, and one for the VMs, called VMX non-root operations.

As one might guess, the VMX root operations mode is more privileged.
The hypervisor, operating in VMX root operations mode, initializes
certain control registers in the processor to establish limits on the VMs.
The hypervisor releases the VMs to execute by performing a VM-Enter
instruction. The VMs are then executing in the restricted VMX non-root
operations mode. When the VMs execute an instruction or perform an
operation that is restricted by the hypervisor, a VM exit is performed by the
processor, returning control to the hypervisor. The hypervisor can either
perform the operation on behalf of the VM in a safe manner, or it can reject
the operation and return some type of exception to the VM; in extreme
cases, the hypervisor can even terminate the offending VM entirely.
     The exact details of virtualized processor state are beyond the scope
of this book. However, the curious may elect to read the Intel 64 and
IA-32 Architectures Software Developer’s Manual Volume 3. Chapters 23
through 33 cover VMX mode. These chapters discuss the virtual machine
control structure (VMCS) that contains the state used by the processor to
implement virtualization and discusses all the elements of the controlled
state, including

      •     Virtual processor state, including control registers,
            debug registers, base registers, and segments

      •     Bit flags controlling what events cause a VM exit, for
            example, interrupts, use of IO ports, and so on

      •     Bit flags indicating how a VM’s state is saved when a
            VM exit is performed

      •     Bit flags indicating how a VM’s state is restored on VM
            entry

      •     Indicators for VMX aborts (the reason a VM abnormally
            exited into the hypervisor)

      •     Indicators for VMX exits (the reason for a normal return
            to the hypervisor)

      There is also another distinction among hypervisors. In the discussion
earlier, we described virtualization as though the operating systems in
the virtual machines were no different than an operating system on a
platform that is not virtualized. When the operating systems in the VMs
are not aware they are being virtualized, this is called full virtualization.
In some systems, or with some applications, it is very difficult to fully
virtualize the system. This may be because there are complex devices
that need to be shared between the virtual machines, or it may be that an
application has very stringent performance requirements. In these cases,
it is counterproductive to perform full virtualization – the cost to do so
would outweigh the benefits. In these cases, the hypervisor implements a
para-virtualized strategy, where the operating system, device drivers, and
perhaps even the applications themselves are aware that they are being
virtualized and are modified in order to behave better in the virtualized
environment. Para-virtualization is accomplished by configuring VMX in
a way that allows the VMs themselves to perform certain operations, for
example, the ability to directly interface with certain IO ports. The VMCS
allows the hypervisor to give some VMs more control than other VMs.
However, the VMs must cooperate with the hypervisor and are trusted to
cooperate in a trustworthy fashion. Intel’s ACRN hypervisor is an example
of a para-virtualized hypervisor, which we will discuss in more detail after
we review the security threats to virtualization and hypervisors.

T? hreats to Hypervisors
Just like operating systems, the threats to hypervisors are numerous and
dangerous. A successful attack on a hypervisor can lead to an attacker
acquiring complete control over the platform and every virtual machine
running on it. NIST-SP-800-125A Revision 126 outlines the baseline set of

26
  h? ttps://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-
   125Ar1.pdf

security functions a hypervisor should perform. These hypervisor security
functions have similarities to the security services that we defined for
operating systems. But because this specification limits itself to virtualization
of servers, and specifically does not address embedded systems, we use the
NIST set of functions as a baseline. In our list that follows, the first five items
are from NIST and are roughly equivalent to the security services we defined
for operating system; protection from programming errors is a sixth security
service we add to NIST’s list. We then add three additional security services
that are unique to IoT instances and not considered by NIST’s analysis. The
set of security services for IoT hypervisors are

      •     VM Process Isolation (i.e., Execution Separation and
            Memory Separation): Each VM’s execution should be
            separated from all other VMs’ execution using multiple
            logical processor structures; a fault in one VM should
            not affect other VMs.

      •     Device Mediation and Access Control (i.e., Levels of
            Privilege and Access-Controlled Secrets Storage):
            Hypervisors provide methods for VMs to share access
            to devices through various methods, including giving
            VMs direct access to hardware, para-­virtualization of
            the device, or device emulation within the hypervisor.
            Access to the devices must be controlled to prevent
            effects from one VM leaking over to other VMs. This
            includes controlling direct memory access (DMA)
            devices to protect both memory read and write. If
            the platform offers secrets storage, the hypervisor
            should provide access to such storage in a manner that
            prevents other VMs from interfering with each other’s
            usage, or from viewing, modifying, or using the secrets
            in that secure storage location (see Chapter 3, section
            on “Intel Virtualization Technology (Intel VT)”).

•   Prevent Abuses by Guest VMs through their
    Direct Execution of Commands (i.e., System
    Authorization): As we stated earlier, para-virtualized
    systems allow VMs to cooperate with the hypervisor;
    the hypervisors in these systems execute commands
    sent from the VMs. The hypervisor’s execution of
    commands from one VM should not affect another
    VM and should not compromise the security of the
    hypervisor or its data structures.

•   VM Lifecycle Management: VM management includes
    creating, starting, stopping, and pausing VMs, as
    well as checkpointing (snapshotting) their state. This
    includes monitoring the state of VMs and various
    tools for migrating data or VM snapshots between
    physical machines. The management of VMs is
    typically performed through add-ons to the hypervisor
    or through a special management VM. These
    management services must not allow leakage of data or
    control across VMs.

•   Management of Hypervisor Platform: The
    configuration of the hypervisor and the platform itself
    must be managed, including configuring devices,
    virtual networking, storage, and any VM policies. This
    management must include proper authentication of
    management requests and restriction of management
    actions to only authorized entities.

•   Protection from Programming Errors: This is the
    leftover security service from our operating system
    list, but has a little different perspective when viewed
    from the virtualization perspective. The hypervisor
    must set appropriate VM aborts when a VM violates

            restrictions on memory separation or corruption of VM
            control structures; stack smashing and heap smashing
            that occur from programming errors in one VM should
            not compromise the hypervisor or other VMs. These
            protections become much more difficult with a ­para-­
            virtualized hypervisor because certain structures and
            interfaces on the hypervisor are accessible to the VMs.

      •     Real-Time Guarantees: In embedded systems and IoT,
            control loops require real-time guarantees and many
            devices operate with real-time restrictions on read/
            write operations that if violated result in data being
            lost. In a virtualized system, the hypervisor itself must
            provide these real-time guarantees in coordination
            with the VMs and their operating systems.

      •     Deep Power Management: In embedded systems
            and IoT, power usage is a critical parameter. Whether
            the power envelope is restricted due to battery life
            and energy harvesting limitations or the power/
            heat trade-off in an industrial environment limits
            equipment’s power budget, management of energy
            usage is essential. Due to real-time guarantees and
            the management of physical devices or equipment,
            the management of power goes far beyond what is
            normally provided in a data center or server cloud
            instance. Power management cannot be left to the
            individual guest operating systems or VMs, because
            they do not have the platform view. The hypervisor,
            in conjunction with the VMs and guest OSes, must
            manage the platform constraints appropriately to
            prevent power spikes or violations of the equipment’s
            defined heat envelope.

       •   Protection from External Devices: In embedded
           systems and IoT, virtualized systems are inevitably
           connected to other devices and sensors, usually in a
           very direct way. Because these devices can be attacked
           and PWNED27 by an adversary, protection of the
           virtualized system from compromised devices is critical
           to protecting a virtualized IoT system. It should be
           noted that this goes beyond the normal protections a
           cloud server is required to enforce to protect REST APIs
           and network connections, which the IoT virtualized
           system must also do. The external IoT devices are
           normally connected to a low-level driver, an emulated
           or virtual bus implementation, or some other higher-­
           privileged software component that must implement
           some type of intrusion and attack detection-prevention
           mechanism.

    When examining the preceding list of necessary protections and
the general operation of hypervisors described earlier, several threat
vectors immediately come to the surface that are likely vulnerabilities in
hypervisors:

       •   Size and complexity of the hypervisor code: The
           more complex and larger code size of a hypervisor,
           the more likely the hypervisor includes critical
           vulnerabilities, because adverse code interactions and
           defects are harder to find in larger code bases.

27
    WNED is the Internet slang for “owning” a device or computer system; it comes
  P
  from “mistyping” the “o” in the word “own” with a letter “p,” ostensibly because
  hackers are bad typists perhaps. Its meaning goes beyond attacking and implies
  complete ownership of the attacked device such that the device is absconded
  to do whatever the attacker wishes – the device becomes part of the attacker’s
  zombie or botnet army.

      •     Attack surface of the guest VMs: Since the VMs
            represent the manipulable interface to attackers, they
            represent the primary point of attack to virtualized
            systems. The more network services exposed by a
            VM, the more third-party code that is not written
            with a security mindset, and the larger the number
            of unprotected IoT devices connected to virtualized
            system, the higher the risk of vulnerabilities that can
            expose the hypervisor to attack.

      •     Hypervisor add-ons that have vulnerabilities: Some
            hypervisors have minimal services but allow add-ons
            or plugin modules that provide additional services, like
            management and configuration. These add-ons can
            include additional vulnerabilities.

      •     Device driver virtualizations that have
            vulnerabilities: Device drivers require special versions
            that provide virtualization features, which may react
            differently with different hypervisors or may operate
            differently on different hardware. These differences
            may create vulnerabilities an attacker can leverage.
    Like operating systems, hypervisors are susceptible to similar classes of
attacks. A recent survey paper28 looked at reported common vulnerabilities
from a reputable CVE database for the top four hypervisors. Figure 4-9
shows the types of vulnerabilities and the number of such vulnerabilities
by product. The purpose of this table here is to highlight the most common
attacks on hypervisors and to highlight that all hypervisors have been
successfully attacked. The data should not be interpreted numerically

   itchfield, Alan., Shahzad, Abid. A systematic Review of Vulnerabilities in
 L
28

 Hypervisors and Their Detection. 23rd Americas Conference on Information
 Systems. Boston. 2017.

to identify which hypervisor is more secure due to a lower number of
attacks. The paper notes that although VMWare had the highest number
of vulnerabilities over the study period (from 1999 to 2015), it was also the
only established hypervisor product in the market for the first 8 years of the
study period, making such rankings of hypervisor security inappropriate.
The following list briefly reviews the most prevalent classes of attacks listed
in Figure 4-9, describing the security principles violated:

      •   Denial of Service: A DoS attack causes a VM to halt
          or create such a serious VM abort that the hypervisor
          refuses to allow the VM to continue to operate. A more
          serious DoS could affect a device on the platform,
          preventing all VMs from accessing the device until
          the platform is rebooted, violating Device Mediation.
          A DoS attack on a virtualized hardware device
          represents a violation of execution separation.
          Another type of DoS attack consumes resources,
          like network socket handles, resulting in other VMs
          not being able to acquire the resource necessary to
          execute a function.

                                            VMWare    Xen   KVM   Hyper-V   Total
               DoS                            66      131   30      5       232
               Code Execution                 48      12     2      3        65
               Stack overflow                 30      28     4      1        63
               Memory Corruption              8       10     2      1        21
               Cross-Site Scripting           13                             13
               Directory Traversal            11                             11
               HTTP response splitting        1                              1
               Bypass something               5              3      1        9
               Gain information               17      16     2               35
               Gain privileges                54      24     7               85
               Cross Site Request Forgery     3                              3
               Total                         256      221   50      11

Figure 4-9. Most common attacks on hypervisors – 16-year period

      •     Stack Overflow and Arbitrary Code Execution:
            Stack smashing, heap smashing, and use-after-free
            vulnerabilities allow an attacker to execute their own
            code on the platform. This type of attack can allow
            escalation of code’s rights, allowing it to become a
            privileged user. In para-virtualized environments, this
            can cause the VM to misbehave and violate the trust
            the hypervisor places in the VM, causing an execution
            or memory separation violation (Prevent Abuses from
            Direct Execution of Commands from Guest VMs).

      •     Gain Information: An out-of-bounds read vulnerability
            allows a VM to access memory outside of its logical
            memory space. These vulnerabilities are common with
            virtualized drivers and VM tools. A gain information
            vulnerability represents a violation of memory
            separation.

      •     Gain Privileges: Gain privilege attacks are usually
            executed through add-ons, like tools and plugins. An
            example is the CVE-2017-4943 that allowed a showlog
            plugin to gain root-level privilege of the platform
            management VM that controls network settings, system
            updates, health monitoring, and device management.
            Becoming root on a para-virtualized system is
            tantamount to a compromise of the hypervisor itself,
            since root on a para-virtualized VM allows the attacker
            to easily violate the implicit para-virtualized cooperation
            agreement (Management of Hypervisor Platform).

     Many of the attacks outlined are serious, but do not directly violate a
fully virtualized system; the hypervisor can properly trap and stop attacks
that directly violate the virtual machine’s configuration. However, when

the hypervisor and VMs are operating in a para-virtualized manner,
privilege escalations in the VM and process and memory violations even
within the VM’s logical memory space can escalate to a violation of the
para-virtualization agreements. An attacker, operating as root within a
para-virtualized VM, can disrupt device drivers and other critical parts of
the VM’s operating system that have direct access to the platform hardware
as part of the para-virtualization contract. In the next section, we look at
ACRN, a para-virtualized hypervisor, and explore some of the strengths
and weaknesses of this approach.

                                           Service VM                                       Linux VM                     Android VM
                                                                                                                      Android     Trusty
                                                                                                                       World      World
                                   VM
                                 Manager          ACRN Device Model            User                                User
                                                     (Mediators)
                                                                               Kernel                              Kernel

                                                                                                                          Keystore
                        User
                                                                                        virtio                           virtio
                        Kernel                                                                          Keystore
                                                                                      FE Drivers                       FE Drivers
                                                       Kernel Mediators
         VMX non-root     Native Device Driver                                                                               Virtual Firmware
                                                                                           Virtual Firmware
          operation

          VMX root
                                                                                                                            ACRN Hypervisor
                                 VMX                                                  Hypercalls
          operation
                                                                                                                            vPIC/vLAPIC/
                                 VT-d            EPT                      VM API                   Trusty API               vIOAPIC/vMSI

                                                                          Firmware (UEFI, SlimBoot etc.)

                                                 CSE                      SOC Platform (Apollo Lake etc.)

Figure 4-10. ACRN architecture diagram

I? ntel® ACRN
ACRN is a BSD open source hypervisor reference platform, built by Intel
for the automotive industry, available at https://projectacrn.github.io.
It is specifically designed to be a flexible and lightweight hypervisor and
designed for real-time and safety-critical IoT deployments.
      As shown in Figure 4-10, ACRN is a para-virtualized architecture
where the guest operating systems must know they are being virtualized
and cooperate with the hypervisor. A para-virtualized solution is required

in the automotive world due to the nature of some devices in the system.
This model enables a more performant implementation and cleaner
virtualization of these devices using virtio drivers. Notice the Service
Virtual Machine (VM) in the top left of Figure 4-10. The Service VM
performs some critical virtualization services for the hypervisor to avoid
the performance penalty of full virtualization. However, support for device
interrupts is provided directly in the hypervisor by virtualizing the PIC
and APIC for each VM. The critical element of the Service VM is the set of
ACRN Device Model (DM) applications that mediate between VMs and
devices for certain operations. For example, USB and IOC (I/O Controller)
devices are emulated in the Service VM due to their complexity, and the
GPU is mediated by the Service VM since emulation will not provide the
performance boost for which the GPU is often used. Because of these
elevated privileges, the Service VM is a critical security element in the
trusted computing base (TCB) of the ACRN platform. If not carefully
limited, the Service VM can easily take on too much and become a security
threat due to violation of the least privilege principle. As the number and
complexity of the Device Models grow, the likelihood of implementation
errors that can be leveraged by an attacker grows (see the list of common
attack patterns discussed in the “Threats to Operating Systems” section). If
an attacker is able to successfully attack a DM, the attacker is likely to inject
other code inside the Service VM, having access to many other privileges
than just the compromised DM. This is an architectural trade-off between
necessary performance and security risk. The risk can be managed by
ensuring every DM or other software component added to the Service VM
is carefully verified and undergoes penetration testing to ensure there are
no security weaknesses in those modules.
     For security features, ACRN supports secure boot, a Trusted Execution
Environment (TEE), and secure storage in a Replay Protected Memory
Block (RPMB) in flash. Figure 4-11 shows the secure boot flow for ACRN
when using the Slim Bootloader (SBL). The TEE and RPMB are shown in
Figures 4-13 and 4-14, respectively.

                            Device Model
                                APP1
                                                 Android VM 1

                             SOS Kernel                Trusty OS              Android OS

              Stitched as
              one image         SOS

                               ACRN
                                                          vSBL: Android OS Loader

                                SBL
                                                             vSBL: Initialization

                                CSE

Figure 4-11. ACRN secure boot flow

    Secure boot on Intel devices starts in the Converged Security Engine
(CSE), which is the common root of trust for verification for Intel platforms
(see Chapter 3, section “Intel CSE/CSME – DAL”). The CSE verifies a digital
signature on the SBL; the digital signature is usually produced using the
RSA algorithm and is commonly 2048-bits or 3072-bits in length. The
public key is part of the SBL image, but this key is verified by the CSE using
a hash of that public key kept in fuses. The fuses prevent the key from
being modified in the image itself.
    The SBL verifies the next stage of the platform, which includes the
ACRN hypervisor and Service Operating System (SOS) kernel, which
are included as a single image. The SOS kernel runs in the Service VM
as VM’s operating system. The SOS Kernel loads and verifies a Device
Model application for each User VM that is loaded; this includes verifying

a virtual Slim Bootloader (vSBL) for each User VM. The SOS uses dm-­
verity29 to check the validity of the DM App and the vSBL. The vSBL then
is responsible to boot the User VM; in the case of Android, this uses the
Android verified boot mechanism.

                                                                       User OS
                                  Service OS
                                                                     User OS
                               ACRN Device Model
                                                                    User OS
                        IOC BE service                               IOC
                                                     UART
                    (filter to emulate the         Emulation      Application
                    whitelisted CMD only)
                                                                   IOC Driver
                                                                  (CBC drive)
                          IOC Driver
                         (CBC drive)
                                                                  Virtual UART

                                               ACRN Hypervisor

                                                   IOC Hardware
                        Physical UART                                CAN Bus
                                                       (MCU)

Figure 4-12. ACRN connectivity to automotive CAN bus

    One of the key features in ACRN is support for real-time and
automotive use cases. This creates extremely stringent requirements on
the hypervisor and the VMs for real-time operations and connectivity.
Because all VMs might require access to the CAN30 bus, an I/O Controller
is emulated in the Service OS that serializes data onto a physical serial

29
     M-Verity, or Device Mapper Verity, was designed for Chrome OS and also
   D
   used by Android. DM-Verity is built into the Linux kernel and uses the kernel
   cryptographic APIs to provide transparent integrity verification for block devices.
   See the Git Repository for more details at https://git.kernel.org/pub/
   scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/device-
   mapper/verity.txt
30
    CAN bus, Controller Area Network, is a type of local bus system developed by
    Bosch for automotive systems to connect controllers and subsystems together.
    www.canbus.us/

bus connected to the vehicle CAN bus (Figure 4-12). In order to protect
the vehicle, the Service OS implements a firewall in each VM’s Device
Model application. This filter restricts the type and content of messages
that a particular VM can place on the vehicle’s CAN bus. For example, the
Android OS that implements the vehicle infotainment features is restricted
from sending messages to critical ECU components for vehicle braking
or engine control. Likewise, other VMs that render cockpit controls are
restricted from receiving messages from USB ports in the cabin.

                    Service OS                                    User OS

                                                Android World               Trusty World

                                           Android                             trusted
                                           trusty apps                         apps

                                         User
                                         kernel

                                             Trusty
                                                                             Trusty OS kernel
                                             driver

                                                                Hypercall

                                           vCPU                                      switch
                                        vCPUswitch
                                                                  Secure world EPT
              ACRN Hypervisor            switch Secure
                                      Normal
                                      world Secure
                                 Normal            world
                                                                              Normal world EPT
                                 worldcontext worldcontext
                                 context      context

                        Memory         Android VM memory     Normal World
                                                             memory

Figure 4-13. ACRN trusted execution environment

    ACRN supports the ARM TrustZone TEE implemented in Trusty in the
Android OS. As shown in Figure 4-13, the ACRN hypervisor implements
the separation of unsecure memory (in the normal world or regular
operating system) from the secure world purely in software through
encrypted page tables (EPTs). The CPUs are also virtualized and maintain
the NS (not-secure) bit used in ARM to switch between two different
contexts in the vCPU. It should be noted that the secure world can see all

of memory, but the normal world is restricted to see only a subset. Just
like we discussed in the Zephyr OS, the ability of privileged users to see all
of memory makes processes and threads in the secure world potentially
more dangerous. It should also be noted that the Service OS also acts like
a privileged secure process with access to additional parts of memory in
order to support the virtualized devices.
     The last security feature in ACRN that we examine is the Replay
Protected Memory Block (RPMB). RPMB is a feature of some flash
devices that allows an encryption key to be used to protect data, using
both confidentiality and integrity, in a reserved flash block. The data is
also replay protected preventing rollback attacks where an old piece of
encrypted data overwrites a newer piece of data.

                                  Service OS (VM#0)                                                         UOS3
                                                                                                         UOS2
                                                                                                      UOS1
                                            ACRN DM
                                                                                        Android                     Trusty
                                       ACRN DM
                                                                                      RPMB Proxy                    SS TA
                          ACRN DM            RPMB BE                                   Daemon
                                       RPMB BEVrkey#1
                                                                                                                Crypto TA
                           RPMB BEVrkey#1 rkey
                                                                                       RPMB cdev                    Vrkey#1
                            Vrkey#1 rkey                                              (/dev/vrpmb)

                                rkey

                 user                                                                   RPMB FE
                 kernel                                                               (virtio-rpmb)

                    RPMB Driver
                                                                                              vSBL /
                                                                                                          Vrkey#1
                 (eMMC/UFS/NVMe)                                                              vOSLoader

                                                                    rkey
                                                                                                            ACRN hypervisor

            RPMB        RPMB       RPMB      RPMB         User             eMMC/UFS
            Blk#0       Blk#1      Blk#2     (rsvd)      Data                 NVMe                              VrKey# = HKDF(SHA256, rkey, VMID#)
                                                        Partition
            Single RPMB Partition/Unit                                                                      vrkey is random number generated per-reboot.

Figure 4-14. ACRN secure storage support through RPMB

    The encryption key for the RPMB is held by a trusted entity in the
platform. In Intel platforms, this trusted entity is the CSE, and the CSE
shares this key with a single device driver on the platform and then locks
access to the key so no other program can gain access to the key. If the key
is overshared, then security of the platform diminishes. During the boot

process, the Slim Bootloader (SBL) reads the platform seed (pSEED) from
the CSE and passes the pSEED on to the ACRN hypervisor. Since ACRN
must support multiple virtual machines, and all these VMs must not be
allowed to see the other VMs’ data or be able to spoof another VM’s data
reads or writes, ACRN cannot directly share the pSEED with the VMs.
ACRN uses a NIST-approved key derivation function (HKDF-256) to derive
new secrets from the pSEED, called vSEEDs for virtual seeds, and passes
a unique vSEED to each VM. Each VM then chooses which device driver
or process will take ownership of the vSEED. For example, in Android, the
vSEED is given to Trusty since it is the TEE for that VM. Figure 4-14 shows
how the seeds are then used to implement RPMB. ACRN provides the real
RPMB key to the DM applications in the Service OS. The derived keys are
used by each of the User VMs to protect their RPMB data; the transactions
for each of the User VMs do not go to the RPMB flash or the ACRN
hypervisor, but instead are routed to the Service OS. The DM App in the
SOS for the particular VM verifies and decrypts the data it received from its
corresponding VM and then re-encrypts the data with actual RPMB key.
Each VM has access to a small part of the RPMB and can only write to its
own section. This separation is enforced by the RPMB driver in the SOS
and the ACRN hypervisor.
    It is clear from Figure 4-14 and the preceding description that the Service
OS must be trusted, since it is possible for the DM Application to forge data
or delete RPMB data as if they were the User VM. Careful review of the
applications in the Service OS is required to ensure no security vulnerabilities
are present, and only trusted applications are allowed to run in the SOS.

  eal-Time and Power Management Guarantees
R
in ACRN
In its current rendition, ACRN provides basic real-time and power
management controls. ACRN maps a physical core into the guest OS for
both real-time and power management. This means that the guest OS
has direct control of the core and can reflect any of the operating system’s

real-time characteristics to the applications in its VM. A real-time Linux
kernel, for example, would run just as effectively in ACRN as on its own
hardware. Since the physical cores are mapped into the VM, the hypervisor
also allows the guest operating system in the VM control over that core’s
C-state, optimizing the core’s power consumption during idle modes. The
P-state, controlling the package voltage-frequency setting, is coordinated
with the VM. ACRN manages the S-state, which is reflected from the
User OS VMs, to the Service OS, and finally the hypervisor, in an ordered
fashion. Future versions of ACRN are planning for further power and
real-time management controls covering devices and real-time quality of
service.

A
  CRN Summary
ACRN supports some strong security services, with RPMB secure storage
and TrustZone TEE being two of the most significant. Many of the design
and security trade-offs made in ACRN are a result of the performance
requirements for automotive and IoT deployments and the need to
interface with complex devices, such as the I/O Controller emulation in
the Service OS for connection with the vehicle bus. Table 4-4 provides a
summary of the hypervisor system security features for comparison with
other systems.

Table 4-4. ACRN Hypervisor Security Summary
Operating System         Grade       Comments
Security Principles

VM Process Isolation     B           Because ACRN is a para-virtualized
(Execution Separation)               hypervisor, and both the Service OS and
                                     parts of the hypervisor are accessible to
                                     guest VMs, the execution separation is
                                     not complete. This cannot be improved,
                                     however, due to the need for emulated
                                     busses and para-­virtualization of certain
                                     devices.
VM Process Isolation     B           User OSs have access to both the Service
(Memory Separation)                  OS and the ACRN hypervisor through some
                                     limited APIs. This necessarily means that
                                     some memory buffers and locations are
                                     shared, with some firewalling in place.
                                     Errors or defects in this sharing, especially
                                     if the uses of additional add-ons are
                                     integrated, can compromise the system.
Device Mediation         B           Device Mediation is done in the Service
(Levels of Privilege)                OS, per VM, using the Device Model
                                     application.
                                                                    (continued)

Table 4-4. (continued)

Operating System         Grade       Comments
Security Principles

Execution of Commands C              ACRN provides separation of commands,
from Guest VMs                       mostly through the Service OS and the
                                     Device Model. However, certain hypercalls
                                     go through the hypervisor itself as
                                     shown in Figures 4-10 and 4-13. Similar
                                     hypercalls are used for USB virtualization.
                                     This creates a disparity in where access
                                     controls need to be reviewed, and makes
                                     it harder to ensure all guest commands
                                     are properly mediated in every case; this
                                     represents a violation of the least common
                                     mechanism security design principle.3
VM Lifecycle             C           ACRN provides a VM manager (Figure 4-10)
                                     in the Service OS; however the
Management of                        implementation is very slim. This is
Hypervisor Lifecycle                 appropriate for the automotive space,
                                     but for generalized IoT, and especially
                                     for industrial usages which require
                                     sophisticated orchestration, the
                                     management features require significant
                                     add-­ons. Because this is performed in
                                     the same VM as the mediation of the
                                     guest VMs, the likelihood of disastrous
                                     compromise is increased.
                                                                   (continued)

Table 4-4. (continued)
Operating System        Grade       Comments
Security Principles

Protection from         -           No specific controls; however the Linux OS
programming errors                  and Android OS, for which the hypervisor
                                    was designed, provide these advanced
                                    controls. ACRN depends on these services
                                    in the guest OS.
Real-Time Guarantees    A           ACRN’s entire design focuses on meeting
and                                 real-time requirements for automotive,
Deep Power                          including providing optimized device
Management                          drivers and virtualized access to power
                                    management controls using a virtualized
                                    PIC and APIC.
Protections from        A           ACRN provides a Service VM that mediates
External Devices                    all external access points and utilizes
                                    VM-specific filters in the Device Model
                                    to individualize protection filters per VM
                                    instance.
Access-Controlled       B           ACRN provides both a TEE and RPMB
Secrets Storage                     secure storage. The lower grading is
                                    a result of the implementations being
                                    primarily in software, not hardware.

    In this section, our discussion focused on the unique features and
architecture of para-virtualized hypervisors. We introduced the use of
secure storage through the RPMB and additional containment through the
use of a TEE. TEEs are discussed in more detail in the section “Software
Separation and Containment.” The design trade-offs for the hypervisor and

TEE led to potential vulnerability in the TEE due to lack of full memory
separation – a similar problem was found in the Zephyr OS. These and
other design trade-offs lead to some weaknesses in the system, but overall,
the combination of hardware security features for VM separation and
secure storage provides superior protection for the targeted IoT vertical.

 Software Separation and Containment
Containment is a critical concept in security. Whether it is keeping the
“bad guys” out, or protecting secrets, or just segregating high privilege
operations from low privilege ones, separation and containment
are paramount to safe operations. Even with the process and thread
separation provided by the operating system, and the hardware-assisted
virtual machine isolation, additional separation capabilities always seem
to be useful to applications and IoT systems. In this section, we look at
two different types of extended application containment capabilities:
containers and Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs). We have touched
on both of these topics already, but in this section, we unpack them to a
deeper level.

 Containment Security Principles
The principles that apply to extended application containment are the
same principles we talked about for operating systems, which includes

      •     Execution Separation

      •     Memory Separation

    The difference between applying these principles here and applying
them to operating systems is the particular mechanisms used to provide
the separation. The preference is for hardware separation as it is more
secure. Containment through hardware separation might be provided

using a completely different processor (see the “Trusty TEE Security
Summary” section), or a different mode of the current processor (see the
section on Virtualization or SGX later). Memory separation might include
a completely different cache of memory (as in SGX and Trusty), or merely
using some extra virtualization controls (the approach used in hypervisors
or containers). In both cases, there are trade-offs to be made, based on the
threats that are being addressed.

 Threats to Extended Application Containment
The threats to extended application containment typically come
from privileged attackers. These attacks can come from a privileged
user or might be from an unprivileged user that performs a privilege
escalation attack to acquire higher privileges. In both cases, the
application containment intends to remove the possibility, or reduce
the efficacy, of attacks by privileged users (e.g., root or admin user
accounts).

      •   Memory Disclosure from Privileged User: A
          privileged user leverages their access to all memory
          pages in order to read data from any application.
      •   Memory Tampering from Privileged User: A
          privileged user leverages their access to all memory
          pages in order to write, overwrite, or corrupt data for
          any application; they may also include making memory
          pages unavailable to an application.

      •   Data Leakage through Side Channels: A privileged
          user leverages their access to data caches to perform
          timing attacks allowing them to determine contents of
          application memory.

      •     Execution Interference from Privileged User: A
            privileged user leverages their ability to schedule tasks
            or run tasks that have higher priority and starve or
            interrupt other applications during a critical operation.
      •     Execution Leakage through Side Channels: A
            privileged user leverages their ability to schedule tasks
            and uses speculative execution or timing operations to
            determine code branches executed during operation.31
     Application containment techniques provide defenses against these
attacks to varying degrees. Full separation32 is the only complete solution,
but this increases costs and adds complexity to management and control
of sensitive applications. The use of different containment techniques is
a trade-off between absolute security and ease of use and utility of the
solution. In each containment example discussed later, we highlight the
different levels of hardware usage that improve the solution’s security level.

C
  ontainers
Containers are a software mechanism to increase the separation between
applications. In the “Linux Section”, we discuss how Wind River Pulsar
uses container to improve the stability of their operating system updates;
because services and components execute within containers with
enhanced separation between applications, the applications are less

31
     or a discussion of the L1 Terminal Fault (L1TF) speculative execution attack
   F
   and its specific effect on ACRN, see https://projectacrn.github.io/latest/
   developer-guides/l1tf.html
32
    Full separation means using a completely different processor with completely
    different memory and devices for sensitive operations.

likely to interfere with each other, increasing system stability. Ubuntu
IoT Core uses a similar construct to containers, which they call snaps.
Containers and snaps utilize software techniques in the operating system
for separation. The long-standing debate is which approach is better –
containerization or virtualization?

                                                                 VM 1                  VM 2            VM 3

         Container 1       Container 2     Container 3

                                                                                       Service
                                                         App 1

                                                                         App 2

                                                                                                       App 3
                                                                                        Micro
                             Service

                                              App 3
        App 1

                App 2

                              Micro

                                                           Bins/Libs                 Bins/Libs       Bins/Libs

          Bins/Libs         Bins/Libs      Bins/Libs       Operating                 Operating       Operating
                                                            System                    System          System
                  Containerization Engine                        vBoot                 vBoot          vBoot

                        Operating System                                         Type-1 Hypervisor

                           Hardware                                                 Hardware

Figure 4-15. Containers and hypervisor comparison

    In Figure 4-15, we show the relationship between a container software
stack and a virtual machine (VM) software stack. What is evident from
the diagram is the VM stack contains more layers of software due to the
operating system in each VM.
    The strength of a VM solution is the hardware separation between
the different VMs; however, setting up the VMs and getting the operating
systems booted in each VM takes more time. The strength of the container
solution is faster startup time for each container and lower overhead of
execution; the weakness in containerization is the reliance on software
separation in the container engine and the underlying operating system.
A best-in-class solution would be a hybrid that provides the hardware
security of virtual machines with the speed of deployment and startup for
containers. Kata Containers provides such a solution.

K
  ata Containers
Kata Containers is an open source project managed by the OpenStack
Foundation, which includes technology from an Intel open source project
called Clear Containers. Clear Containers is related to the Intel Clear Linux
project discussed earlier in the chapter. In actuality, Kata Containers are
really lightweight virtual machines designed to be managed like containers.
The benefit of Kata Containers over regular containers is the increased
security from the hardware-enforced separation provided by the hypervisor.
This discussion of Kata Containers is based on the 1.2.0 release.33
    Kata Containers uses the KVM hypervisor and works seamlessly with
Kubernetes, Docker, and OpenStack. Other hypervisor support is being
built and may even be available as you are reading this. Kata Containers is
comprised of six different components, as shown in Figure 4-16.

        Your Choice of Container Engine

                                                                                 VM 1                        VM 2

                                                                            Container                 Container
                  I/O                     OCI cmd/spec
                                                                       Command

                                                                                                   Command
                                                                                        EXEC

                                                                                                                    EXEC

                    kata-shim              kata-runtime

                                  gRPC
                                                                           kata-agent              kata-agent
                                 Proxy
                                                                             kernel                     kernel

                                                  Linux Operating System
                                vSerial
                                                                                  KVM Hypervisor
                                Device

                                                          Hardware

Figure 4-16. Kata Containers architecture

33
   Kata Containers, https://katacontainers.io and https://github.com/
  kata-containers/documentation

      •   The Runtime, called the kata-runtime, handles
          all the Open Container Initiative (OCI) commands
          used to create and configure a container. It also starts
          the Shim instances. The kata-runtime utilizes the
          virtcontainers34 project to perform the heavy lifting in
          a platform agnostic way. Whenever an OCI command
          is run on a container, the Runtime creates a new Shim
          to connect the container engine to the container.

      •   The Shim, called the kata-shim, is an interface
          between the container engine (like Docker, Kubernetes,
          or OpenStack) and the created container inside the
          virtual machine. The container engine has a process
          (called the Reaper) that monitors the container,
          manages the container, and reaps the container when
          it dies or must be killed. Because Kata Containers are
          inside a virtual machine, the Reaper cannot actually
          access the container, due to the hardware separation
          in place by the VM. The Shim pretends to be the
          container, so the container engine can connect to it for
          management, and the Shim communicates with the
          actual container using an agent. The Shim links the
          standard input and output flows and any Linux signals
          from the container back to the container engine, so the
          container engine can receive them and process them
          appropriately.

      •   The Agent (kata-agent) is part of the minimal Clear
          Linux OS image and runs inside the VM; it provides
          communication outside the VM to the kata-runtime
          and kata-shim. The Agent creates a container sandbox

34
   https://github.com/containers/virtcontainers

            based on a set of namespaces for a container to run
            inside. The namespaces include UTC, IPC, network,
            and PID35 namespaces. The Agent can support multiple
            containers running inside a VM (called a pod); however
            using Docker, only one container per pod is supported.
       •    The Hypervisor provides virtualization and is a
            combination of KVM with QEMU. As shown in
            Figure 4-­17, QEMU is the Virtual Machine Manager
            (VMM) and creates the virtual machine for the
            container to run in, populates it with the virtualized
            kernel, and emulates virtualized devices for the
            VM. KVM is used to control the VM, and all VM
            exits return directly back to KVM. The hypervisor
            provides a virtual socket (VSOCK) or a serial port to
            communicate with the Shim or Runtime. The serial
            port is the default, but for Linux kernels beyond v4.8,
            VSOCK is available. If a serial port is used, gRPC runs
            over Yamux on the serial port.

35
   See http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/namespaces.7.html, IPC =
  interprocess communication and message queues namespace, PID = process
  identifier namespace, UTS = hostname and Network Information Service (NIS)
  domain name service.

                                                                VM 1
                                                              Container

                                                              kata-agent

                                                               vkernel
               VMX Non-Root Mode

                                                                           Direct to KVM
               VMX Root Mode

                                                                           VM-EXITs
                                        QEMU VMM

                                            Virtio Services

               Linux Operating System
                     virtio
                                    vhost                KVM Hypervisor
                   services

                                            Hardware

Figure 4-17. Kata Containers hypervisor architecture36

      •   The Proxy is a multiplexer for the hypervisor if a
          serial port is used to connect between the Runtime
          or Shim and the hypervisor. Multiple connections are
          required because the kata-agent can communicate
          with multiple different kata-runtime instances and
          kata-shims; each instance opens its own remote
          procedure call to the Agent using gRPC, and the Agent
          connects these to the appropriate container process
          in the VM. The Proxy is not needed if a VSOCK is used
          to connect between the Runtime and the hypervisor,
          since gRPC can run directly over a virtual socket and
          then gRPC directly handles the multiple different

36
  h? ttps://github.com/kata-containers/documentation/blob/master/
   architecture.md

            communication streams. In this case, the gRPC
            connections from the kata-runtime feed directly to the
            hypervisor over a VSOCK, and the Proxy disappears
            from the architecture diagram in Figure 4-16.
      •     The kernel is the operating system that runs the
            container inside the virtual machine. The kernel is
            a highly optimized kernel from Clear Linux with a
            minimal memory footprint and includes only the
            services needed to run the container workload. QEMU
            virtualizes or emulates everything else. The smaller
            Linux kernel reduces the attack surface presented to
            the container, further increasing security.

             Your Choice of Container Engine

                                                                     Container
                                                                                              VM 1
                                                                     Networking
                                                                     Namespace              Container

                                           Container Engine
                    Docker
                                     Networking Namespace
                    Network                                                                kata-agent
                     Bridge
                                                                                            vkernel

                   vEth Device             kata-runtime                     QEMU VMM

                                                                              TAP Device
                                               gRPC
                                                   Linux Operating System
                                          vSock
                                                                             KVM Hypervisor
                                          Device

                                                         Hardware

Figure 4-18. Networking with Kata Containers

                                 WHAT IS QEMU?

   Software Engineering can solve any problem using another layer of
   abstraction…except for the problem of having too many abstraction layers.
   QEMU is a special abstraction layer that solves several difficulties with
   virtualization.

   Recall that KVM is a Type 2 hypervisor and part of the Linux kernel. But, KVM
   uses all the hardware features of VMX, so it is as fast and secure as a Type
   1 hypervisor. Kata Containers combines QEMU with KVM for further speed
   improvements.

   QEMU is a virtual machine monitor (VMM) that runs on top of an operating
   system host, like Linux. QEMU is also an emulator that does binary translation
   and can even run programs compiled for different CPUs or OSs on that host.
   So, QEMU is really good at emulation.

   In Kata Containers, QEMU quickly boots virtual machines (VMs) for KVM
   by using emulation. A special version of QEMU provides highly optimized
   emulators to speed boot time and reduce interpretation of ACPI interfaces.
   Other emulators provide the root filesystem as a persistent memory device.
   QEMU also provides hot-plugging devices, during the launch process, allowing
   devices and virtual CPUs to be added to the VM only when needed.

   All this speeds the construction of VMs and makes Kata Containers execute
   really fast.

    Connecting containers to a network is accomplished with a virtual
network created by the container engine on the host. The container engine
connects this virtual network to the real network, using appropriate filters,
including a network address filter (NAT). Docker connects the containers

to this network using a virtual Ethernet (veth) device. However, virtual
machines normally use a TAP37 device. The problem in Kata Containers is
that all devices are emulated through QEMU, and QEMU does not support
veth interfaces. The solution implemented in Kata Containers requires
the kata-runtime to bridge between the TAP device in QEMU and the host
virtual network created by the container engine. Figure 4-18 shows this
configuration graphically, with the traffic from the Docker virtual network
running through the TAP device emulated by QEMU and then into the
container in the VM.
    Figure 4-19 shows the series of interactions between the Kata
Containers components to create a container in a virtual machine. The
virtcontainers library as part of the kata-runtime essentially does all the
work to create the VM, start the Proxy, create the container sandbox that
the container will run in, and then create the container, and finally start
the kata-shim to communicate with the container.
    Once the container is created, it can be started and used with the
start message. In Kata Containers, the start message does not create
the container as it does with most container engines. The container
was already created with the create command, as shown in Figure 4-19.
Instead, start just forwards the start message to the kata-agent, and the
kata-agent starts the container’s primary process.

37
    TAP device copies all traffic from the network into the device, just like a “tap”
  A
  on a phone line.

   Docker        kata-runtime                     virtcontainers                            hypervisor          proxy   agent                                   shim

            create
                                CreateSandbox()

                                          Sandbox
                                           Ready

                                                            createNetwork()
                                                            Execute PreStart Hooks
                                                              Start VM (inside the netns)
                                                                     VM started
                                                                               Starte Proxy
                                                                                                   Connect the VM
                                                                                  CreateSandbox()
                                                                                  Sandbox Created
                                                                                  CreateContainer()
                                                                                  Container Created
                                                                                                         Start Shim
                                                                                                                                ReadStdout() (blocking call)
                                                                                                                                ReadStderr() (blocking call)
                                                                                                                                WaitProcess() (blocking call)

                                        Container
                                         Ready
                          End of CreateSandbox()
        End of create

   Docker        kata-runtime                     virtcontainers                            hypervisor          proxy   agent                                   shim

Figure 4-19. Kata Containers create command

 Kata Containers Summary
With Kata Containers, you can have security and performance. Virtual
machines utilize hardware separation to provide increased containment
between containers while creatively using different software abstractions
to maintain the same software APIs to start up and control the containers
themselves. As we saw with ACRN, there are areas of attack that could
breech the system, including the QEMU virtualized drivers, and the Kata
Shim and Runtime. Table 4-5 outlines the analysis of the Kata Containers
against our containment security requirements.

Table 4-5. Kata Containers Security Summary
Operating System         Grade     Comments
Security Principles

Memory Disclosure by     B         Most privileged attackers are restricted from
Privileged User                    viewing or tampering the VM memory. QEMU
Memory Tampering by      B         and the KVM, including their virtualized
Privileged User                    devices, remain as potential privileged
                                   attackers on the VM memory. Platforms
                                   with multi-key total memory encryption
                                   (MKTME) can provide protection but should
                                   include integrity as well as encryption. See
                                   the following article for attacks on encrypted
                                   memory: https://arxiv.org/ftp/
                                   arxiv/papers/1712/1712.05090.pdf
Execution Interference   C         Most privileged attackers are restricted
by Privileged User                 from viewing or tampering with workloads
                                   in the VM. QEMU and the KVM, including
                                   their virtualized devices, remain as potential
                                   privileged attackers on the VM execution,
                                   though this is expected and cannot be
                                   avoided. However, the Kata Shim and
                                   Runtime provide targets for privileged
                                   attackers to subvert workloads running
                                   in the VMs, and these processes are not
                                   protected.
                                                                    (continued)

Table 4-5. (continued)

Operating System        Grade     Comments
Security Principles

Data Leakage via Side   C         Side channels are most concerning for
Channels                          VMs and container systems, as there may
                                  be applications of different trust levels
                                  running inside different containers or VMs.
                                  Updates to the Linux kernel and microcode
                                  patches for the serious side-channel CVEs
                                  are available. There continue to be security
                                  patches for KVM and QEMU, as late as
                                  October 30, 2018.
                                  For additional information, see www.
                                  qemu.org/2018/01/04/spectre/ and
                                  www.redhat.com/archives/rhsa-
                                  announce/2018-­October/thread.html
                                  for Red Hat kvm-qemu patches.
Execution Information   C         Execution leakage is similar to memory
Leakage via Side                  leakage and requires multi-key total
Channels                          memory encryption (MKTME) for protection
                                  but must also include integrity protection as
                                  well as encryption. Inference of execution
                                  is still possible under MKTME if page loads
                                  and misses are observable by the attacker.
                                  Just as we see in SGX, the operating system
                                  kernel remains as a potential attacker here.
                                                                  (continued)

Table 4-5. (continued)

Operating System          Grade      Comments
Security Principles

Trusted I/O               -          Trusted I/O is not supported in Kata
                                     Containers.
Application Flexibility   A          Any application can build into Kata
                                     Containers, and the support of many devices
                                     through virtual device drivers improves the
                                     level of support and flexibility of the Kata
                                     Containers solution.

 Trusted Execution Environments
Even with the protections afforded to applications by containers and
virtual machines, some applications are so sensitive that they require
even greater separation protections. Examples of such applications
include payment applications that deal with credit card transactions
or authentication applications that deal with fingerprints or other
biometrics. Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs) are application
execution containers that are separate from the operating system and
other applications on the platform and provide enhanced memory
and execution separation characteristics. TEEs provide containment
guarantees that prevent even the administrator or root from interfering
with or peeking at the secrets of an application. This section looks at two
such TEEs, Intel’s Software Guard Extensions (SGX) and Android Trusty.

 Software Guard Extensions
Software Guard Extensions (SGX) is a ring 3 TEE, meaning that SGX is
directly accessible to applications, and applications running in SGX
have the same type of privileges (ring 3) as other applications on the

platform. SGX creates a TEE from a special memory cache and a secure
mode of the CPU, removing the entire operating system from the trusted
computing base (TCB); this means that unlike other TEEs, SGX does not
even depend on secure boot to instantiate a trusted environment. For
applications to use SGX however, the operating system must support
access to the SGX instructions and the SGX memory cache. Support for
SGX is available for Microsoft Windows and many Linux distributions,
including Ubuntu Desktop. SGX has not been ported to Ubuntu IoT Core.
     An application running SGX is called an enclave, and an SGX enclave
is actually part of an application. An enclave is built like a dynamically
loadable library (DLL) or shared object library (SO), to use Linux
terminology. The enclave is loaded by an application and, from the
operating system perspective, the enclave is an extension of the process
space of the application that loaded it. There are three primary differences
between a regular application and an enclave:

      •   The way the enclave memory is treated

      •   The way the enclave memory is loaded

      •   The way the enclave is executed

    Memory for an enclave comes from a special pool of memory called
the Enclave Page Cache (EPC). EPC memory is encrypted by the processor
and is only accessible in SGX mode. Regular applications, or even the
operating system, that try to access EPC memory see only encrypted junk.
Only when an enclave is executing can the CPU provide the decryption key
so the memory page contents can be viewed. Likewise writes to the EPC
pages are also restricted. These guarantees are part of what makes SGX
mode a TEE. Platforms must allocate memory into the EPC, thus making
that memory unavailable for regular applications; a new feature of SGX is
the dynamic allocation of pages to the EPC, but this is not supported on all
processors yet.

     The second thing that makes SGX mode a TEE is the special
way that code and data are loaded into an enclave. When a regular
application asks the operating system for an enclave to be created,
it provides the DLL (or SO) that contains the enclave’s code. That
code must be signed. We will discuss how the code is signed and with
what key in a moment. SGX includes a special loader that verifies the
signature on the enclave as it is loading its code and data into EPC
memory. If the signature indicates the enclave code is authentic, then
the loader activates the enclave and the application can use the enclave
functions. If the signature indicates the enclave has been tampered
with or is not signed with an authorized key, then the load of the
enclave fails. All code and initial data pages loaded into an enclave are
verified as authentic, which indicates that the authorized party that
signed that code also trusts that code. This makes the code running
inside SGX trustworthy and another attribute of SGX as a TEE.
     The final thing that makes SGX mode a TEE is the fact that it is
a special mode of the CPU, and this creates execution separation
between regular applications and enclaves. The execution of enclave
code within SGX is separate from execution inside the operating system
and the execution in applications. There have been side-channel
attacks on SGX, just as there have been on other execution modes. This
is a result of some shared micro-architectural state and shared cache
state; there is also a dependency from SGX on the operating system to
load and manage memory pages which creates another type of side
channel. Changes to the CPU microcode have addressed the attacks
that are known, and further changes are being made to hyperthreading
mode to address additional issues. We talk more about this in the
section on threats later.

     Creating code that can be run as an enclave requires a special key.
This is because the enclave code must be verified by the SGX launcher
when the enclave is loaded. The SGX launcher uses a key set by the BIOS
during boot to verify enclave programs. If an enclave is signed using a key
which itself is signed by the SGX launcher key in BIOS, then the enclave
is trusted. By default, the BIOS includes an Intel key. Intel will sign an
enclave developer’s key after they submit a formal request and fill out
some paperwork. This means that any developer with such a key could run
enclave code on any platform with an Intel processor. Intel realizes this
should be a bit more controlled, so they allow the owner of the platform
to change the key in the BIOS to a key of their own. This means that the
platform owner can change the behavior of the SGX launcher to approve
only enclaves that they themselves trust; this is done by changing that
BIOS key.
     SGX is a powerful mode on Intel processors that provides a trusted
execution environment to applications. This gives applications the ability
to put their most sensitive code inside a trusted execution container and
keep the operation of that code, and any secrets that the code uses, away
from other applications and even the operating system.

 SGX Security Summary
Table 4-6 provides a summary of the SGX system security features for
comparison with other systems.

Table 4-6. SGX TEE Security Summary
TEE Security Principles   Grade     Comments

Memory Disclosure by      A         SGX uses a separate memory cache that is
Privileged User                     encrypted by the CPU and is separated from
                                    the operating system and other applications.
Memory Tampering by       A         SGX mode prevents access to memory
Privileged User                     pages in the EPC unless an SGX application
                                    is executing, which locks out other
                                    applications and the operating system from
                                    tampering with the memory. Page attributes
                                    are set and locked at page set up time
                                    when the enclave is loaded.
Execution Interference    B         The operating system still controls the
by Privileged User                  page tables, including allocation of pages
                                    and page eviction; a misbehaving OS can
                                    perform a DOS on an enclave and perform
                                    some side-channel attacks using the
                                    enclave’s usage of pages. Protection of
                                    secrets within an SGX enclave still requires
                                    the use of constant-time programming
                                    constructs and careful use of pages and
                                    cache to avoid such side-channel attacks.
                                                                    (continued)

Table 4-6. (continued)

TEE Security Principles   Grade      Comments

Data Leakage via Side     C          Research on SGX side channels, including
Channels                             L1 Terminal Fault, have been reported.
Execution Information     B          These are a result of microarchitectural
Leakage via Side                     side channels in the CPU itself. CPU patches
Channels                             are effective in mitigating most of these
                                     attacks, other than hyperthreading-­based
                                     attacks.38 Other options including forcing
                                     CPU core scheduling are potential solutions.
                                     (https://www.usenix.org/system/
                                     files/conference/atc18/atc18-
                                     oleksenko.pdf)
Trusted I/O               -          Trusted I/O is not supported in SGX.
Application Flexibility   A          Any application can contain enclave code
                                     which can be loaded into SGX. Commercial
                                     development of enclaves requires a key
                                     from Intel, or the platform must be set up
                                     with a special SGX launcher key.

A
  ndroid Trusty
The Trusty TEE39 is an offering from Google that includes an operating
system, a set of drivers for Android to communicate with Trusty, and APIs for
applications to use applications running in Trusty. Trusty is an interesting
TEE that has some very different properties as compared with Intel SGX.

38
   h? ttps://software.intel.com/security-software-guidance/api-app/sites/
    default/files/336996-Speculative-Execution-Side-Channel-Mitigations.pdf
39
     Google. “Trusty TEE.” https://source.android.com/security/trusty

    The first primary difference is Trusty is designed to operate on a
completely separate processor from the main processor running the
untrusted operating system. Trusty uses its own memory management
unit (MMU) and provides virtualized memory for all the trusted apps
running in Trusty. All the applications must be single threaded, though
multithreaded applications may be provided in a future update.
    The next significant difference with Trusty is that it can have access
to devices, platform keys, and other resources and give access to those
resources to Trusty applications. Since SGX runs in ring 3, it does not have
privileged access to devices and does not currently have a trusted I/O
mechanism.
    The last difference in Trusty is that trusted applications are compiled
into Trusty and run as an event-driven server. Applications cannot be
added dynamically into Trusty – they must be designed and built into the
Trusty kernel. And each trusted application running in Trusty is accessible
to any application in the untrusted operating system; Trusty applications
are not bound to a particular process in the untrusted processor.

 Trusty TEE Security Summary
Trusty is an interesting TEE that provides significant trust for platform
developers, but it does not expose the capability for end users to create
their own trusted applications.
    Table 4-7 provides a summary of the Trusty TEE security features for
comparison with other systems.

Table 4-7. Trusty TEE Security Summary
TEE Security Principles     Grade       Comments

Memory Disclosure by        A           Because Trusty uses a physically
Privileged User                         separate memory from the untrusted
Memory Tampering by         A           operating system and its own MMU,
Privileged User                         disclosure and tampering are avoided.
                                        The drawback is the additional HW cost
Data Leakage via Side       A
                                        for this separation.
Channels
Execution Interference by   A           Because Trusty uses a physically
Privileged User                         separate processor (or physical core)
Execution Information     A             from the untrusted operating system and
Leakage via Side Channels               its own MMU, disclosure and tampering
                                        are avoided. The drawback is the
                                        additional HW cost for this separation.
Trusted I/O                 B           Trusted devices are built into the system
                                        and allocated when Trusty software is
                                        compiled.
Application Flexibility     D           Only the applications built into the Trusty
                                        software are available – no dynamic
                                        loading of software applications or
                                        services is possible.

 Containment Summary
In this section, we reviewed different types of application containment,
ranging from software-only containment using containers, hardware-­
assisted containment with virtual machines, hardware TEE with encrypted
memory and special processor state with SGX, and full hardware
separation TEE with Trusty. The more hardware used in the containment

solution, the greater the level of security provided by the solution.
However, there is a balance to be had, as we saw with Trusty, because
software is more flexible than hardware. A full hardware solution, while
more secure, creates limitations to what can be accomplished and what
usage models applications can execute.

 Network Stack and Security Management
This section signals the shift in our chapter from platform software
to the management plane. Networking and connectivity are vital to
an IoT system, and therefore the entirety of Chapter 5 is devoted to
this subject. We leave the discussion of the network technologies and
protocol stacks, including the threats, to that future chapter. However,
before we leave the networking topic completely, we want to cover an
important software library for network packet processing, the DPDK,
as well as a few software packages that make security management
easier.

 Intel Data Plane Development Kit
The Data Plane Development Kit (DPDK) is a set of software libraries
and device drivers that make constructing software networking stacks
with advanced features very easy and very performant. We talk about
the DPDK because it is a useful component to speed the development
of end-to-end security features and in the implementation of network
security policies to enforce network restrictions. This library exposes
the features and capabilities of network cards into ring 3, enabling better
performance when processing packets at high speed. This is important
for edge devices implementing industrial control loops, because the
DPDK allows software to reliably receive and send packets within a

minimum number of CPU cycles. The Linux Foundation40 provides a
downloadable version of the DPDK, and Intel contributes specialized
features and drivers that directly leverage Intel silicon performance.
The DPDK boosts packet processing throughput and provides multicore
support, facilitates processing of packets in user space (ring 3) to avoid
costly transitions between user and kernel space, and enables direct
access to devices for high-speed IO.
    The latest DPDK version is 18.05 and supports the following features:

       •   Support for multiple NIC cards, including virtualized
           drivers

       •   Support for cryptographic operations in cryptodev
           library

       •   Support for event handling in the eventdev library

       •   Baseband wireless in the bbdev library

       •   Data compression support in the compressdev library
           (new in DPDK 18.05)

     Figure 4-20 shows the architecture of the DPDK library.

40
  h? ttps://www.dpdk.org/ and documentation is available online at http://fast.
   dpdk.org/doc/pdf-guides/

                   Intel® DPDK Libraries
                                                                   Customer
                      Buffer Management                           Application

                      Queue Management                             Customer
                                                                  Application
                   Packet Flow Classification
                                                                   Customer
                     NIC Poll Mode Drivers                        Application

                                Environmental Abstraction Layer

                                  Linux Execution Environment

                                       Target IA Platform

Figure 4-20. The Intel DPDK library structure

    The DPDK is very comprehensive and supports multiple hardware
capabilities across Intel, AMD, ARM, NXP, and other hardware
manufacturers. In keeping with our theme in this chapter, let us review
the security capabilities and the Intel-specific hardware features that are
supported through the DPDK.
    The DPDK supports standard modes for the Advanced Encryption
Algorithm (AES), including Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) mode, Electronic
Code Book (ECB) mode, Counter (CTR) mode,11 and a special mode used
primarily for block storage devices, XTS41 mode. All modes are supported

41
    TS is actually considered a tweak cipher, a modification of the underlying
  X
  cipher using parameters. XTS stands for XEX-based tweaked-codebook
  mode with ciphertext stealing. XEX is a tweak cipher mode, which stands for
  XOR-Encrypt-XOR, which was designed by Phillip Rogaway, 2004, “Efficient
  Instantiations of Tweakable Blockciphers and Refinements to Modes OCB and
  PMAC,” http://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/papers/offsets.pdf

with the standard key sizes, 128-bits, 192-bits, and 256-bits. DPDK also
supported DOCSIS encryption and DES and 3DES.42
    In addition to encryption, the DPDK supports hashing algorithms
using the SHA243 algorithms, SHA2-256, SHA2-384, and SHA2-512. The
older SHA1 algorithm is also supported, but should only be used for
interoperability reasons; the use of SHA2-256 should be the minimum
requirement for IoT systems.
    The DPDK supports the Intel SHA-NI and AES-NI instructions (see
Chapter 3, section “CPU hosted Crypto implementations”), providing
access to hardware acceleration of these algorithms. In addition, AES-­
GCM, the Galois Counter Mode of AES, is further enhanced by combining
the AES-NI instruction with carryless multiplication instructions to speed
performance of the Galois integrity tag calculation.44
    The DPDK provides compatibility with other software and hardware
implementations of cryptography, even providing a full software
implementation using the OpenSSL open source cryptographic library.
Using these different plugins for the DPDK cryptodev library, a fully
portable application can be built that makes use of the best hardware
features the platform has to offer. The use of the DPDK allows applications

42
     ES, Data Encryption Standard, and 3DES, Triple Data Encryption Standard,
   D
   are older modes included only for interoperability. It is strongly recommended
   to avoid use of these modes unless they are required for interoperability. In IoT
   systems, there is no good reason to use such modes.
43
    SHA, Secure Hash Algorithm, are algorithms defined in the NIST Secure Hash
    Standard (SHS) for cryptographic hash algorithms. The older version SHA1
    is deprecated for most uses today. The SHA2 family of algorithms, https://
    nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.180-4.pdf, covers multiple hash
    digest bit lengths.
44
     https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/intel-carry-less-
     multiplication-instruction-and-its-usage-for-computing-
     the-gcm-mode and https://software.intel.com/en-us/articles/
     aes-gcm-encryption-performance-on-intel-xeon-e5-v3-processors

direct access to the best cryptographic acceleration hardware of the Intel
platform, and compatibility to other platform’s cryptographic accelerators
as well.

S
  ecurity Management
Security management is the combination of active processes and
executed procedures during installation, configuration, operation, and
decommissioning of systems that preserves the confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of those system and network resources for the approved
mission(s) of the organization. This chapter focuses on software, not
processes and procedures. However, there are software tools and agents
that directly aid the security management process. We look at a few of
those here, just for completeness in our discussion.

 Secure Device Onboarding
The very first issue requiring a solution in an IoT system is device
provisioning or how to provision devices so they can connect to the
correct back-end cloud system or device management system. A common
solution is to preprovision devices during manufacturing to connect
to a specific cloud agent. Microsoft Azure Sphere uses this approach.
While it works, that solution locks the device into a specific cloud, and
the approach can have impacts on high-speed manufacturing. A better
approach is to provide flexible and secure onboarding for any device to
any cloud system. Intel’s Secure Device Onboard (SDO45) provides this
security capability using an EPID46 device identity key. Figure 4-21 shows
the provisioning lifecycle of a device, from manufacturing to installation.
This can be any device from a gateway or server down to a smart sensor.

45
  h? ttps://software.intel.com/en-us/secure-device-onboard
46
    See the discussion of Intel’s Enhanced Privacy ID (EPID) in Chapter 3.

                                                           2 ANY DEVICE      4 DATA
                                                            MANAGEMENT      FORWARDING
    CONNECTED                                                             for analytics, etc.
                          1                                   SERVICE
      DEVICE
                               Zero-Touch Onboarding
                                (anonymous identity +
                                  encrypted channel)

   Device Management                Secure Update
      Service Agent           Device image and corporate
                                     key download                                                CUSTOMER’s IOT
        Secure Intel HW                            3
         Root of Trust                                                                              PLATFORM
                                                                                                and Cloud Analytics

Figure 4-21. Intel’s Secure Device Onboard preserves device privacy
and provisions “Any Device to Any Cloud”

    SDO utilizes a few hardware security features to construct this high-­
level service, including

       •       The platform’s root of trust containing an identity key;
               an EPID group signature key is the preferred identity
               key, since it provides privacy for the device installation,
               but an RSA or ECDSA key may also be used.

       •       The Intel SDO Client firmware executing inside a TEE;
               SDO currently uses the CSME discussed in Chapter 3
               for its TEE, but SGX or Trusty are alternative TEEs for
               SDO.

       •       Secure storage on the device to hold the manufacturer’s
               public key, a GUID, and an ownership credential.

     During manufacturing, a digital record of the device is created, which
is referred to as the ownership credential. The ownership credential
includes the device’s unique identifier (GUID) and the owner’s public
key; the owner credential is signed by a private key belonging to the
manufacturer and includes an integrity checksum to prevent modification
or forgery of the ownership credential. The manufacturer endorses the
ownership credential by digitally signing it with the manufacturer’s private
key when the device is sold. This endorsement can be repeated in the

supply chain, allowing a deferred binding between the credentials stored
in the device and those of the device management service (e.g., running
within a particular AWS account) who will control the device in operation.
    When the device is installed (Step 1 in Figure 4-21), the device contacts
Intel’s Secure Device Onboard Rendezvous server and is connected with the
device management service which was specified by the device’s owner. As a
precursor to the device install step, the preferred device management server
must have been registered with the SDO Rendezvous service by the device
owner using the ownership credentials. The SDO protocol between the
device and Rendezvous server validates the ownership credential, as well
as the authenticity of the device and the Rendezvous server to each other.
At the end of the SDO protocol, the device is forwarded to the proper device
management service to complete provisioning (Step 2 in Figure 4-­21),
allowing the device management service to install a management agent on
the device. SDO prevents unauthorized entities from taking control of the
device and gives the end customer flexibility to provision the device to any
management service or cloud back end. The device management service
can then update the device with new software and link the device to the
preferred back-end cloud system (Steps 3 and 4 in Figure 4-21). Intel SDO
can also be reactivated by the device owner at any time, allowing the device
to be reprovisioned or for device resale.
    Intel Secure Device Onboarding solves the first problem an IoT device
encounters – how to securely connect to the right back-end service for
management and operations. Using hardware security elements inherent
in the platform, SDO provides a low-cost and flexible solution with high
security.

P
  latform Integrity
Once a device is provisioned, maintaining the integrity of the platform
software is vital to keeping an IoT system operating. Platform integrity
means ensuring that a device has booted the platform software intended

by the system and that the platform firmware, boot loader, and operating
system have not been corrupted. Device management software can query
the platform’s integrity state and determine if something needs to be
updated or remediated. But, some software element must reside on the
device to calculate the platform integrity and then communicate it up to
the device management software in a meaningful way.
    In Chapter 3, we discuss protected boot technologies included in
Intel platforms, including PTT47 and TPMs. These hardware elements
use software in the operating system, boot loader, and BIOS to measure
the platform during boot. These measurements are stored in hardware-­
protected storage in PTT or the TPM. The software to access these
measurements is included in the trusted services stack (TSS) that was
written according to the Trusted Computing Group’s (TCG) specification
for TPM2. As shown in Figure 4-22, this software stack is comprehensive
and, besides platform integrity measurement, includes features for other
TPM operations including encryption, key generation, secure storage,
and attestation. The application-level APIs are all provided in the System
API (SAPI)48 or the Enhanced SAPI (ESAPI)49 and are defined by the TCG;
the FAPI is still under development. The Feature API (FAPI) would be the
easiest to use and abstracts many details of the TPM from the application,
while the SAPI provides near-transparent use of the TPM commands and
responses.

47
     latform Trust Technology (PTT) and Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
   P
48
    https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TSS_SAPI_
    Version-1.1_Revision-22_review_030918.pdf
49
     https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-content/uploads/TSS_TSS-2.0-
     Enhanced-System-API_V0.9_R03_Public-Review-1.pdf

     TCG TPM2 SOFTWARE STACK: DESIGN                                                                                  Application
     System API (SAPI)               Enhanced SAPI (ESAPI)            Feature API (FAPI)                                APP-1
     • 1:1 mapping to                • Additional utility functions   • Spec in draft form
                                                                      • No implementation yet                                  APP-2
        TPM2 commands                • Provides Cryptographic
     • No file I/O                     functions for sessions         • File IO                                                      APP-3

                                     • No file I/O                    • Requires heap
     • No crypto                                                      • Must be able to do retries                                     FAPI                        Crypto
     • No heap                       • Requires heap / does           • Context based state                   U                                                    Library
                                       memory allocations             • Must support static linking           s                     ESAPI
                                                                                                              e
     TPM Command Transmission Interface (TCTI)                                                                r                                                  Marshalling
     • Abstract command / response mechanism,                         • No crypto, heap, file I/O                               SAPI
     • Decouple APIs from command transport / IPC                     • Dynamic loading / diopen API

     TPM Access Broker and Resource Manager (TAB/RM)                                                              K
                                                                                                                              TPM Command Transmission Interface (TCTI)
     • Power management                                               • Abstract Limitations of TPM Storage
                                                                                                                  e
     • Potentially no file IO - depends on power mgmt.                • No crypto                                 r
                                                                                                                  n       TPM Access Broker (TAB) & Resource Manager (RM)
     TPM Device Driver                                                                                            e
     • Device interface (CRB / polling)                                                                           l                          TPM Device Driver
     • Pre-boot log handoff

Figure 4-22. Intel TPM2 software stack (TSS)50

N
  etwork Defense
IoT systems are all about communication, and without some type of
defensive measures, these IoT devices would be easy targets for network
attackers. Common network defense capabilities including firewalls and
intrusion defense software are important to add to any IoT device. Some
devices are so small and so resource constrained that no attempt is even
made to add any network protections. However, there are tools that can
provide some reasonable protections and should be considered.
    The first step of network defense, of course, is to limit the applications
and services that open ports to listen for connections. In fact, if your IoT
device is so resource constrained that you are considering putting no
network defenses on the device, then there should be no listening services
either – only outgoing connections. But because firewalling is the most
basic defense, a program that intercepts the incoming network traffic to
check for anomalies is important and should be considered.
    On Linux distributions, the recommended program for network defense
is TCP Wrappers. This program can be called from inetd or configured into
the hosts.allow and hosts.deny configurations. TCP Wrappers allows the
system to be configured to allow or deny connections based on the network

50
  h? ttps://software.intel.com/en-us/blogs/2018/08/29/tpm2-software-
   stack-open-source

address and protocol. Additionally, other commands can be executed when
rules in the TCP Wrappers configuration are triggered, such as sending
an alert email or adding an entry to the syslog. Configuration of the TCP
Wrappers file can provide extensive filtering and can be set up so that normal
traffic and operations easily get through without any overhead. Other options
for firewalling include directly using the kernel netfilter or configuring the
netfilter through ipchains. Significant material is available both on the Web
and in Linux books, so that information will not be repeated here.
     Finally, good logging for what is happening on the network and on a
device is vital to reconstructing an attack or understanding an attempted
intrusion. There are numerous programs for attack detection that operate
on both Linux and Windows and can be compiled for other operating
systems as well. TCPdump and snort51 are common programs for detecting
network intrusions or malformed packets on a device. Snort can be turned
into a full-scale network intrusion detection system where devices capture
traffic and send dangerous looking packets to a central server for deeper
analysis. Suricata is a similar robust open source solution for intrusion
detection. These types of intrusion detection system are very useful for
IoT system for early detection of attacks and fast response to prevent such
attacks from bringing down the IoT system.

P
  latform Monitoring
Security management includes monitoring a device and its workload for
anomalies, in the event that a network attacker is able to circumvent the
network defenses in place on the device. The monitoring functions are tied
into the device management agent on the platform, allowing problems to
be reported back to the management servers.
    In the section on Zephyr, we discussed watchdog timers used to
monitor for long running privileged threads. Remember the problem in
Zephyr was a privileged thread that does not yield back to the operating

51
   https://www.snort.org/

system which can then starve out the execution of other processes on
the system. The operating system can prevent this by using a hardware
timer started before releasing control to the high-privileged thread; if
the thread does not yield back in a certain amount of time, the hardware
timer causes a non-maskable interrupt (NMI) that stops execution of
everything else and returns control back to an interrupt service routine
(ISR) in the operating system. When the operating system regains control,
it can terminate the offending thread and report the situation back to the
management service. Sometimes this doesn’t work. It often fails because
the attacked thread had enough privileges on the system, allowing the
attacker to disable or continually reset the timer, effectively disabling the
watchdog.
     There are other unique options for performing platform monitoring
that can identify side-channel attacks or threads that have potentially been
corrupted by network attackers. Several techniques are published[52, 53]
that utilize hardware performance counters in the CPU microarchitecture
to characterize and monitor software and detect when attacks are likely
present. This information can be used to shut down the attacking threads
or reboot the system into a known good state.

 McAfee Embedded Control
There is one last software capability that deserves mention in security
management that provides some unique system authorization
capabilities. McAfee Embedded Control (MEC)54 is a software program

52
     Survey of Cyber Security Countermeasures Using Hardware Performance
   A
   Counters, https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.10868.pdf
53
    Cache-Based Side-Channel Attacks Detection through Intel Cache Monitoring
    Technology and Hardware Performance Counters, https://hal.inria.fr/
    hal-01762803/document
54
     https://www.mcafee.com/enterprise/en-us/products/embedded-control.html

that provides extended access control and integrity to IoT platforms. MEC
protects both executable as well as data files on a platform, ensuring that
those files are not accidentally or maliciously modified, even by a user with
administrative rights. MEC creates a new privileged user on the platform
that is only accessible through the MEC admin interface and manages
a database of integrity checksums over directories and files specified by
the MEC admin. MEC includes an augmented launcher that is integrated
with the Windows or Linux operating system, allowing MEC to check the
integrity of executable files before launch. The access control database
allows MEC to also specify what services and devices an executable can
access, providing even stricter control on running applications. This
means that even if a program were maliciously corrupted at Runtime, the
attacker would not be able to use unauthorized system resources, and ROP
or JOP attacks would only be able to modify the use of authorized system
resources, not fundamentally change the resources to which the program
has access.
    MEC creates a very powerful protection for IoT devices, and
this system works extremely well when the platform’s software and
configuration does not change regularly. MEC can be integrated easily
in McAfee ePO device management suite as well (see the discussion in
the “Device Management” section). In some versions of MEC, dynamic
protection of memory is also provided, limiting the effect of buffer
overflows. A limited version of MEC is included in Intel’s IoT Gateway
Software Suite,55 and McAfee continues to add improvements and support
for other operating systems in MEC. Upgrading to the fully featured
McAfee Embedded Control Pro from the basic MEC version included in
Intel’s IoT Gateway is a smooth transition, fully supported by the MEC
admin interface.

55
   https://shopiotmarketplace.com/iot/index.html#/details?pix=58

 Network Stack and Security Summary
In this section we looked at various software components that can provide
effective network defense and attack detection, and even be used to
build comprehensive end-to-end security using the cryptographic library
in the DPDK. Common IoT problems like platform integrity, device
provisioning, and system authorization can be solved using specialized
packages like the TSS, Intel SDO, and McAfee Embedded Control. While
these problems cannot be solved for free, the cost in additional compute
resources and Runtime RAM may likely provide the difference between
a platform that is regularly being attacked and draining the maintenance
and remediation budget and a platform with adequate tools and packages
that is resilient to attack.

 Device Management
IoT systems are composed of thousands of devices, and with so many
devices, manual management is prohibitive. In other cases, IoT devices are
physically located in remote or difficult-to-reach locations, increasing the
cost of sending out a repair person in a “truck roll.” Autonomous device
management using a cloud-based management solution is essential to
preserving an IoT system’s return on investment (ROI).

                                                                     Management
              Device Agent
                                                                       Console

                                                                   Device
                         Device             Command
                                                                Information
                       Event Input           Queue
                                                                 Database
                                     Device Management System

Figure 4-23. Notional cloud-based device management system

     Cloud-based device management systems include a few common
elements, as shown in Figure 4-23. On the device, a management agent
performs the actions requested by the management system and also
provides data to the management system on the device’s health. How
such an agent is installed on a device can sometimes be an issue; however
device provisioning solutions like SDO covered in a prior section provide
convenient solutions to this issue. A management console, normally
implemented as a browser-based web application, retrieves data from the
device management system and presents usable information to system
administrators, allowing admins to schedule maintenance, perform
actions on groups of devices, or even dive into details of a specific device
to troubleshoot problems or investigate trouble tickets. The actual device
management system in the Cloud is what separates different systems.
Generally, each management system must have three elements:

      •   A Device Event Input queue allowing devices to provide
          status and report problems

      •   A Command Queue allowing administrators to push
          out commands to devices

      •   A Device Information Database containing information
          on each device in the system

    The security services that device management system must provide
include

      •   Authentication: Ensures that both devices and
          administrators on the device management system are
          who they claim to be. Cryptographic credentials issued
          to these parties are essential to maintaining proof of
          identity for all entities on the system.

      •     Authorization: Commands to devices can be
            disruptive to the services provided by the IoT system,
            or even potentially destructive to the device itself. A
            reboot command to several devices might cause a
            temporary denial of service, but a forced operating
            system update with corrupt software could bring down
            a system for days or even months.

      •     Confidentiality and Integrity: Although data sent
            via device management systems do not typically
            include personally identifiable information (PII),
            the commands and device health data can contain
            sensitive information. Integrity of this data is vital to
            prevent tampering or accidental corruption of the data
            in transit, but confidentiality may also be warranted
            depending on the information contained in commands
            and data updates from devices.

      •     Nonrepudiation: Guaranteed proof of source
            attached to health data or even the collection of other
            environmental data around devices could be crucial to
            the IoT system. Guaranteeing data originated from a
            particular device is part of data provenance.

      •     Defense in Depth: Is a layering of defenses to protect
            system elements from hacking. This includes attacks
            on the devices, gateways, and on the cloud systems
            and management consoles. Because the device
            management system represents the most significant
            network attack surface, and many of the software
            elements attached to the device management
            agents require elevated privileges to perform their
            operations, the device management system itself

         must be constructed to prevent attackers from gaining
         control over the IoT systems. Careful attention to the
         construction of both the device agent and the interfaces
         and APIs presented by the cloud system is necessary to
         prevent successful attacks.

    This section reviews two different device management systems, one
designed for small to medium deployments (Mesh Central) and one
designed for large deployments (Helix Device Cloud).

 Mesh Central
Mesh Central is a device management solution appropriate for small- to
medium-sized IoT deployments. Mesh is an agent technology, which
means that each managed device must be running the Mesh Agent
software component. Mesh allows a Mesh Administrator to gain remote
access and control of their devices through a variety of means, including
direct shell access, dashboards, and connection via custom web applets.
Mesh also provides peer-to-peer (i.e., Machine-to-Machine [M2M])
interactions, allowing devices to communicate directly to each other,
without a human administrator being involved; this enables the IoT M2M
type actions for true IoT automation.
    Mesh Central is an Intel open source project and has a wide array of
services targeted for remote monitoring and management of computers
and devices. Users can manage all their devices from a single web site,
no matter the device location or the device position behind routers and
proxies, and this is all possible without needing to know the device’s IP
addresses. Mesh works by having each device generate a new unique RSA
key pair, and the hash of the public key becomes the device’s identity.
Mesh devices register to the Mesh Central Cloud by communicating
to devices around them and finding a path to the Mesh servers. This
information is found in a signed policy file that is shared among the

devices; however, this requires that devices be preprovisioned with a Mesh
client and a policy file, otherwise, and IP address and a path to the device
are needed for solutions like SDO to work properly.
    The following is a partial list of the actions a Mesh Administrator can
do to their connected devices:

        •   Opening a shell to run commands directly on the
            device

        •   Opening the device’s graphical desktop, displaying
            the device’s GUI, and providing mouse control on the
            device

        •   Installing, removing, and updating software on the
            device

        •   Activating a particular piece of software on the device
            or sending commands to that software (as if on a
            terminal on the device)

        •   Viewing files or logs on the device

      The following is a brief list of Mesh Central architectural elements:

        •   Each device is referred to as a node and is identified by
            a secure, provable identifier based on a self-generated
            (device-generated) RSA public key.

        •   Nodes are organized into an overlay network, meaning
            routing of Mesh messages occur from the Mesh server
            to the device, but potentially hopping from one device
            in the Mesh to another device in the Mesh in order
            to reach the actual destination device; this path may
            traverse different communication networks connecting
            each device.

     •    Agent and Server APIs are available for generic, secure
          messaging for Admin-to-Device and Device-to-­Device
          messaging.

     •    Agent Software Update is provided over-the-air
          (network) using signed and verified updates.

     •    Direct Connection from an admin web browser (via
          web sockets) directly to devices for custom applications
          in the browser to interact with, query, or control
          devices.

     •    A Mesh Developer API to add custom actions into the
          Mesh Agent running on devices.

              Database
              (MSSQL)

                                                         INTERNET            Some Mesh Nodes have
                                                         Connections via     direct access to the internet,
                                                      TCP & UDP Port 16990   but others have access only
                                                                             by hopping through another
                                                                             device via Mesh
                                       Swarm
                                       Server
   MSMQ

             AJAX Server

              Administrator view
              thru browser or                                                       Mesh of loT devices
              custom web application                                                And access gateways

Figure 4-24. Mesh Central device management system architecture

    As shown in Figure 4-24, Mesh Central is actually composed of four
different servers:

      •     The AJAX Server: Provides the primary interface for
            Mesh administrators
      •     The Swarm Server: Provides the primary interface for
            devices into Mesh

      •     The Database: Usually Microsoft SQL Server, stores
            data about devices

      •     The MSMQ: Provides message delivery among servers

    Mesh operates by having a bit of software, called the Mesh Agent
Software, on every device. This agent runs under a privileged account on
the device so that it is able to perform management on the device (e.g., run
software, install applications and services, activate hardware, etc.). The
Mesh Agent also has a configuration file, called the Mesh Agent Policy File,
that controls what the agent is allowed to do and information about the
Mesh control server.

Table 4-8. Mesh Central Device Management Analysis
Device Management       Grade     Comments
Security Principles

Authentication          C         Mesh requires devices to generate their own
                                  identity keys in software and then registers
                                  devices to the Mesh Swarm server without any
                                  device attestation or proof from a hardware
                                  root of trust. This forces device administrators
                                  to know the hostnames of devices that should
                                  be registering and ignore or boot off devices
                                  they do not trust.
                                                                     (continued)

Table 4-8. (continued)
Device Management     Grade   Comments
Security Principles

Authorization         C       Authorization of commands requires an
                              additional key be shared from the Mesh
                              Administrator, because commands are not
                              protected end to end, only hop to hop. Without
                              this additional layering of authorization (not
                              natively provided by Mesh), commands could
                              be forged by a rogue Mesh node.
Confidentiality and   A       All messages traversing the Mesh are
Integrity                     protected with strong integrity and
                              confidentiality, and session keys are
                              regenerated frequently. Protections are only
                              provided hop to hop, however, not end to end.
Repudiation           D       Mesh does not leverage a hardware root of
                              trust, so all keys are software generated. While
                              all the right actions (e.g., encrypted messages,
                              RSA identity keys, verification by clients) are
                              performed, there is no protection of credentials
                              on the device if an attacker were able to
                              compromise software on one of the systems.
Defense in Depth      D       Mesh runs the Mesh Agent as root by default;
                              significant rework of the client software is
                              required to segment high privilege tasks to
                              protected software agents.

 Wind River Helix Device Cloud
Helix Device Cloud (HDC) is an IoT device management solution by Wind
River. HDC is able to connect to IoT devices and gateways, manage device-­
generated data, automatically respond to device events, and perform
remote (OTA) software updates. HDC includes a significant back-end
system using Kafka that enables intelligent autonomous management of
devices and provides easy and secure device onboarding and provisioning
through Intel Secure Device Onboard (SDO). HDC adds an agent protocol
called DXL (Data Exchange Layer) to each edge device that enables
intelligent processing of data and secure end-to-end communication.
    With Helix Device Cloud, administrators can

      •     Maintain secure two-way connectivity to gateways and
            devices

      •     Perform flexible data collection to the Cloud and even
            distribute that data across multiple edge nodes using
            DXL’s powerful edge capabilities

      •     Receive immediate notification of device issues and use
            HDC Agent tools for remote diagnosis and repair
      •     Securely onboard new devices using SDO and upgrade
            new devices when first activated in the field

      •     Push new updates out to connected devices

      •     Collect and import data from IoT devices directly to
            enterprise systems

    HDC focuses on the device management and edge aggregation
services; HDC does not address applications and data analytics, but
provides mechanisms for these services to reach devices through HDC
using McAfee ePO plugins and call-outs to external services. For a more
complete overview of HDC, see the HDC Overview whitepaper.56

      Edge
     Device
                                                              Data Bus                                                       Streams                  Other
                                                                                                                                                     Parties,
          Gateway                              Bridge                                                                                                Systems
                                                                             Realtime
        (Moon Island)                                                       Processing
                                                                              Rules

       UDM                       DXL Brokers
       Agent                                                                                                      queries
                        MQTT

                                                                                                                                API Gateway
                        DXL                                                                                        auth

                                                                                                                                 (Mashery)
                        HTTP                                                                                                                         Targeted
                                    Data                                                                          asset
                                                                                                ePO App Server
                        etc...                                                                                                                       Consoles
      McAfee                      Collectors
     ePO Agent                                          Unstructured Structured                                   policy
                                                                                                                                              HTTP
                                                                                                                 telemetry                    REST
                                                                                     Metadata
                                                                                                                 provision
       Other                       Agent                                                                                                              Admin
      Services                    Handlers                                                                          ...
                                                         Compute         Analytics                                                                   Console
                                                                                                                   OTA

Figure 4-25. Wind River Helix Device Cloud device management
architecture

    Figure 4-25 shows the architecture of HDC. Devices connect to HDC
Cloud using HTTP, DXL, or MQTT57 protocols, and enterprise services
leverage the data in HDC through a set of REST APIs exposed by HDC
on the back end. Within HDC, there are three primary components:
the device connection protocols, the data bus that organizes and routes
messages and events, and the database that holds structured and
unstructured data, analytics, metadata, and compute workloads. A fourth

56
  h? ttps://software.intel.com/en-us/iot/cloud-analytics/cloud-helix
57
    MQTT – Message Queuing Telemetry Transport is an ISO standard protocol
    based on the publish-subscribe design pattern. MQTT is described in more
    detail in “Message Orchestration” section.

part of HDC provides an extension interface to add features to HDC using
the same extension interface as McAfee ePO,58 allowing them to leverage
each other’s extensions.
     One of the most interesting elements of HDC is the data bus and real-­
time processing rules. HDC utilizes an open source topic organization
server called Kafka. With Kafka, incoming messages from devices are
filtered through a set of rules to determine appropriate actions. Actions
can include storing the message data into a part of the database, passing
the message off to an ePO plugin, generating an alert to an administrator,
or even activating some compute element in the database to create an
immediate response to the reporting device. In fact, with the Kafka rules,
multiple actions can be executed as a result of receiving a single message.
     HDC is a secure device management system due to its use of Intel
Secure Device Onboard (SDO) to provision devices and the use of DXL
for secure communication. As discussed in the section on security
management, SDO leverages the device’s root of trust to authenticate
the device during onboarding, ensuring the device is not being spoofed
by an attacker. During onboarding, HDC leverages the secure channel
authenticated with the device’s root-of-trust key to install a new device
identity key. DXL uses this new key for authentication back to HDC
during TLS session establishment, making all messages passed over TLS
authenticated back to the device. SDO also installs a trust anchor key for
the HDC server; a trust anchor key is a key that is inherently trusted for a
particular purpose. The DXL client stores the HDC trust anchor key so that
it can authenticate the HDC server over TLS. On platforms that support the
SGX TEE (see the section on software containment), the DXL client uses
SGX to protect its identity key and the trust anchor key from attack by any
malware that is able to infiltrate the device.

58
    cAfee ePO is an enterprise Policy Orchestration product that provides a unified
  M
  and centralized management console for security management.

Table 4-9. Helix Device Cloud Device Management Analysis
Device Management     Grade      Comments
Security Principles

Authentication        A          The device and HDC server are authenticated
                                 with RSA key pairs that were established
                                 over a secure channel through SDO using a
                                 hardware root-of-trust key.
Authorization         A          All commands down to the device are
                                 verified as authentic through DXL using a
                                 trust anchor key established during device
                                 provisioning through SDO.
Confidentiality and   A          All data and commands are protected over
Integrity                        TLS.
Repudiation           A          The strong identity keys established using
                                 SDO validate the true device identity and link
                                 that to the RSA identity keys. Any actions or
                                 data are tied to this identity key and cannot
                                 be repudiated.
Defense in Depth      A          DXL uses the SGX TEE to ensure its
                                 operations and key material are not
                                 compromised, even if the platform is infected
                                 with malware.

 Device Management Summary
Managing the devices of an IoT system is critical to security. Since
all the management services occur over the network, attacks such as
device spoofing, message forgery, and data disclosure are all possible.
Although basic security protections over messages are possible, in

IoT system, attacks on the devices themselves can compromise key
material and lead to questions regarding the provenance of data
collected in the Cloud. The use of hardware security capabilities, like
hardware root-of-trust keys and Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs),
drastically improves the security of device management systems and,
due to the lower risk of attacks, reduces the total cost of ownership of
IoT systems.

  ystem Firmware and Root-of-Trust Update
S
Service
At the beginning of the chapter, in the “Operating Systems” section,
we discussed the update problem. The Linux distributions reviewed in
that section had different strategies for solving consistency among the
packages and services being updated. However, the section identified
a remaining problem regarding firmware updates which is how to gain
the required access to firmware on the platform with the ability to
perform updates.
    Firmware is notoriously difficult to update. It typically resides in
flash or other nonvolatile storage that is locked or inaccessible even
to the operating system itself. The reason for this inaccessibility is
security. Firmware is part of the most trusted parts of a system. The
BIOS is the first part of the system that executes during power-on and
represents the root of trust of the entire system. Other firmware may
implement root-of-trust functions, such as system measurements,
secure storage, or attestation reporting. Firmware in the security
engines control cryptographic algorithms and keys. Firmware in
network controllers (Ethernet, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, Zigbee, LoRa) have
access to all traffic entering and exiting the device and may even have
access to cryptographic keys for encrypted traffic.

    On personal computer-like systems using BIOS, the standard way
to perform secure firmware updates is through the Capsule Update.59 A
Capsule Update is a function in the BIOS that is activated by the operating
system. The Capsule Update function is provided the addresses of capsules
in memory containing updates for certain firmware, and then the system
performs a soft reset. When BIOS takes control of the platform, it verifies
the capsules in memory, and if they are authentic and appropriate for the
platform, the capsules are used to update the appropriate firmware. For
Capsule Update to work properly, the operating system must be capable of
engaging the update service.
    Not all devices support the BIOS Capsule Update. And of course for
systems without BIOS, or for IoT systems that do not use standard BIOS,
some other solution is required. In these cases, some type of custom
update procedure is required; as an example, see the update procedure
required for the Infineon TPM, a standard device on many PC platforms
(https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/product/promopages/tpm-update/
and https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/help/4096377/windows-­
10-­update-security-processor-tpm-firmware).

 Threats to Firmware and RoT Update
Firmware update for IoT systems is being addressed by an Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF) working group named SUITS (Software
Updates for Internet of Things). The SUITS working group60 compiled
a detailed set of threats and requirements that systems implementing
updates should adhere to.

59
   h? ttps://software.intel.com/en-us/blogs/2015/06/23/better-firmware-
    updates-in-linux-using-uefi-capsules and https://software.intel.com/
    en-us/blogs/2017/02/04/signed-uefi-firmware-updates-in-edk-ii
60
     https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/suit/documents/ – At the time of this
     writing, all documents in SUIT are still in the draft stage, but should be approved
     as full RFCs by the time of publication.

      •     Modified/Malicious Firmware Updates: The first
            threat considered when updating firmware is corrupted
            or maliciously modified firmware. If an attacker is
            able to modify the firmware in transit to the platform,
            or even during the process of updating the firmware,
            then the attacker is able to inject features into the
            device. Accidental corruption is just as dangerous since
            corruption of firmware during the update process can
            brick a system (cause the system to be permanently
            broken).

      •     Rollback to Old (Vulnerable) Firmware: The second
            common threat considered for firmware is rolling
            back the firmware to an older version. An attacker
            that is able to force a system to reload an older version
            of firmware may be able to force an old vulnerability
            back into the platform, allowing them to take over the
            system. This is especially dangerous since the platform
            owner erroneously believes they are protected from that
            vulnerability and may not be watching for indications of
            compromise for that particular attack.

      •     Unauthorized Update Request: An often overlooked
            threat to firmware and RoT updates is the person or
            entity authorized to update firmware on the platform.
            Allowing a network attacker to force an upgrade
            of firmware is problematic. Obviously, an attacker
            successfully pushing corrupt or invalid firmware into
            a platform would create a problem, but even pushing
            a valid firmware update could create instability in
            the platform or a denial of service. Firmware update
            mechanisms should validate the entity requesting
            the update is authorized to do so, either because they

          are acting under an administrator account or their
          request is cryptographically proven to originate from an
          authorized administrator.

      •   Unknown Source of Firmware: Even if an authorized
          entity issues the firmware update request, the actual
          source of the firmware (the firmware code itself )
          should come from a known and approved source.
          Firmware that is intended to update an Infineon TPM
          device should not be written by Broadcom; there are
          potential exceptions, most notably in cases where
          an OEM repackages an update for their device (i.e.,
          HP repackaging a TPM update for the devices they
          manufacture).

      •   Application of Incorrect Firmware: Finally, firmware
          must be matched to the system model and version
          of the hardware on which they execute. There can be
          many different revisions of hardware components, and
          firmware for one component may not operate properly
          on a different stepping or version.

T? urtle Creek System Update and Manageability
 Service
Turtle Creek is the code name for an Intel product that manages
application and platform updates over the air for Intel® Atom, ARM,
Core, and Xeon processors. Turtle Creek allows a system administrator
to remotely schedule and deploy software updates and recover
malfunctioning systems to ensure business continuity and system
availability. It is a cloud-based system that interfaces to many other device
management systems, including Helix Device Cloud and Mesh Central
which were covered in a previous section.

    Turtle Creek is a microservice cloud system where each feature of the
system is implemented by a microservice in a container hosted on the
Cloud. This allows customized deployment of Turtle Creek features, which
include the following capabilities:
      •     Update of the OS, application, and system firmware on
            supported platforms

      •     Recovery of platform software and firmware to known
            good status (factory reset)

      •     Control of system restart and shutdown

      •     Device telemetry reception for device health, data logs,
            and management messages

      •     Device diagnostics to execute pre-install and
            post-install checks

      •     Rollback recovery for any update

      •     Device system performance monitoring (e.g.,
            CPU utilization, memory utilization, container
            performance)

      •     Centralized configuration manager that stores
            and retrieves configuration for devices used by all
            microservices, supporting various formats including
            XML, Consul database, or name-value pairs

      •     Comprehensive security using cryptographic signature
            verification for all packages using the TPM 2.0 for
            key and secret management and secure MQTT
            for messaging using TLS with end-to-end mutual
            authentication based on X.509 certificates.

                                                                                                     Turtle Creek

                                                                                           TRTL Update
                                                                               AOTA           Manager               Mesh Central

                                                  Configuration
                                                                               Utility      (Containers,

                                    Diagnostics

                                                                  Dispatcher
                      Telemetry

                                                    Manager
                                                                                          File/Block OTA)
                        Agent

                                       Agent

                                                     Agent

                                                                    Agent
         SECURITY

                                                                               SOTA         Cloud
                                                                               Utility     Adapters

                                            Message                            FOTA        Package
                                             Broker                            Utility     Manager                      HDC

                                                       Linux Kernel

                                                                                                                       Other*
                    ETH           Wi-Fi                   Hardware              Storage        TPM

Figure 4-26. Turtle Creek architecture

     Figure 4-26 shows the architecture of the Turtle Creek client software.
Turtle Creek separates updates into three different categories based on
the type of update and the repository from which the update packages
are retrieved. These include Application Over-the-Air (AOTA), Software
Over-the-Air (SOTA), and Firmware Over-the-Air (FOTA). AOTA supports
update of application and individual software vendor’s services via an
update mechanism based on packages and signed RPMs using SMART
and Docker container update mechanisms. SOTA supports operating
system updates from an OS vendor’s repository, which includes the use
of the OS standard update mechanisms, like Ubuntu Update Manager
and Mender61 (for Yocto Linux). FOTA supports device or component
manufacturer’s ability to update custom firmware over the air and
integrates firmware-specific functionality to update the device firmware
components. The primary mechanism for FOTA support is BIOS Capsule
Update.

61
    ender is a client software embedded in Yocto that enables updates to the
  M
  operating system to be installed. https://docs.mender.io/1.6/artifacts/
  building-mender-yocto-image

    Turtle Creek’s contribution to the IoT platform is twofold. First it
unifies multiple disparate platform and software update mechanisms
under a single management tool, making the process of managing and
distributing updates easier. Second, it incorporates significant security
protections on the update process, overlaying them on top of existing
capabilities where necessary. Turtle Creek creates a manifest format to
convey update commands and requires this update to be signed with a
key in the TPM. This satisfies the security requirement for authorization
of updates and ensures that the versions and source (repository) for the
updates are genuine. If update packages do not include an embedded
signature or source authentication, Turtle Creek’s manifest can include
a detached signature so the actual bits downloaded for the update can
be verified that they have not been accidentally or maliciously modified.
Table 4-10 outlines a more complete security analysis of Turtle Creek.

Table 4-10. Security Analysis of Turtle Creek System Update and
Management Service
System Update         Grade   Comments
Security Principles

Protect Against       A       Turtle Creek enforces RSA signatures over all
Modified Update               update packages.
Packages
Prevent Update        A       Turtle Creek maintains a database of configured
Rollbacks                     version numbers and packages on each device
                              and ensures rollbacks do not occur.
Accept only           A       Update requests are received over an
Authorized Update             authenticated MQTT channel and are contained in
Requests                      signed manifest file.
                                                                   (continued)

Table 4-10. (continued)
System Update         Grade    Comments
Security Principles

Use only Authorized   A        Manifest file contains authorized source for
Update Sources                 download of the update mechanism.
Apply Correct         A        Manifest file contains attributes of the update that
Firmware/Software              are checked on install to ensure invalid updates
to the System                  are not applied.

                               In the event of a failed update or problems during
                               update, Turtle Creek is able to restore the previous
                               version of the software or firmware on the system
                               reducing downtime.

 System Firmware and RoT Summary
One of the most difficult problems in IoT systems is updating the base
system firmware or recovering from a security vulnerability in a root-of-­trust
component like a TPM. Oftentimes, these firmware elements are designed
to require a trusted administrator to manually watch over an update or
install process. IoT devices in remote environments or hard-­to-­reach places
cannot afford to miss such updates, but also cannot be sustained if a skilled
administrator must manually install such updates. Services such as Turtle
Creek which enable remote update of all software and firmware on a device
are vital to both the security posture and ROI of IoT systems.

 Application-Level Language Frameworks
The application-level language frameworks are the first topic in the
application plane of our generic IoT architectural model from Figure 4-2.
Although we are several software layers removed from the hardware of the

platform, hardware-based security still plays a role in providing best-in-­
class software and services. As we look at different options in this space, we
want to focus on how an application developer might be able to leverage
hardware-based security features.
     Application developers tend to choose an application framework based
on the programming language they have chosen, and not vice versa. And
particular programming languages tend to have certain frameworks that are
popular with a majority of programmers. In this section, we will examine
the common security APIs available within some of these frameworks and
evaluate the ease of use for developers to utilize hardware security features.
     The hardware security features focused here are partly based on the
hardware features we have discussed throughout the previous sections
of this chapter, as well as security features advantageous to common use
cases encountered by IoT developers. These features include

      •     Access to Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs)
            to leverage highly secure containment features for
            sensitive data and operations

      •     Access to Secure Storage or Protected Keystores to
            protect credentials and application secrets

      •     Access to message and network security features to
            protect communication to other devices

      •     Access to cryptographic functions in hardware,
            including AES, SHA, and random number generation
            in order to build other security features not available
            from available services.

 JavaScript and Node.js or Sails
JavaScript is a common language used in IoT and web services today. It
is an event-driven interpreted language with a rich set of frameworks.
Node.js is one common framework, designed to build network

applications that handle events concurrently. Node.js is extremely
flexible, so other frameworks are used to create more structure around
Node.js. Sails is an example of such an extension framework.
    As far as security goes, Node.js is far removed from most platform
security features. However, the crypto API provided in Node.js is a wrapper
around the latest OpenSSL library. This means that Node.js developers get
access to the hardware implementations of AES-NI and SHA-NI through
OpenSSL, as well as the hardware random number generator. Best of all,
developers do not have to configure anything or worry about any platform
settings – it is all handled inside OpenSSL.
    One of the great advantages of Node.js is npm (node package
manager). One of the great security problems with Node.js is also npm.
The node package manager makes it extremely easy to add packages into
your Node.js project. A simple install command issued on the command
line and a require expression in the code add any package registered
in the Node.js npm repository to your application. npm has over half
a million packages and over three billion downloads every day.62 This
makes using JavaScript widgets and gadgets built by others very easy (a
great benefit!). But what are you really downloading? Are you getting the
latest version with the latest bug fixes? Or are you installing the latest
version that was corrupted with malware? Often developers set up their
Node.js applications and never audit the npm repository again. This poor
discipline proliferates security vulnerabilities.

J? ava and Android
The Java programming language is the language used for Android devices,
and because of this popularity has found its way into IoT devices as well.
Google provides their Android Things operating system as a base OS and
framework built on Java for small IoT devices and provides the same base

62
   https://nemethgergely.com/nodejs-security-overview/

security for the smallest system on a module (SoM) devices as found on
larger devices, including secure boot and a secure hardware keystore.
Android Things is built from the base Android system, as shown in
Figure 4-27, and uses the same kernel, hardware abstraction layer, native
libraries, and Java API framework as the standard Android. Android Things
is intended for smallest of devices.

            Java API Framework      Google Services           Things Support Library

                                   Native C/C++ Libraries

                                 Hardware Abstraction Layer

                                        Linux Kernel

                                         Hardware

Figure 4-27. Android Things architecture

    Android itself is popular in many larger IoT devices, including in-­
vehicle infotainment (IVI) systems in autonomous and smart vehicles. And
the security services available through Java and the Android framework are
significant.63
    As we discussed previously, Android supports the Trusty TEE, which
can be used to hold sensitive applications for the platform. One of those
applications is a hardware-backed secure keystore to protection keys. This
prevents keys from being used by unauthorized applications or users and
can prevent keys from being exfiltrated off the device. On Intel devices,
the Trusty TEE can be used to provide this service, or the keystore can
be implemented in the CSME (see Chapter 3). Android also supports a
verified boot mechanism where the stages of boot verify each software
component is signed with a valid cryptographic key (see Chapter 3 for
secure boot details).

63
   https://source.android.com/security/

E? dgeX Foundry
EdgeX Foundry is a new Internet of Things framework for industrial
edge computing sponsored by the Linux Foundation.64 EdgeX Foundry
is platform agnostic, flexible, and extensible framework providing
capabilities for “intelligence at the edge” for data storage, aggregation,
analysis, and action all organized into sets of microservices using Docker
containers.
     Figure 4-28 is the platform architecture for EdgeX Foundry, which
includes four service layers and two system services. The service layers
are the Export services, Supporting services, Core services, and Device
services. The system services are security and device/system management.
     The Export services allows data to be communicated to the Cloud
and supports several protocols, including REST or message queue
protocols (see the section “Message Orchestration”); Google IoT Core
is also supported for sending telemetry and receiving configuration
and commands. The Device services enables connections to sensors
and actuators and supports multiple protocols for this purpose. Some
of these protocols are wireless or wired communications protocols
which are covered in more detail in Chapter 5; other protocols are
message orchestration protocols, like MQTT, which is covered in the
section “Message Orchestration.” The Supporting services handles edge
intelligence and analytics capabilities. The Core services is the linkage
between northbound communications to the Cloud and southbound
communications to the sensors and actuators.

64
   https://www.edgexfoundry.org/

                                                                                                                                     REQUIRED INTEROPERABILITY FOUNDATION

                                                                                                                                       REPLACEABLE REFERENCE SERVICES

                                                                      “NORTHBOUND” INFRASTRUCTURE AND APPLICATIONS

        LOOSELY-COUPLED MICROSERVICES FRAMEWORK                                           CHOICE OF
                                                                                          PROTOCOL
                                       EXPORT SERVICES

                                                                                                                                                             ADDITIONAL
                                             CLIENT REGISTRATION                        DISTRIBUTION                          ADDITIONAL SERVICES

                                                                                                                                                              SERVICES

                                                                                                                                                                          DEVICE + SYSTEM MANAGEMENT
                                       SUPPORTING SERVICES
                                                                                         ALERTS &                                        ADDITIONAL
                                          RULES ENGINE             SCHEDULING                                       LOGGING
                   SECURITY SERVICES

                                                                                       NOTIFICATIONS                                      SERVICES

                                                                                                                                                             DEPLOYMENT
                                                                                                                                                              CONTAINER
        SECURITY

                                                                          ALL MICROSERVICES INTERCOMMUNICATE VIA APIs
                                       CORE SERVICES

                                               CORE DATA                   COMMAND                       METADATA                REGISTRY & CONFIG

                                                                                                                                                             LOCAL MGMT
                                                                                                                                                               CONSOLE
                                       DEVICE SERVICES (ANY COMBINATION OF STANDARD OR PROPRIETARY PROTOCOLS VIA SDK)
                                                                                                                                                ADD’L
                                        REST       OPC-UA    MODBUS      BACNET      ZIGBEE        BLE        MQTT       SNMP       VIRTUAL     DEVICE
                                                                                                                                               SERVICES

                                                                       “SOUTHBOUND” DEVICES, SENSORS AND ACTUATORS

Figure 4-28. EdgeX Foundry architecture65

    The Security system service includes a security store to maintain
cryptographic keys and credentials and an access control service to
manage REST resources and access keys using either OAuth2 or JWT
tokens.
    The interesting part of EdgeX is the ability to rewrite any part of
the EdgeX Foundry by modifying the Docker container that supplies
that service and not having to contend with changing other parts of
the system. Security services for key storage can be extended to use a
TPM or SGX enclave for enhanced security. Encryption routines in the
Distribution container of the Export services can be upgraded to use
hardware-based encryption without affecting other elements of the
Supporting or Core services. This type of flexible framework makes it
easy to utilize the important hardware security features that make an IoT
instance more secure.

65
   https://docs.edgexfoundry.org/Ch-Intro.html

 Application-Level Framework Summary
The application framework chosen for an IoT device can make a significant
difference on the security provided to IoT applications. Frameworks like
Node.js have few hardware security features built into the framework, but
make it easy to add capabilities. However, access to hardware devices is
rather difficult through JavaScript, limiting the options for developers.
     Android takes an alternative approach and builds in many
sophisticated security features into the operating system and framework
itself. However, limitations, such as with the Trusty TEE which cannot
dynamically add secured applications, make adding hardware-based
security features difficult.
     EdgeX Foundry takes a different approach, using containers to
separate functionality into microservices. This framework expends effort to
create the connections and APIs between components so that services can
be shared. In this model, it is much easier to upgrade a service to make use
of hardware security features on the platform, but allow platforms that
do not have such services to use alternative implementations. Although
EdgeX Foundry does not have many hardware security features built
into the framework at present, the intention to encourage platform
differentiation through service modifications is clearly stated.

 Message Orchestration
Message orchestration performs the orderly reception and delivery of
data and commands on an IoT platform. As briefly mentioned in “EdgeX
Foundry” section, message orchestration protocols enable data delivery
and reception off the platform to devices and the Cloud, but can also be
used to move data around within an IoT platform. Message orchestration
implements the publish-subscribe design pattern, often referred to as pub-
sub. In this design pattern, entities with data (publishers) publish their data

to a broker or message bus, and recipients subscribe to certain messages
from the broker and are given only the messages for which they register.
The beauty of this design pattern is that publishers do not need to know
who or how many subscribers are out there, and subscribers do not have to
be prepared to receive and parse messages that they are not interested in.
    Several message orchestration protocols are common in IoT devices,
including Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT), Constrained
Application Protocol (CoAP), eXtensible Messaging and Presence Protocol
(XMPP)66, and OPC Unified Architecture (OPC UA).
    Message orchestration needs to deal with several security issues in
order to be secure:

       •    Publishers must have an identity and must be
            authenticated against that identity so that the source of
            messages are attributable to an Authorized Publisher.

       •    Subscribers must have an identity and must be
            authenticated against that identity so that messages are
            delivered only to Authorized Subscribers.

       •    Authorized Publishers may assign access control lists to
            messages that restrict which subscribers are allowed to
            receive their messages.

       •    Administrators may assign access control lists to
            message types restricting Publishers from publishing
            certain message types and/or restricting Subscribers
            from receiving certain message types.

       •    Authorized Subscribers may register to receive message
            types that do not violate an access control list.

66
    MPP is not covered in this chapter due to space constraints, however details
  X
  can be found in RFC 6102, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6120

      •   The message broker will accept a message only from an
          Authorized Publisher, and only if the message type sent
          by the Authorized Publisher does not violate an access
          control list.
      •   The message broker will deliver a message to an
          Authorized Subscriber only if that subscriber requested
          messages of that type, and if that subscriber is not
          prohibited from receiving that message type by a valid
          access control list.

      •   Messages shall be protected from unauthorized
          disclosure, tampering, unauthorized deletion,
          reordering, and message delay.

 Message Queuing Telemetry Transport
Message Queuing Telemetry Transport (MQTT) is a commonly used
message orchestration protocol that enables sending data between entities
on a system. The protocol is based on topic names in data packets that
define a title for the data. Subscribers subscribe to topics; subscribers
may use wildcards within the topic names to which they subscribe.
MQTT operates over TCP/IP and supports basic operations, such as
CONNECT, PUBLISH, SUBSCRIBE, UNSUBSCRIBE, and several types of
acknowledgment packets.
    The MQTT protocol published by OASIS67 supports some basic security
services including password-based authentication of publishers and
subscribers and recommends the use of TLS for data privacy and integrity.
    Several open source implementations of MQTT are in common use
including Mosquitto, RabbitMQ, and HiveMQ. Table 4-11 provides a
security analysis of Mosquitto MQTT.

67
   http://docs.oasis-open.org/mqtt/mqtt/v3.1.1/mqtt-v3.1.1.html

Table 4-11. Security Analysis of Mosquitto MQTT
System Update         Grade      Comments
Security Principles

Authentication of     B          MQTT supports usernames and passwords
Publishers and                   natively. Mutually authenticated TLS is the
Subscribers                      best option for authentication over the network
                                 using public key certificates; using user ids
                                 and password is acceptable, but should be
                                 protected by TLS if the communication is over
                                 a network (broker protection of passwords
                                 should be addressed through secure storage).

                                 A security vulnerability in Mosquitto up until
                                 1.4.12 allows a user with a specially formatted
                                 id to overcome the access permissions set
                                 by Mosquitto, allowing them to read or write
                                 topics they do not have permissions to access.
Access Controls on    B          Mosquitto provides a topic configuration
Message Topics                   file that allows topics to be restricted by
                                 anonymous users, by username, or by a
                                 pattern that uses the username or client name;
                                 access control is based on “read,” “write,” or
                                 “readwrite” actions. This file must be manually
                                 configured, and it is a bit difficult to get correct
                                 especially when there are many topics.
                                                                      (continued)

Table 4-11. (continued)

System Update         Grade       Comments
Security Principles

Message Privacy and D             No special protections are provided for
Integrity                         messages, and even using TLS does not
                                  protect messages while they wait in the queue
                                  for delivery, opening the possibility for malware
                                  on the broker device to modify messages.

                                  Consider adding encryption and message
                                  integrity to MQTT messages at the application
                                  layer; this provides security end to end and can
                                  be used to prevent repudiation attacks as well.
Message Delivery       D          No special protections are afforded to the
Protections (Deletion,            broker’s queue. The broker should not be
Delay, Reordering)                run as root, but run under a special service
                                  user id. In some installations of Mosquitto,
                                  the message queue is written to disk and
                                  susceptible to tampering. The configuration of
                                  your Mosquitto installation should be examined
                                  to ensure any files used for queuing are
                                  properly protected.

 OPC Unified Architecture
                                              OPC-UA
                                               Object
                                      Variables           Methods    Methods are the
                  Variables are the
                                                                      Actions Objects
                   Properties and
                                                                      can take when
                    State held by
                                                                    requested by other
                       Objects                    Event                   objects
                                                   E1
                                                   E2
                                                   En

                                         Events are the
                                           Alarms and
                                       Conditions reported
                                          by the Object

Figure 4-29. OPC-UA notional object68

OPC-UA[69, 70] is a platform-independent service-oriented architecture
targeted to the industrial segment of IoT and is based on the earlier OPC
Classic protocols that used the Microsoft Component Object Model
(COM) and Distributed Component Object Model (DCOM). OPC-UA
is therefore an object-based technology, defining objects as notionally
shown in Figure 4-29 and using the TCP/IP protocol for communication
between objects, which provides a much richer set of services than
MQTT, but it is also much more complex with a 13-part specification of
over 1200 pages.

68
   h? ttps://opcfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/OPC-UA-
    Interoperability-For-Industrie4-and-IoT-EN-v5.pdf
69
     OPC officially stands for Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) for Process
     Control, but since OPC-UA has moved away from strict COM and DCOM
     protocols, the full expansion of the acronym is no longer widely used.
70
      https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/

    OPC-UA provides communication between components (objects)
on a device and between devices using the publisher-subscriber design
pattern described earlier, the observer design pattern where objects notify
other objects of events, and using direct method calls between objects
(even across devices using a DCOM-like mechanism). OPC-UA includes
a discovery service allowing objects and devices to find each other on a
network.
    OPC-UA defines a comprehensive security model71 based on security
above the transport layer and uses certificate-based identities for
applications and users. By default, all communication between devices
is encrypted and signed, and the algorithms are negotiated at session
establishment between the two parties, just like TLS. All applications
are assigned a unique identity certificate, which is used to perform
authentication during session establishment to other entities. The other
devices/applications/servers a device is allowed to communicate with
are defined in a trust list that contains those other applications’ identity
certificates. Access control and rights can be managed in three different
ways: username and passwords, Kerberos tickets, or certificates. Table 4-12
provides a security analysis of OPC-UA.

71
  w? ww.dsinteroperability.com/OPCClassicVSUA.pdf and https://
   opcfoundation.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/OPC-UA_Security_Model_
   for_Administrators_V1.00.pdf

Table 4-12. Security Analysis of OPC-UA
System Update          Grade   Comments
Security Principles

Authentication of      A       OPC-UA includes multiple options for
Publishers and                 authentication, with public key certificates being
Subscribers                    included by default. Issuance of these keys can
                               still be an issues that need to be dealt with,
                               but from a security perspective, this is the best
                               solution.
Access Controls on     C       Rough access control is provided at the trust list
Message Topics                 level. OPC-UA applications have to implement
                               their own access control in order to implement
                               anything greater than just this device/application-
                               level trust. Access control functions can take
                               advantage of other information (usernames,
                               certificates, Kerberos tokens), but this requires
                               custom programming.
Message Privacy and    A       Message encryption and message integrity is
Integrity                      built into OPC-UA above the transport layer and
                               can be used to prevent repudiation attacks as
                               well. Session security is provided end to end.
Message Delivery       D       For store-and-forward or pub-sub broker type
Protections (Deletion,         message delivery, the application is responsible
Delay, Reordering)             for creating the behavior of the application.
                               Although patterns exist for good design, they
                               are not provided by default for applications and
                               require custom programming.

 Constrained Application Protocol
The Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP) is a web transfer protocol
specified in IETF RFC 725272 specifically designed for devices with limited
computation and/or on a network with limited bandwidth. CoAP is a
lightweight HTTP protocol and based on the same request-response REST
interaction model, using commands GET, PUT, POST, and DELETE. CoAP
requires DTLS (Datagram Transport Layer Security, which is TLS over the
UDP protocol) for security, and much like HTTP/TLS combination, any
additional access control or security on the messages themselves must be
added to the applications. Table 4-13 provides a security analysis of CoAP.

Table 4-13. Security Analysis of CoAP
System Update Security   Grade     Comments
Principles

Authentication of        A         Mutually authenticated DTLS is the best
Publishers and                     option for authentication over the network
Subscribers                        using public key certificates; many other
                                   authentication options are possible, but
                                   would need to be integrated into the
                                   applications (e.g., OAuth, JWT, Kerberos).
Access Controls on       D         No special access control is provided above
Message Topics                     the rough authentication performed by
                                   DTLS. Any additional access control must be
                                   provided by the application.
                                                                   (continued)

72
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7252

Table 4-13. (continued)
System Update Security    Grade      Comments
Principles

Message Privacy and       D          No special protections are provided for
Integrity                            messages beyond the network protections
                                     afforded by DTLS.
Message Delivery          C          Messages may be transmitted with reliability
Protections (Deletion,               (marked as Confirmable), and for those
Delay, Reordering)                   messages, deletion recovery is handled
                                     through the acknowledgment mechanism.
                                     Every message has a unique 16-bit message
                                     id that allows detection of replay.

 Message Orchestration Summary
Message orchestration solutions vary widely in their offerings from simple
(CoAP) to complex (OPC-UA). The security offerings for the simpler
solutions leave much to the application to implement. One of the primary
benefits for MQTT is the ease with which network security can be added
with TLS, and the rich set of access controls that can be configured without
having to add custom code. Other solutions require applications to
implement access controls, which can result in harder to diagnose defects,
and duplication of the access control code in many places.

A
  pplications
The applications are the components that give IoT devices their behaviors
and consume and benefit from the security in the hardware and the software.
There is much to explore in the application space, which we leave for
Chapter 6, where we explore different vertical IoT applications in great detail.

S
  ummary
Software in IoT is an enormous subject. In writing this chapter, there were
many things that had to be left out or shortened in order to meet the page
count and retain some semblance of a publishing deadline. If we have
omitted your favorite IoT software component or feature, we assure you
it is only due to the space limitations. However, we feel that the coverage
we have provided of the software elements of an IoT stack is adequate to
engage your design enthusiasm and get you thinking about how to expose
useful security features in your IoT designs.
      The goal of this chapter was to introduce how security could be
provided in IoT systems, and we have shown, layer by layer, where
platform security features can be exposed and built upon to add strong
and effective security services to IoT devices. If the “S” for security is left
out of our IoT devices, it is because we have not leveraged the software and
capabilities that are available to us to make security a reality.
      While it is true that the most constrained devices have less software
and less hardware services, this should not be an excuse to remove
security entirely. There are too many good options to solve this tough
problem. When the constraints get tighter, it should mean that we focus
back on the basics and jettison everything we do not need, but retain the
most basic security capabilities. These basic security capabilities are the
hardware features for the secure minimum viable platform enabled with
the basic platform software – secure boot, secure identity, and secure
storage. This is not impossible. In Chapter 6, we will show examples of
exactly how to do this.

                Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms
                of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included
in the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise
in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder.

