CHAPTER 5

Connectivity
Technologies for IoT
Internet of Things (IoT) is a set of technologies that are enabling new
use cases and delivering services across a wide variety of markets
and applications. When people think of IoT, they often think of home
or personal IoT. However, IoT will play a role in many commercial
applications such as smart manufacturing, smart cities, autonomous
cars, building automation, and healthcare. How will an IoT-enabled
device communicate what it knows to the Internet? Suitable connectivity
solutions range from a multitude of wired connectivity technologies such
as Ethernet to wireless technologies like Wi-Fi and even 5G cellular. Many
solutions need a combination of multiple communication technologies.
For example, a smart car system playing video or using GPS navigation
might need 4G LTE in order to communicate with the outside world and
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth to communicate with devices like phones and rear
seat entertainment (RSE) used by the passengers. In this chapter, we will
take a look at a selected set of connectivity technologies that enable these
applications.

© The Author(s) 2020                                                     347
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8_5

 Ethernet Time-Sensitive Networking
Ethernet Time-Sensitive Networking (TSN) is reshaping the industrial
communication landscape and laying the foundation for the convergence
of Information Technology (IT) and Industrial Operations Technology
(OT). TSN essentially is a set of features that have been added to standard
Ethernet. By bringing industrial-grade robustness and reliability to
Ethernet, TSN offers an IEEE standard communication technology that
can be used to enable deterministic communications for industrial
applications. Being an IEEE standard, it enables interoperability between
standard compliant industrial devices from different suppliers. TSN
removes the need for physical separation of critical and noncritical
communication networks, reducing the cost of the infrastructure needed
to allow open data exchange between operations technology network and
enterprise/information technology network – a concept that is at the heart
of the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). At the network system level, TSN
supports deterministic communication based on network schedules that
are distributed to devices via standard configuration interfaces.
     TSN standards address a wide range of functions, and their
implementation can be similarly broad, encompassing various hardware
elements such as endpoints and switches, embedded software, standard
interfaces, routing algorithms, and configuration tools. To ensure the
highest levels of TSN performance, a system-level solution is required
that takes each element into account and provides a seamless interface
between them. Seamless fault-tolerant communication and enhanced
cybersecurity with robust network planning, configuration, and
monitoring will be a necessity in the networks of the future.

L? egacy Ethernet-Based Connectivity in Industrial
 Applications
Today, there are multiple variants of Industrial Ethernet protocols available
on the market. In most cases, the Industrial Ethernet protocol selected for use
in industrial devices differs from vendor to vendor or from Industry Alliance
to Industry Alliance, which means that devices are only compatible with other
equipment from the same vendor or an Industry Alliance using the same
protocol. This is known as manufacturer lock-in. It forces customers to either
buy all industrial equipment from one vendor or a limited set of vendors
who are part of the same Alliance. This approach may not be the most cost-
and performance-optimized way to implement the required solution. If a
customer chooses not to do this, there is considerable challenge of integrating
equipment from multiple vendors into a single network system or there needs
to be a set of protocol conversion gateways implemented between the various
Industrial Ethernet protocols. Both options will lead to unnecessary expense
and limit innovation on the factory floor over many years. Thus industrial
automation architectures become hierarchical, purpose-built, and inflexible.
     This approach is currently undergoing a dramatic change with the advent
of the IIoT and Industry 4.0, which demands for full automation and greater
insights in manufacturing. These demands are pushing industrial automation
architectures to become more flexible and seamless to interoperate. In
these types of increasingly converged architectures, real-time connectivity
is essential for controlling critical processes, as well as for collecting and
analyzing data from machines, in a timely manner. TSN offers the real-time
connectivity capabilities that match and sometimes exceed what current
Industrial Ethernet protocols can provide, with the added flexibility of being
based on IEEE standards. Similar to what is the norm in the enterprise world,
TSN Ethernet can therefore be the common communication protocol that
connects industrial equipment from different vendors, simultaneously
delivering the very challenging functional requirements demanded by
mission-critical embedded and industrial applications.

 Key Benefits of TSN
The primary strength of TSN is its status as an open standard–based
technology, unaffiliated to any Industry Alliance or company. For an
industrial automation market that has struggled for many years with
multiple incompatible proprietary communication protocols, TSN brings
several key benefits.
     TSN guarantees compatibility at the network level between devices
from multiple suppliers. This gives customers much greater choice of
devices for building their system, avoiding manufacturer lock-in and
enabling seamless connectivity across various subsystems and systems.
     As TSN is part of the Ethernet standard family, it naturally scales with
Ethernet, which means that the technology will not be limited in terms of
bandwidth/speeds, thus allowing more and more sensors and actuators
that are needed for implementing complex automation applications to be
connected to a network system.
     TSN supports standards-based network configuration capabilities.
This means that new nodes can be added to the network and discovered
without the need for costly downtimes and manual configuration. New
data streams can be added to the network without the risk of disturbing
existing traffic and without the need to reconfigure the entire network.
     TSN can be used for communication between machines as well as
from machines to enterprise systems. Communication between mission-
critical TSN-based systems and existing noncritical Ethernet-based
systems can be achieved over the same infrastructure. In other words, non-
TSN Ethernet nodes can work over a TSN network, without modification.
     Overall system costs are significantly reduced when we adopt
standards-based technology. Consumer choice and competition will result
in lower device prices. Research, development, and maintenance costs
are all driven down when solution providers and customers can focus on
one standard technology rather than a number of different proprietary
protocols and solutions.

     Breaking down communication barriers between critical and
noncritical systems is a foundational concept of the IIoT and Industry
4.0. TSN enables the convergence of networks and systems that were
previously kept separate for reasons of operational integrity, real-time
performance, safety, and security.
     TSN allows time-critical messages to be sent over the same
communication line as all other Ethernet traffic, without disturbance
or increase in delay and with controlled delay variation. Different traffic
classes can coexist on the network with no impact on higher criticality
level traffic from traffic with lower priority.
     End-to-end latency is guaranteed even under heavy traffic load, and
standard mechanisms can be used to accelerate message transport for
high-priority communications. Thus, the most challenging motion control
and safety-critical applications can be converged with other Ethernet
traffic on Ethernet networks using TSN.
     Convergence makes accessing data from industrial systems easier.
With more systems on the same network, the task of gathering data from
a wide variety of sources is simplified. Data from industrial systems can
be sent to enterprise systems over standard Ethernet without the need
for protocol conversion gateways. Overall system costs are significantly
reduced by the convergence of different traffic classes on a single network
infrastructure. Hardware and maintenance costs are lower because we
need fewer devices and cables to build the network infrastructure.
     Higher layer protocols can be combined with TSN, as the technology
is implemented primarily at the data link layer (OSI model layer 2).1 One
example is the Open Platform Communications-Unified Architecture
(OPC-UA) protocol.2

1
  I? SO/IEC 7498-1:1994 - Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection -
   Basic Reference Model: The Basic Model.
2
    More details on OPC-UA can be found at https://opcfoundation.org/about/
    opc-technologies/opc-ua/

T? SN Standards
Table 5-1 lists the TSN set of features that have been added to standard
Ethernet. The features are defined and published in a number of IEEE 802.1
standards that address topics such as timing, synchronization, forwarding,
queuing, seamless redundancy, and stream reservation. These individual
features extend the functionality and Quality of Service (QoS) of Ethernet
to enable guaranteed message transmission through switched networks,
providing the fundamental capabilities such as robustness, reliability, and
determinism required for an industrial communication technology.

Table 5-1. List of Published IEEE Standards for TSN (March 2019)
Function              Standard

Time Synchronization • ?IEEE Std. 802.1ASTM-2011: generalized Precision Time
                       Protocol (gPTP)
Bounded Low           • IEEE Std. 802.1QavTM-2009: Credit-based shaper
Latency               • IEEE Std. 802.1QbvTM-2015: Transmission gate scheduling
                      • ?IEEE Std. 802.1QbuTM-2016 & IEEE Std. 802.3brTM-2016 :
                        Frame Preemption
                      • IEEE Std. 802.1QchTM-2017 : Cyclic Queuing and Forwarding
Reliability           • IEEE Std. 802.1QcaTM-2015 : Path Control and Reservation
                      • IEEE Std. 802.1CBTM-2017 : Frame Replication &
                      Elimination
                      • IEEE Std. 802.1QciTM-2017 : Per-stream Filtering & Policing
Resource              • IEEE Std. 802.1QatTM-2010 : Stream Reservation Protocol
Management            • ?IEEE Std. 802.1QccTM-2018 : SRP Enhancements and
                        Performance Improvements
                      • IEEE Std. 802.1QcpTM-2018 : YANG model

   To address new use cases and make performance improvements, many
more IEEE standards are being defined, as listed in Table 5-2.

Table 5-2. List of Upcoming IEEE Standards for TSN (March 2019)
Time               • ?P802.1AS-Rev (Draft v8.0): Time Synchronization
Synchronization      improvement
Bounded Low        • P802.1Qcr (Draft v0.5): Asynchronous Traffic Shaping
Latency            • P802.1Qcz (PAR approved): Congestion Isolation
Reliability        • ?P802.1Qcx (Draft v1.0): YANG Data Model for Connectivity
                     Fault Management
Resource           • P802.1CS (Draft v2.1): Link-local Registration Protocol
Management         • ?P802.1Qcj (Draft v0.4): Automatic Attachment to Provider
                     Backbone Bridging (PBB) services
                   • ?P802.1Qcw (Draft v0.2): YANG Data Models for Qbv, Qbu,
                     and Qci
                   • P802.1Qdd (PAR approved): Resource Allocation Protocol
                   • P802.1ABcu (Draft v0.6): LLDP YANG Data Model
                   • ?P802.1CBcv (PAR approved): Frame Replication &
                     Elimination YANG Model and MIB Module
                   • ?P802.1CBdb (PAR approved): FRER Extended Stream
                     Identification Functions

For latest Update, check https://1.ieee802.org/tsn/

     The key TSN features that provide guaranteed message delivery timing
are time synchronization and traffic scheduling. They are addressed by the
802.1AS and 802.1Qbv standards, respectively. All devices participating
in the TSN network are synchronized to a global time and are aware of a
network schedule that dictates when prioritized messages will be forwarded
from each switch. TSN makes use of multiple queues per port at the egress
of the switch, where messages are held until a gate opens (at a time slot

specified by the schedule) to release queued messages for transmission.
The timed release of messages ensures that delays in the network can be
deterministically predicted and managed. This allows for the convergence
of critical traffic and noncritical traffic on the same network.
     The preemption feature defined in the TSN 802.1Qbu standard can be
used to increase the efficiency of bandwidth use for noncritical messages.
In highly converged networks, it could be the case that large low-priority
frames are delayed by higher-priority traffic on the network and dropped.
Preemption enables the transmission of large frames to be interrupted,
sent in smaller fragments and reassembled at the next link. This maximizes
bandwidth utilization for all traffic types on the TSN network. Another
important benefit of message preemption is the reduction of transmission
latency for so-called Express traffic, which can preempt regular (lower-
priority) Ethernet packets. Especially on lower-speed networks (e.g., 10 or
100 megabits per second (Mbps)) carrying large regular Ethernet packets
up to 1,500 bytes and more, the latency reduction for Express traffic can be
useful for building converged networks.
     TSN provides a standard method for achieving seamless redundancy
for industrial communication over Ethernet. The feature allows for the
simultaneous transmission of duplicate message copies across different paths
in the network. The first message copy to be received in time without error is
processed, while the other copies are discarded. This adds another layer of
determinism to the delivery of critical messages in converged networks.
     A crucial feature of TSN is the support for open, vendor-independent
network configuration. This is achieved through the standardization in
IEEE of YANG models for various TSN standards. These can be configured
over the NETCONF protocol using encoding formats such as XML or
JSON. YANG models for bridging, traffic scheduling, frame preemption,
seamless redundancy, and policing ensure that configuration of key TSN
features is done according to standard methods. This allows TSN networks
to be composed of any standard compliant device from any vendor and can
be configured by any standard compliant network configuration software.

T? SN Profiles
TSN is essentially a toolbox of features that address various needs such
as reliability, bounded low latency, time synchronization, and resource
management. These capabilities are realized through various TSN
specifications (e.g., IEEE 802.1AS-Rev, IEEE 802.1Qbv, etc.), and customers
can choose the relevant standards to implement based on their specific
application needs. Profile standards are being specified for some of them
to describe which TSN standards to use and how. A TSN profile selects
features, options, configurations, and protocols to build a bridged network
for the given TSN application. Table 5-3 shows a list of select TSN profiles
that are currently being defined.

Table 5-3. List of TSN Profiles (March 2019)
Industry           TSN Profile

Industrial         • ?IEC/IEEE 60802 (Draft v0.3):TSN Profile for Industrial
Automation           Automation
Automotive         • ?IEEE Std. 802.1BATM -2011 : Audio Video Bridging system
In-­Vehicle          [AVB Profile]
Networks           • ?IEEE Std. 1722TM -2016: Transport Protocol for Time-Sensitive
                     Applications [+AVTP Control format message types: FlexRay,
                     LIN, CAN, MOST, Sensor, etc]
                   • ?IEEE Std. 1722.1TM -2013: Audio Video Discovery,
                     Enumeration, Connection management and Control (AVDECC)
                   • ?P802.1DG (PAR approved): TSN Profile for Automotive In-
                     Vehicle Ethernet Communications
Service Provider   • ?P802.1DF (PAR approved): TSN Profile for Service Provider
Networks             Networks
                                                                        (continued)

Table 5-3. (continued)

Industry           TSN Profile

Mobile Fronthaul   • ?IEEE Std. 802.1CMTM -2018: TSN for Fronthaul [Mobile
                     Fronthaul Profile]
                   • ?P802.1CMde (PAR approved): Enhancements to Fronthaul
                     Profiles to Support New Fronthaul Interface, Synchronization,
                     and Syntonization Standards

    The following sections provide an overview of the major TSN
standards.

8? 02.1AS/AS-Rev
Enhanced Generic Precise Timing Protocol: Timing and synchronization
are vital mechanisms for achieving deterministic communication. 802.1AS
is a profile of the IEEE 1588 PTP (Precision Time Protocol) synchronization
protocol that enables synchronization compatibility between different TSN
devices (Figure 5-1). This lays the foundation for the scheduling of traffic
through each participating network device. 802.1AS-Rev is being defined
to add support for fault tolerance and multiple active synchronization
masters (Figure 5-2). Multiple clock-masters for redundancy enable high
availability of TSN networks – in cases when a grandmaster becomes
faulty, system elements such as end nodes and bridges are still able
to remain synchronized by obtaining the timing information from the
redundant grandmasters. 802.1AS-Rev is also a profile of the IEEE 1588
PTP synchronization protocol.

                               Bridge                Bridge                 Listener

      Grand
                    Bridge                                        Bridge
      master

                               Bridge                Bridge

Figure 5-1. 802.1AS operation3

                             Bridge               Bridge               Listener

     Grand                                                                    Grand
                  Bridge                                      Bridge
     master                                                                   master

                             Bridge               Bridge

Figure 5-2. 802.1AS-Rev operation4

3
    igure 5a: Single grand master transmitting 2 copies using separate paths.
  F
  https://www.synopsys.com/designware-ip/technical-bulletin/ether-time-
  sens-net-for-auto-adas-socs-2018q2.html
4
Figure 5b: Multiple grand masters transmitting 2 copies using separate paths.
   https://www.synopsys.com/designware-ip/technical-bulletin/ether-time-
   sens-net-for-auto-adas-socs-2018q2.html

8? 02.1Qbv
Time-Aware Shaper: Scheduling of traffic is a core concept in TSN. Based
on the shared global time provided by 802.1AS, a schedule is created and
distributed between participating network devices. 802.1Qbv defines the
mechanisms for controlling the flow of queued traffic through gates at the
egress of a TSN switch (Figure 5-3). Frames are assigned to queues based
on Quality of Service (QoS) priority. The transmission of messages from
these queues is executed during scheduled time windows. Other queues
will typically be blocked from transmission during these time windows,
therefore removing the chance of scheduled traffic being impeded by
nonscheduled traffic. In other words, there is a gate in front of each queue
which opens at a specific point of time which is reserved for that queue. This
means that the delay through each switch is deterministic and that message
latency through a network of TSN-enabled components can be guaranteed.
The IEEE 802.1Qbv standard defines up to eight queues per port for
forwarding traffic. The scheduler is designed to separate the communication
on the Ethernet network into fixed length, repeating time cycles.
     Figure 5-3 shows an example with four queues, with a cycle time of td
and guard band of tg. At time t0, the time-critical data queue, Queue 3 is
open. Once that frame is transmitted, the best effort Queues 0, 1, and 2 are
opened. Before the end of the cycle, at time t0-tg, all the non-time-critical
data is blocked, so that the port is free to transmit the time-critical data at
the start of the next cycle. This is essentially a time-division multiple access
(TDMA) scheme.

                             IEEE 802.1 Qbv          t0 - tg = 0000 Block non-time critical data
                                                     t0      = 1000 Time critical data queue is open
                                scheduler
                                                     t0 + td = 0111 Time critical data is done best
                                                                    effort queues open
                   Queue 3

                   Queue 2
                                                                    MAC
                   Queue 1

                   Queue 0

    Q3
         tg                                                          tg
    Q2
    Q1
    Q0

              t0                  Cycle time (td)                         t0

Figure 5-3. 802.1Qbv operation5

8? 02.1Qbu
Frame Preemption: While the 802.1Qbv mechanisms protect critical
messages against interference from other network traffic, it does not
necessarily result in optimal bandwidth usage or minimal communication
latency. Where these factors are important, the preemption mechanism
defined in 802.1Qbu can be used (Figure 5-4). 802.1Qbu allows the
transmission of standard Ethernet or jumbo frames to be interrupted in
order to allow the transmission of high-priority frames, and then resumed
afterward without discarding the previously transmitted piece of the
interrupted message. Frame preemption always operates on a link-by-link
basis. A frame is only fragmented from one Ethernet switch to the next
Ethernet switch, where it is reassembled.

5
   ime-aware shaper allows scheduling. https://www.synopsys.com/
 T
 designware-ip/technical-bulletin/ether-time-sens-net-for-auto-adas-
 socs-2018q2.html

Figure 5-4. 802.1Qbu frame preemption6

    In Figure 5-4, without preemption as shown in the top, if a high-priority
frame in Queue 3 arrives after a low-priority frame, the high-priority frame
is delayed until the transmission of the low-priority frame is finished.
In the case of an Ethernet port with preemption enabled, as shown in
the bottom, the low-priority traffic passes through a preemptable MAC.
The transmission of the low-priority frame is stopped, once a high-priority
frame arrives and the high-priority frame from Queue 3 is allowed to
go out. Once the transmission of the high-priority frame is completed,
the rest of the low-priority frame is transmitted. Each partial frame is
completed by a CRC32 for error detection. In contrast to the regular
Ethernet CRC32, the last 16 bits are inverted to make a partial frame
distinguishable from a standard Ethernet frame. Also the start frame
delimiter (SFD) is changed.

6
   reemption reduces latency of time-critical data streams. https://www.
 P
 synopsys.com/designware-ip/technical-bulletin/ether-time-sens-net-
 for-auto-adas-socs-2018q2.html

8? 02.1CB
Frame Replication and Elimination: Redundancy management
implemented in 802.1CB follows similar approaches known from High-
Availability Seamless Redundancy (HSR) (IEC 62439-3 Clause 5) and
Parallel Redundancy Protocol (PRP) (IEC 62439-3 Clause 4). It supports
zero switch over time when a link fails or frames are dropped. To increase
availability, redundant copies of the same messages are communicated in
parallel over disjoint paths through the network as shown in Figure ­5-5.
Time-critical frames are expanded to include a sequence number, and
then they are replicated where each identical copy follows a separate path
in the network. The redundancy management mechanism then combines
these redundant messages to generate a single stream of information
to the receiver(s). At any point in the network where the separate paths
join again, duplicate frames can be eliminated from the stream as shown
in Figure 5-5. The 802.1Qca standard for Path Control and Reservation
defines how such paths can be set up. The standard also allows for auto
configuration.

                                           L                                                   L
                    B            B                                          B            B

                   Talker Replicates                                       Bridge Replicates
      T      B     Listener Removes        B          T            B       Listener Removes    B
                       Duplicates                                              Duplicates

                    B            B                                          B            B

                                                                       L
                                                B            B

                                               Bridge Replicates
                          T            B       Bridge Removes          B
                                                   Duplicates

                                                B            B

Figure 5-5. 802.1CB frame replication and elimination7

8? 02.1Qcc
Enhanced Stream Reservation Protocol: The enhancements to Stream
Reservation Protocol (802.1Qat) include support for more streams,
configurable stream reservation classes and streams, better description of
stream characteristics, support for layer 3 streaming, deterministic stream
reservation convergence, and User Network Interface (UNI) for routing
and reservations. 802.1Qcc supports offline and/or online configuration
of TSN network scheduling to provide network management for control
plane. It supports a “Central Controller” or predefined “Engineered
Configuration” of the network.

7
   rame Replication & Elimination Page 16. https://bcourses.berkeley.edu/
 F
 files/66071146/download?download_frd=1

      The fully centralized configuration model is depicted in Figure 5-6.
It is composed of Centralized User Configuration (CUC) entity and a
Centralized Network Configuration (CNC). Computing the configuration
setting and enforcing it (e.g., setting up gate schedules, reserving
resources, etc.) in bridges are done by CNC. Thus CNC will be in charge of
configuring TSN features such as credit-based shaper, frame preemption,
scheduled traffic, per-stream filtering and policing, and frame replication
and elimination for reliability. The CUC is responsible for building up the
applications’ requirements.

                                                                                              Centralized
                                                                                                 User
                                                                                             Configuration
                                                                                     ol         (CUC)
                                                                                   oc                          En
                                                                                ot
                                                                              Pr                                    d
                                                                                                                    St
                                                                          n                         User/Network
                                                                        io                                              at
                                                                     at                             Configuration       io
                                                                   ur                                                    n
                                                                                                                             (“
                                                               fig                                    Interface              U
                                                            on                                          (UNI)                 se
                                                          )C                                                                      r”
                                                                                                                                  )C
                                                       r”
                                                     se                                       Centralized                              on
                                                  U                                                                                     fig
                                                (“                                             Network                                      ur
                                            n
                                     a  tio                                                  Configuration                                  at
                                                                                                                                              io
                                   St                                                           (CNC)                                            n
                               d                                                                                                                  Pr
                             En                                                                                                                      ot
                                                                                                                                                     oc
                                                                                             Network                                                   ol
                                                                                            Management
                            Stream                                                           Protocol
                             Data

                                                                                                                                                 Stream
                                                                                               Bridges                                            Data
      Talker End Stations                                                                                                                                 Listener End Stations

Figure 5-6. 802.1Qcc centralized network configuration8

8? 02.1Qci
Per-Stream Filtering and Policing: This protects against faulty and/or
malicious endpoints and switches and isolates faults to specific regions in the
network. It works at the ingress of the switch (forwarding engine) in order to
protect the outgoing queues from being flooded with frames. In this process,

8
   igure 3: Centralized Network Configuration. https://www.odva.org/
 F
 Portals/0/Library/Conference/2017-ODVA-Conference_Zuponcic_Hantel_
 Klecka_Didier_TSN_Influences_on_ODVA_Technologies_FINAL.pdf

the data packets are checked to ensure that they fit to a reserved data stream
at the network input. If this is not the case, the packet will be filtered out and
rejected and won’t be forwarded further. This can be leveraged to prevent
attacks on level 2 of the OSI layer model. It utilizes well-known flow identifiers
and policers used in the industry. Per-Stream Filtering and Policing (PSFP)
allows filtering and policing decisions to be made on a per-stream basis. The
various stages of data flow for one stream are depicted in Figure 5-7.

                                 Incoming Frame

                                   Stream Filter

                                   Stream Gate

                                      Meter

                                    Queueing

Figure 5-7. 802.1Qci per-stream filtering and policing

8? 02.1Qch
Cyclic Queuing and Forwarding: This defines cycles for forwarding
traffic that is queued using 802.1Qci to assign buffers and 802.1Qbv
to shape traffic. This cyclic enqueuing and queue draining procedure
gives a defined (but not optimal) upper boundary for latency. Basically
this is a simplified way to use TSN if controlled timing is desired, but
reducing latency to absolute minimum is not highly important. The
synchronized operations effectively allow bridges to synchronize their
frame transmissions in a cyclic manner, achieving zero congestion loss and
bounded latency, independently of the network topology.
     In this scheme, time-sensitive streams are scheduled (enqueued and
dequeued) at each time interval resulting in a worst-case deterministic
delay of two times the cycle time between the sender (talker) and the next
(intermediate) receiver (listener). As shown in Figure 5-8, each high-priority
traffic frame scheduled on a cycle is scheduled to be received at the next
bridge in the next cycle. A guard band before the start of the cycle prevents
any interfering low-priority traffic from affecting the high-priority traffic.
802.1Qch can be combined with frame preemption, to reduce the cycle
time from the transmission time of a full size frame to the transmission
time of a minimum size frame fragment. Thus, preemption can improve the
performance for high-priority traffic. For this to work correctly, all frames
must be kept to their allotted cycles, that is, all transmitted frames must be
received during the expected cycle at the receiving bridge.

                                                         Preemption
                                Even Cycle                Overhead                    Odd Cycle

                High Priority         Best Effort (LP)
    Bridge 1
                   Traffic             (preempted)

                                                                      High Priority        Best Effort (LP)
                                                Bridge 2
                                                                         Traffic            (preempted)
                                                                                           Reduced
                                                                                          Guard Band

Figure 5-8. 802.1Qch operation with preemption (802.1Qbu)9

    To summarize, the network transit latency of a frame is completely
characterized by the cycle time and the number of hops. Therefore, the
frame latency is completely independent of the topology parameters and
non-TSN traffic.

8? 02.1Qcr
Asynchronous Traffic Shaping: This provides bounded latency and
jitter (relatively lower performance levels) without the need for time
synchronization. It aims to smoothen traffic patterns by reshaping streams
per hop, implementing per flow queues and prioritizing urgent traffic over
lower-priority traffic. Previously described TSN standards such as Time-
Aware Shaper (802.1Qbv) and Cyclic Queuing and Forwarding (802.1Qch)
depend on network-wide coordinated time and packet transmission at
enforced periodic cycles, resulting in suboptimal utilization of available
network bandwidth. 802.1Qcr operates asynchronously, without the need

9
 I? llustration of CQF with preemption for a linear network. https://arxiv.org/
  pdf/1803.07673.pdf

for bridges and endpoints to synchronize in time. Therefore, it is expected
that this technique can utilize available network bandwidth efficiently
under heavy link utilization with mixed criticality traffic.

 TSN and Security
Since TSN is Ethernet based, the security mechanisms that are state of
the art today can be employed to secure the TSN network. Traditional
security solutions such as firewalls will be the key to this. Since firewalls
need to inspect packets, the resulting computational overhead in firewalls
can create an additional transmission delay. This delay should be taken
into account while configuring the TSN network schedules. If security
mechanisms introduce longer delays than that are tolerable by the TSN
application, they can be implemented at the border or periphery of the
TSN network, such as an Industrial Demilitarized Zone that connects the
TSN industrial control network to the rest of the IT system.

 OPC-UA Over TSN
Of the many higher layer industrial communication protocols that could be
combined with TSN, one of the prominent ones is OPC-UA. Much like TSN,
OPC-UA is an open, standard technology that is vendor independent and
useful for a wide range of industrial applications. The combination of OPC-
UA and TSN therefore provides a complete open, standard, and interoperable
solution that fulfills a plurality of industrial communication requirements.
    By representing data in a uniform way, OPC-UA enables interoperability
between devices that could not previously share data and gives you new
insight into a wealth of information. For this reason, it has been adopted
and integrated into products by all of the major industrial automation
vendors. OPC-UA was originally limited to a client or server architecture;
however the recently released publish/subscribe (PubSub) extension now
enables multicast communication. In combination with TSN, OPC-UA

PubSub allows data to be sent with precise timing and thus be used for real-
time industrial applications as illustrated in Figure 5-9. In the horizontal
direction, OPC-UA-based controller-to-controller communication can
be done over TSN. In the vertical direction, OPC-UA-based controller-to-
cloud communication can be done directly, via a gateway or broker. This
enables IT (Information Technology) systems having less stringent timing
requirements to interwork with OT (Operations Technology) systems that
need guaranteed data delivery with precise timing.

                                                                                           Cloud

                    ERP/MES                                                              Relay                                             SCADA
                                                                                         Broker

  IT Network

                  Management shell                           Management shell                                Management shell

  OT Network

                Controller            Saw                  Controller
                                                                             Press                         Controller             Robot

                                               over TSN                                     without TSN

                      SLAVE   SLAVE    SLAVE                     SLAVE   SLAVE   SLAVE                            SLAVE   SLAVE    SLAVE

               Fieldbus A                                 Fieldbus B                                      Fieldbus C

Figure 5-9. Factory automation network with OPC-UA over TSN

    OPC-UA also enables a standard method for configuring TSN networks
online and in a dynamic way. This does not require you to input any
system parameters for the scheduler as these are all taken from the
OPC-UA application parameters within each device. A broker mechanism
as defined by the OPC Foundation provides an interface between OPC-UA
applications and TSN scheduling software.

  verview of Wireless Connectivity
O
Technologies
The IoT will require several wireless technologies if it’s to meet its
potential. For example, Bluetooth Low Energy and IEEE 802.15.4 are good
choices for battery-powered sensors, but for devices that are constantly
moving, or are not near a LAN (local area network), such relatively short-
range wireless technologies are not suitable for connecting to the Internet.
     Even if a LAN is present, manufacturers might prefer longer-range wireless
technology for its convenience and autonomy. For example, a white goods
manufacturer could select cellular technology over Wi-Fi because it enables
a refrigerator or washing machine to connect to the Cloud automatically,
eliminating the need for a consumer to enter a password to add the appliance
to a home’s LAN. In these situations, low-power wide area networks (LPWAN)
or Narrowband IoT technologies could come to the rescue.

  onsiderations for Choosing Wireless
C
Technologies for IoT
There are many wireless networking technologies that are deployed in IoT
today, each with a different set of capabilities. Here are some of the key
considerations when choosing these different solutions.

 Spectrum
Wireless spectrum can be characterized as either licensed or unlicensed.
Access to licensed spectrum is typically purchased from local government
to provide an organization exclusive access to a particular channel in a
particular location. Operation in that channel should be largely free of
interference from competing radios. The drawback is that the spectrum
of interest may be extremely scarce or expensive to access. In some other
cases, radio connectivity bands allowed in one country may not be available

in other geographical area for same usage. For instance, mobile networks in
India use the 900 MHz and 1800 MHz frequency bands, while GSM (Global
System for Mobile communications) carriers in the United States operate in
850 MHz and 1900 MHz frequency bands. To deploy an IoT device globally,
then it may have to support multiple radio bands making the device costly
as well as time-consuming to develop. Even when more easily accessible,
it can take months to gain the approval to operate, so licensed bands are
not well suited to rapid deployments. Unlicensed spectrum is generally
open and available to anybody to use with no exclusive rights granted to
any particular organization or individual. The downside is that competing
systems may occupy the same channel at different power levels leading to
interference. Manufacturers of radio systems operating in unlicensed bands
include capabilities in these radios to adapt their operation for this potential
interference. These techniques include adaptive modulation, automatic
transmit power control and out-of-band filtering, and so on.

 Range and Capacity
Several factors impact the amount of data capacity that can be delivered at
a particular distance. Those factors include spectrum, channel bandwidth,
transmitter power, terrain, noise immunity, and antenna size. In general,
the longer the distance to be covered, the lower the data capacity. The
longest propagation distance can be achieved by using a low-frequency
narrowband channel with a high-gain antenna, while higher capacities
could be achieved by selecting wider channels, with limited range. For
optimal performance for each application, we need to choose the best
combination of channel size, antenna, and radio power and modulation
schemes to achieve the desired capacity.
     A radio link can be described as being line of sight when there is a
direct optical path between the two radios making up the link. A link
is called non-line of sight when there is some obstruction between the
two radios. Near line of sight is simply a partial obstruction rather than a

complete obstruction. In general, lower-frequency solutions have better
propagation characteristics than higher frequencies. Higher-frequency
solutions that operate in multi-gigahertz range are typically line-of-sight
or near line-of-sight systems. From 1 GHz to 6 GHz range, the propagation
characteristics capabilities will vary depending on other factors, and
typically below 1 GHz the propagation becomes much better, making those
frequencies suitable for longer range. Figure 5-10 shows a landscape of
data rates and ranges of common wireless technologies.

     >1000
                                    Low Power
                  WAN

                                 Wide Area Networks                          Cellular (3G, 4G/LTE, 5G)
                                     LoRa, SigFox etc.
            100
Range (m)

                                                     Proprietary                                  Wi-Fi
                  LAN

                                                                                         (802.11 a/b/g/n/ac/ax/ah)
                                              Sub-GHz        2.4GHz

             10
                  PAN

                                             Zigbee
                                                              Bluetooth                           BAN Body Area Network
              1
                                                                                                  PAN Personal Area Network
                                                                                                  LAN Local Area Network
                  BAN

                                                                                                  WAN Wide Area Network
                               NFC
                        0.01                             1                          10                       100              1000
                                                                 Data Rate (Mbps)

Figure 5-10. Range and data rate for various wireless technologies

N
  etwork Topology
Network topology is the arrangement of the elements in a network,
including its nodes and connections between them. Common network
topologies used for wireless connectivity are depicted in Figure 5-11.

            Point to Point                                 Star

              Ring                                           Mesh

Figure 5-11. Common network topologies

    Point-to-point topologies are best suited for delivering lots of capacity
over long distances. Point-to-point connections cover longer distances that
are less susceptible to interference as the antenna patterns are narrower
so the energy can be focused in the direction of the desired transmission.
PTP links are also used for short-range connections to the wireline
backbone. Resiliency in a PTP link can be provided by deploying in 1+1 or
other redundant configurations with parallel sets of radios.
    Ring topologies are excellent for resilient operations of high-capacity
links covering a large area. This configuration is typically used in the
backhaul network.
    Mesh networks can be built using multiple point-to-point links or
with specialized meshing protocols to enable multiple paths from point
A to point B. Mesh networks have the downside of each packet traversing

multiple hops and so can lead to lower capacity and increased latency for a
given infrastructure.
    Point-to-multipoint (or star) networks provide scale and capacity over
a geographic area. Point-to-multipoint networks are typically deployed to
cover sectors or cells. The key differentiating capability to look for in point-
to-point networks is their ability to scale in the number of nodes per cell
but also the ability to place cells next to each other without interference.

 Quality of Service
System builders and operators need to make the most efficient use of
available spectrum by deploying multiple services on the same network
and also making sure that mission-critical information is transmitted with
highest priority. A network should support multiple Quality of Service (QoS)
levels and the ability to sort traffic based on both layer 2 and layer 3 standard
traffic classifiers. In this way, the transmitter of the data packet can mark the
class of service or priority, and the end-to-end network will ensure that the
packet is delivered with the desired level of low latency and availability.

 Network Management
The capability to manage a network has a direct impact on the total cost
of ownership of the IoT system. Networking systems that allow centralized
management of configuration, fault detection, performance tuning
and continuous monitoring, and security validation minimize the cost
and effort. They also reduce unplanned outages and increase system
availability and reliability.

 Security
The security of wireless communications is growing in importance.
Primary techniques to look for here is the ability to encrypt the over-
the-air link, using a network, mesh, or link key. Besides this we need to

secure management interfaces with HTTPS and SNMP. Systems should
also provide the ability to create multiple user accounts with password
complexity rules. Previously, many traditional automation and control
solutions have not been exposed to security issues faced by the IT systems,
but recently have become hacking targets as their solutions get connected to
the Internet. Major security breaches could slow down the adoption of IoT.
    As can be seen from Figure 5-12, several local area network (LAN) and
wide area network (WAN) technologies with different levels of security and
network management requirements need to work seamlessly to realize an
end-to-end IoT system.

                       Things                                             Network                                                  Cloud

                                                              Gateway Devices

  Security     Management        Data    API Libraries,                                                  3rd Party
                              Processing APIs, SDK                                                        Cloud

                                                           Security    Management                                       Data      Batch & Stream     Storage
                                                                                                                     Management      Analytics

             Local Area Network Connectivity                                               Network
                                                             Data      API Libraries,   Infrastructure
                                                          Processing    APIs, SDK

                                                                                                                      Security     Management      API Libraries,
                                                                                                                                                    APIs, SDK

             Wide Area Network Connectivity

Figure 5-12. End-to-end IoT systems need various connectivity
technologies to work together

W
  i-Fi
Wi-Fi is a wireless connectivity technology based on the IEEE 802.11
standards. Initially created for wireless local area network (WLAN)
applications, Wi-Fi is also increasingly used for peer-to-peer and wireless
personal area network connections (WPAN). It provides secure, reliable,
and fast wireless connectivity. A Wi-Fi network can be used to connect
electronic devices to each other, to the Internet, and to wired networks that
use Ethernet technology. It can provide real-world performance similar to

that of basic wired networks. Wi-Fi networks operate in the 2.4 GHz and
5 GHz radio bands, with some products that contain both bands (dual-
band). Wi-Fi is also pushing into a third band – the 60 GHz band – using
ultra-wideband channels and the baseband solution originally developed
by WiGig. The Wi-Fi Alliance is a wireless industry organization that
promotes wireless technologies that are based on IEEE 802.11 and their
interoperability. The Alliance also certifies products that comply with its
specifications for Wi-Fi interoperability, security, and application-specific
protocols.
     Wi-Fi offers low power consumption and low cost relative to cellular.
Unlike cellular, Wi-Fi operates in unlicensed spectrum, resulting also in
lower data transmission costs. Range is limited by proximity to a wireless
router or relays, and the quality of connection can be diminished by
network congestion. There are several different Wi-Fi standards optimized
for IoT applications. Next, we will take a brief look at them.
     Wi-Fi Direct enables two or more devices to connect directly in the
absence of a traditional Wi-Fi hotspot.
     With the broad availability of the 802.11ac Wi-Fi standard, Wi-Fi
operates in the 5 GHz band with wider channels (Note: 802.11n could also
operate in 5 GHz but in smaller channels), thus enabling more capacity.
Theoretical throughput of 11ac can exceed 1 Gbps.
     Also known as Low-Power Wi-Fi, 802.11ah operates in the sub-1 GHz
band. It is viewed as central to IoT, given support for extended range
Wi-Fi and efficient power profile. 11ah extends Wi-Fi beyond 2.4 and 5
GHz, enabling coverage in challenging environments such as in building,
basements, and so on. It also supports low-cost sensors without a power
amplifier, and minimum data rates result in short-term data bursts.
     802.11p is an approved standard for vehicle-to-vehicle
communications. It uses dedicated short-range communications (DSRC)
for applications such as toll collection, interaction between cars, and safety
and roadside communications.

    With the increased adoption of Wi-Fi networks for IoT applications
arose the need for providing wireless network in places where connecting
an access point (AP) to wired network infrastructure (e.g., a wired
Ethernet switch) was not possible. A typical example would be the case
of positioning an AP in the middle of a large warehouse, since the length
of an Ethernet cable is limited to 100 meters. Some other use cases are
the extension of an indoor wireless network to a parking lot or a campus,
providing Wi-Fi coverage to outdoor industrial areas such as an oil refinery
and others. Such a network can service applications like wireless security
cameras, utility meters, flow and pressure sensors, vehicle tracking
systems, and so on.
    802.11s defines Wi-Fi mesh networking. As shown in Figure 5-13,
mesh networks allow rapid deployment with lower-cost backhaul, and
they make providing coverage in hard-to-wire areas easier. Inherently,
mesh networks are self-healing, resilient, and extensible. Under the
right conditions, they increase the range of the network due to multihop
forwarding and provide higher bandwidth and better battery life due to the
lower power transmissions caused by shorter hops between neighboring
nodes.

                           Classic 802.11 WLAN
                                   Wired Infrastructure

                       AP                                 AP

                                                                      AP
                      STA
         STA                                              STA                 STA
                                      AP
                                                                STA

                             STA                                        STA
                                         STA

      = radio link

                            WLAN with Mesh
                                   Wired Infrastructure

                     Mesh            Mesh             Mesh
                      AP              AP               AP
                                                                      Mesh
                                                                       AP
                     STA
       STA                          Mesh                  STA                 STA
                                     AP                         STA

                            STA                                         STA
                                        STA

    = mesh radio
      link

Figure 5-13. Comparison of classic and mesh wireless local area
network topologies

     Wi-Fi uses TCP/IP stack for Internet connectivity. Wi-Fi technology
is hugely popular for consumer electronics and enterprise applications
due to its ubiquitous presence in laptops, tablets, smartphones, and home
entertainment devices. Wi-Fi access points are deployed today in many
public spaces such as stadiums, airports, bus and railway stations, coffee
shops, and schools. They are also present in most homes and offices. The
increasing demand for cost-effective and easy Internet access along with
the interoperability and ecosystem programs run by Wi-Fi Alliance has
contributed to the wide adoption of this technology across the world. This
worldwide availability makes Wi-Fi a natural choice for IoT connectivity,
for applications that can leverage existing infrastructure without the need
for custom protocol translators or gateways.
     Today, most Wi-Fi networks operate in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz ISM
(industrial, scientific, and medical) band. With more channels being
available in the 5 GHz spectrum, higher data rates are possible. Wi-Fi
networks have a start topology, with the access point acting as an Internet
gateway. The transmit power permitted by Wi-Fi standards are high
enough to enable in-home coverage in many cases. In large buildings,
multiple access points and range extenders are often deployed at different
locations to ensure adequate coverage and to avoid dead zones. Some
Wi-Fi products support multiple antennae and transmitter and receiver
chains for diversity. This helps in overcoming dead zones as well as
increases data throughput.
     Wi-Fi and TCP/IP software stacks are fairly complex and big in size.
In traditional applications like laptops, smartphones, and tablets with
adequate processing power and memory footprint, this was not a major
issue. IoT devices – or things – often come with very low processing power
and memory size and are typically battery powered. Till recently, adding
Wi-Fi connectivity to those devices was neither practical nor cost-effective.
Today, many wireless modules with embedded microcontrollers that
run the TCP/IP stack and Wi-Fi software are available, thus offloading
the task of networking from the main microprocessor unit. Wi-Fi devices

targeted for low data rate IoT applications apply advanced sleep protocols
and support fast on/off times to reduce the average power consumption
dramatically. Since many IoT applications do not need the maximum
data rates that Wi-Fi offers, intelligent power management techniques can
efficiently draw bursts of current from the battery for very short intervals
and keep products connected to the Internet for multiple years without
battery replacement.
     Wi-Fi modules for IoT applications typically integrate the RF frontend,
thus eliminating the need for extensive radio design experience for the
embedded system designer. They often come pre-certified for regulatory
compliance such as FCC (Federal Communications Commission) in the
United States, thus making the system certification process less time-
consuming. Wi-Fi is the most ubiquitous wireless Internet connectivity
technology today. Its high power and complexity has been a major
barrier for IoT developers, but new silicon devices and modules reduce
many of these barriers and enable Wi-Fi integration into emerging IoT
applications and battery-operated devices. On the other hand, latest Wi-Fi
standards offer very high bandwidth and capacity where needed, such as
in video surveillance, retail, and sports arena applications. Thus Wi-Fi can
support a wide variety of applications. Table 5-4 summarizes the Wi-Fi
technologies currently available in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz spectrum.

Table 5-4. Wi-Fi Protocol Summary
Protocol         Frequency     Channel      MIMO          Maximum data
                               Width                      rate(theoretical)
802.11ac wave2 5 GHz           80, 80+80,   Multi User    1.73 Gbps1
                               160 MHz      (MU-MIMO)
802.11ac wave1 5 GHz           80 MHz       Single User   866.7 Mbps1
                                            (SU-MIMO)
                                                                (continued)

Table 5-4. (continued)
Protocol            Frequency      Channel         MIMO        Maximum data
                                   Width                       rate(theoretical)
802.11n            2.4 or 5 GHz    20, 40MHz     Single User   450 Mbps2
                                                 (SU-MIMO)
802.11g            2.4 GHz         20 MHz        N/A           54 Mbps
802.11a            5 GHz           20 MHz        N/A           54 Mbps
802.11b            2.4 GHz         20 MHz        N/A           11 Mbps
Legacy 802.11      2.4 GHz         20 MHz        N/A           2 Mbps
1
    2 Spatial streams with 256-QAM modulation.
2
    3 Spatial streams with 64-QAM modulation.

     To increase the relatively short range of Wi-Fi – specifically for IoT
sensors that don’t require high data rates – 802.11ah was introduced. It
operates in the 900 MHz and uses target wake time to reduce the amount of
energy a device needs to stay connected to the network. Devices wake up
for very short times at defined intervals to accept messages. It penetrates
through walls and obstructions better than high-frequency networks. It
is well suited for smart building applications, like smart lighting, smart
HVAC, and smart security systems. It would also work for smart city
applications, like parking garages and parking meters. Since there is no
global 900 MHz standard, the adoption rate of 802.11ah is currently very
low. Table 5-5 summarizes the key characteristics of 802.11ah.

Table 5-5. 802.11ah Overview
Name of Standard                 IEEE P802.11ah (low power WiFi)

Frequency Band                   License-exempt bands below 1 GHz,
                                 excluding the TV White Spaces
Channel Width                    1/2/4/8/16 MHz
Range                            Up to 1Km (outdoor)
End Node Transmit Power          Dependent on Regional Regulations
                                 (from 1mW to 1 W)
Packet Size                      Up to 7,991 Bytes (w/o Aggregation), Up to
                                 65,535 Bytes (with Aggregation)
Uplink Data Rate                 150 Kbps ~ 346.666 Mbps
Downlink Data Rate               150 Kbps ~ 346.666 Mbps
Devices per Access Point         8191
Topology                         Star, Tree
End node roaming allowed         Allowed by other IEEE 802.11 amendments
                                 (e.g., IEEE 802.11r)
Governing Body                   IEEE 802.11 working group
Status                           Targeting 2016 release

    802.11ax represents the next phase of Wi-Fi. The Wi-Fi Alliance
coined the term “Wi-Fi 6” when referring to the IEEE 802.11ax standard,
indicating the sixth generation of Wi-Fi. Continued growth in the number
of Wi-Fi-enabled devices, increased per-user traffic demand, greater
number of users per access point (AP), higher-density Wi-Fi deployments,
growing use of outdoor Wi-Fi, heterogeneous device and traffic types, and
a desire for more power and spectral efficiency are all major driving forces
behind 802.11ax. There are many 802.11ax enhancements in the 2.4 GHz
band that will help increase the viability of Wi-Fi for Internet of Things

(IoT) applications. These include target wake time (TWT), orthogonal
frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA), 2 MHz clients, and
coexistence improvements with other IoT wireless technologies. With sub-
1 GHz Wi-Fi HaLow (802.11ah) having gained very little traction to date,
there is still considerable potential for 2.4 GHz Wi-Fi in the IoT. If certain
2.4 GHz 802.11ax implementations can offer comparable battery life to
802.11n, or other short-range wireless IoT connectivity solutions, it may
open new opportunities for Wi-Fi across several IoT vertical applications.
The standard builds on the strengths of 802.11ac while adding efficiency,
flexibility, and scalability. Table 5-6 shows the major technical differences
between 802.11ac and 802.11ax standards.

Table 5-6. 802.11ac and 802.11ax Comparison
                       802.11ac                  802.11ax

Bands                  5 GHz                     2.4 GHz and 5 GHz
Channel Bandwith       20 MHz, 40 MHz, 80 MHz,   20 MHz, 40 MHz, 80 MHz,
                       80+80 MHz, & 160 MHz      80+80 MHz, &160 MHz
FFT Sizes              64, 128, 256, 512         256, 512, 1024, 2048
Subcarrier Spacing     312.5 kHz                 78.125 kHz
OFDM Symbol            3.2 us + 0.8/0.4 us CP    12.8 us + 0.8/1.6/3.2 us CP
Duration
Highest Modulation     256-QAM                   1024-QAM
Data Rate: 1 Spatial   433 Mbps (80 MHz, 1 SS)   600.4 Mbps (80 MHz, 1 SS)
Stream
Data Rate: 8 Spatial   6933 Mbps (160 MHz, 8 SS) 9607.8 Mbps (160 MHz, 8
Streams                                          SS)

    For Wi-Fi connectivity technology, security has two aspects. First is
controlling who can connect to and configure the network and equipment.
Second aspect deals with securing the data travelling wirelessly across
your Wi-Fi network from unauthorized access by using encryption. For the
overall network to be secure, one should also consider measures to protect
the gateways and the connections across the Internet using virtual private
network (VPN), firewalls, and so on.

 Bluetooth
Bluetooth operates in the unlicensed industrial, scientific, and medical
(ISM) band at 2.4 GHz using a spread spectrum, frequency hopping, and
full-duplex signal at a nominal rate of 1600 hops/sec. The 2.4 GHz ISM
band is available and unlicensed in most countries. Its range varies from
1 m to 100 m depending on which class of radio is used. Class 2 is the most
commonly used radio. It has a range of around 10 m and uses 2.5 mW of
power.
     Bluetooth provides a short distance wireless connection with low
power consumption, even compared to Wi-Fi. Bluetooth Low Energy
(also known as Bluetooth Smart or BLE) further reduces the power
consumption profile of traditional Bluetooth. For example, Bluetooth
devices can sustain battery life for weeks or months, while Wi-Fi can be
hours or days. Data transfer rates are somewhat limited at about 1 Mbps
(though theoretical throughput is up to 24 Mbps), though the range
extends up to about 100 meters (300+ feet). Similar to Wi-Fi, Bluetooth
can be used for machine-to-machine connections and device pairing.
Bluetooth 4.1 was introduced in December 2013, which enables devices
to communicate with each other before feeding that data back to a host
and interoperates with LTE.
     The Bluetooth SIG controls the Bluetooth standard. Bluetooth
technology was originally proposed as a standard for communications
between phones and computers. The main use case that made Bluetooth

initially popular was hands-free phone calls with headsets and in-vehicle
infotainment systems in cars. With the advent of smartphones, high-
fidelity music streaming and health and fitness accessories have also
become more popular.
     Bluetooth is a PAN (personal area network) technology primarily
used today as a cable replacement for short-range communication. It
can be used in a point-to-point or star network topology. It supports data
throughputs up to 2 Mbps, with up to eight connected devices.
     Original Bluetooth standard is today commonly referred to as
Bluetooth Classic, to distinguish it from Bluetooth Low Energy. Bluetooth
Low Energy, sometimes known as Bluetooth Smart, is an addition to the
Bluetooth specification. Bluetooth SIG adopted it in the Bluetooth 4.0
standard in 2010 to enter the low-power IoT space.
     Though Bluetooth Low Energy also uses the 2.4 GHz ISM band, it is
not compatible with Bluetooth Classic. Bluetooth Low Energy uses 40
2 MHz-wide channels, whereas Bluetooth Classic uses 79 1 MHz-wide
channels. Compared to Bluetooth Classic, Bluetooth Low Energy greatly
reduces the power consumption of Bluetooth devices by supporting lower
data throughput and enables lengthy lives for battery-operated devices.
Bluetooth Low Energy also offers a beaconing capability and location-
based services. Bluetooth Low Energy has proven to be very popular,
triggering an explosion of new applications in spaces as diverse as fitness,
toys, and automotive applications. It is now the main driving force behind
many new Bluetooth standards.
     Over the years, Bluetooth SIG has announced major revisions to the
specifications to improve security, battery life, and easier interoperation
with IP-based networks. For example, Bluetooth 4.2 specification added
industrial strength security with elliptic curve cryptography (ECC)-based
key management and Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) counter with
cipher block chaining message authentication code (CCM) cryptography
for message encryption.

    Bluetooth 5 offers a choice of data rates and operating ranges – 2 Mbps,
1 Mbps, 500 Kbps, and 125 Kbps. The lower the data rates, the longer the
ranges. The increases in range and data rate capabilities make Bluetooth
Low Energy increasingly attractive in nonconsumer segments such as
industrial data loggers or smart energy meters. Along with these, Bluetooth
Low Energy’s inherent advantage of built-in compatibility with mobile
devices, it is an excellent choice for data display and retrieval, Internet
connectivity, and initial provisioning and configuration of IoT devices in
the field. Table 5-7 shows a comparison of Bluetooth Classic and Bluetooth
Low Energy technologies.
    In 2017, the Bluetooth SIG released the mesh profile and mesh
model specifications. Mesh networking technology enables the use of
Bluetooth Low Energy for many-to-many device communications in home
automation applications such as smart lighting, low-power wireless sensor
networks, and so on. It also enables extended range communication using
intermediary nodes to relay the data across the network. These new mesh
standards are compatible with both the Bluetooth 5 and Bluetooth 4.x
standards.

Table 5-7. Bluetooth Low Energy and Bluetooth Classic Comparison
                   Bluetooth Low Energy (LE)          Bluetooth Classic
                                                      [Basic Rate/Enhanced
                                                      Data Rate (BR/EDR)]

Optimized For…     Short burst data transmission      Continuous data streaming
Frequency Band     2.4 GHz ISM Band                   2.4GHz ISM Band (2.402–
                   (2.402–2.480 GHz Utilized)         2.480 GHz Utilized)
Channels           40 channels with 2 MHz spacing     79 channels with 1 MHz
                   (3 advertising channels/37 data    spacing
                   channels)
                                                                   (continued)

Table 5-7. (continued)

                     Bluetooth Low Energy (LE)          Bluetooth Classic
                                                        [Basic Rate/Enhanced
                                                        Data Rate (BR/EDR)]

Channel Usage        Frequency-Hopping Spread           Frequency-Hopping Spread
                     Spectrum (FHSS)                    Spectrum (FHSS)
Modulation           GFSK                               GFSK, π/4 DQPSK, 8DPSK

Power                ~0.01x to 0.5x of reference        1 (reference value)
Consumption          (depending on use case)
Data Rate            LE 2M PHY: 2 Mb/s                  EDR PHY (8DPSK): 3 Mb/s
                     LE 1M PHY: 1 Mb/s                  EDR PHY (π/4 DQPSK): 2
                     LE Coded PHY (S=2): 500 Kb/s       Mb/s
                     LE Coded PHY (S=8): 125 Kb/s       BR PHY (GFSK): 1 Mb/s
Max Tx Power*        Class 1: 100 mW (+20 dBm)          Class 1: 100 mW (+20
                     Class 1.5: 10 mW (+10 dBm)         dBm)
                     Class 2: 2.5 mW (+4 dBm)           Class 2: 2.5 mW (+4 dBm)
                     Class 3: 1 mW (0 dBm)              Class 3: 1 mW (0 dBm)
Network Topologies Point-to-point (including piconet)   Point-to-point (including
                   BroadcastMesh                        piconet)

    Security in Bluetooth mesh networking is concerned with the security
of more than individual devices or connections between peer devices; it’s
concerned with the security of an entire network of devices and of various
groupings of devices in the network. Consequently, security in Bluetooth
mesh networking is mandatory. This is achieved by implementing the
following fundamental security measures:

      •      Encryption and authentication: All Bluetooth mesh
             messages are encrypted and authenticated.

      •   Separation of concerns: Network security, application
          security, and device security are addressed
          independently.

      •   Area isolation: A Bluetooth mesh network can be
          divided into subnets, each cryptographically distinct
          and secure from the others.

      •   Key refresh: Security keys can be changed during the
          life of the Bluetooth mesh network via a key refresh
          procedure.

      •   Message obfuscation: Message obfuscation makes
          it difficult to track messages sent within the network
          and, as such, provides a privacy mechanism to make it
          difficult to track nodes.

      •   Replay attack protection: Bluetooth mesh security
          protects the network against replay attacks.

      •   Trashcan attack protection: Nodes can be removed
          from the network securely, in a way which prevents
          trashcan attacks.

      •   Secure device provisioning: The process by which
          devices are added to the Bluetooth mesh network to
          become nodes is a secure process.

 Zigbee
Zigbee is based on the IEEE 802.15.4 link layer and typically operates in
the 2.4 GHz ISM band. Its networking layer has been designed with mesh
topology operations in mind from the ground up. This provides the
ability to scale the network geographically through multihop operations

(for applications such as smart meters), as well as increases fault tolerance
and reliability as backup paths are created through the mesh between any
two points.
     Zigbee is designed, promoted, and maintained by the Zigbee Alliance.
Zigbee 3.0, the latest specification, increases choice and flexibility for users
and developers and delivers the confidence that products and services will
all work together through standardization at all layers of the stack. Zigbee
3.0 is built on the Zigbee PRO, which enhances the IEEE 802.15.4 standard
by adding mesh network and security layers along with an application
framework and to become a full stack, low-power certifiable, interoperable
Zigbee solution. Zigbee provides a complete solution that enables true
device interoperability between different manufacturers. The Zigbee
protocol suite incorporates the Zigbee cluster library: a standard library
of device types, data models, and behaviors built by original equipment
manufacturers (OEMs) operating in different vertical markets and proven
in actual deployments for many years. A rigorous certification program
managed by the Zigbee Alliance guarantees interoperability between
Zigbee devices, verifying device type behavior and functionality from
an end product perspective and ensuring that products from different
manufacturers can operate together.
     The Zigbee protocol suite includes standard commissioning, security,
network, and device management procedures. Various device types
can join and be authenticated in the network and be factory reset or
decommissioned in an interoperable way, guaranteeing end-to-end
device interoperability from the start of device operation and seamlessly
integrating with data collectors or hubs.
     Zigbee-based applications mostly target the smart home and smart
building domains, with focus in lighting and home control and physical
security segments. Many telecom, security, and Internet service providers
have endorsed Zigbee as the protocol of choice when introducing
their home automation services to consumers, and many lighting
manufacturers have a series of smart bulbs supporting this protocol.

     Zigbee takes full advantage of IEEE 802.15.4 physical radio standard
and operation in unlicensed bands worldwide at 2.4 GHz (global), 915 MHz
(Americas), and 868 MHz (Europe). Raw data throughput rates of 250
Kbps can be achieved at 2.4 GHz (16 channels), 10 Kbps at 915–921 MHz
(27 channels), and 100 Kbps at 868 MHz (63 channels). Transmission
distances range from 10 to 100 meters, depending on power output and
environmental characteristics. Sub-1 GHz channel transmission ranges up
to 1 km. Table 5-8 provides a quick overview of the Zigbee technology.
     Zigbee effectively uses the allocated bandwidth to convey both
application data to operate devices and network management procedures
like mesh and routing management with a very small energy footprint.
Zigbee’s addressing scheme is capable of supporting hundreds of nodes
per network (up to 64K), and multiple network coordinators can be linked
together to support extremely large networks. The logical size of a Zigbee
network ultimately depends on which frequency band is selected, how
often each device on the network needs to communicate, and how much
data loss or retransmissions can be tolerated by the application.

Table 5-8. Overview of Zigbee Technical Specifications
Solution                         Description

Network Protocol                 Zigbee PRO 2015 (or newer)
Network Topology                 Self-Forming, Self-Healing MESH
Network Device Types             Coordinator (routing capable), Router, End
                                 Device, Zigbee Green Power Device
Network Size (# of nodes)        Up to 65,000
Radio Technology                 IEEE 802.15.4-2011
Frequency Band/Channels          2.4 GHz (ISM band)
                                 16 channels (2 MHz wide)
                                                                   (continued)

Table 5-8. (continued)

Solution                          Description

Data Rate                         250 Kbits/sec
Security Models                   Centralized (with Install Codes support)
                                  Distributed
Encryption Support                AES-128 at Network Layer
                                  AES-128 available at Application Layer
Communication                     Up to 300+ meters (line of sight)
Range (Average)                   Up to 75–100 meters indoor
Low Power Support                 Sleeping End Devices
                                  Zigbee Green Power Devices (energy
                                  harvesting)

 NFC
Near field communications (NFC) is a short-range wireless
communication technology designed to build on existing high-frequency
(HF) (13.56 MHz) contactless and RFID technology. Using 13.56 MHz on
the ISM band and with a typical operating distance of up to 4 cm, today
NFC enables an exchange rate of between 106 Kbps and 848 Kbps. NFC
creates a short-range wireless connection able to operate in three different
modes of operation: card emulation, read/write, and peer-to-peer. NFC
technology enables a wide range of use cases from keyless access to
e-wallet in smartphone and smart tags for medical applications. This is
due to ease of implementation and the ability to embed tags into credit
cards, smartphones, and other wearable devices.

 GPS/GNSS
GPS is a satellite-based radio navigation system that provides users with
location, velocity, and time information. A GPS receiver acquires each
visible satellite’s signal and measures the individual time delays. Applying
these time delays to known radio wave propagation characteristics allows
the distance to each satellite to be calculated. GPS accuracy correlates
with the number of satellites successfully acquired by a GPS receiver. New
systems are under development, such as Glonass, Galileo, and Compass,
which, when used in conjunction with GPS, will improve global coverage,
reduce time to fix location, and increase performance in challenging
environments. Location data collected by onboard GPS trackers are
vital to many applications in the transportation industry such as fleet
management, asset tracking, and autonomous vehicles.

 Cellular
Cellular technologies provide “always-on” connectivity to the backbone
network – to the Cloud. Similar to mobile phones for consumer
applications, cellular data for IoT can be connected over 2G, 3G, or 4G
networks. Benefits include broad coverage leveraging existing base station
infrastructure as well as mobility (e.g., cars). Potential drawbacks include
power consumption, fees associated with data transfer over licensed
spectrum owned by carriers, and potential gaps in coverage.
    As demand for ubiquitous connectivity for IoT devices gets ever
stronger, cellular networks can deliver reliable and secure IoT services
using existing network infrastructure. Massive investments have been
made in spectrum allocations and network deployments to ensure good
coverage for the entire population in most countries. The same networks
that are used to connect people can now be leveraged to connect things.

    Traditional cellular options such as 2G, 3G, or higher category 4G
modems consume a lot of power and don’t fit well with applications where
only a small amount of data is transmitted infrequently, such as smart
meters, asset trackers, healthcare equipment, agriculture sensors, parking
spaces, and street lights. Cellular IoT is designed to meet the requirements
of such low-power, long-range applications. It takes existing technology
that we already use every day for our smartphones and scales it back to
meet the needs of low-power devices.
    When it comes to analyzing cost of a communication solution, the
total cost of ownership includes spectrum costs, infrastructure costs, and
operational expenses. As cellular networks are already in place, very little new
infrastructure needs to be installed. The base stations, cell towers, buildings,
and power supply are already in place, all around the world. The technology
also has the potential to cover hundreds of thousands of IoT devices per
square kilometer – many more than other communication options.
    No single technology or solution is ideally suited to all the different
potential massive IoT applications, market situations, and spectrum
availability. As a result, the mobile industry is standardizing several
technologies, including Long-Term Evolution for Machines (LTE-M) and
Narrowband IoT (NB-IoT). NB-IoT is ideally suited for low bandwidth,
infrequent communication from a relatively stationary device, while
LTE-M suits higher bandwidth or mobile and roaming applications.
    A good application for NB-IoT is the use of remote environmental
sensors to measure temperature, wind, pressure, and so on. These devices
can send regular updates from a fixed location while optimizing battery
use. Such a device could last for up to 10 years, or longer if solar powered
and in the right geographical position.
    Similarly, an asset tracker with condition monitoring through
several sensors, which is mobile and roaming from country to country,
is well served by an LTE-M solution that offers highway speed mobility,
international roaming between countries and operators, and efficient
firmware updates.

   Advantages of cellular connectivity for IoT include

      •   The use of open standards based on existing
          infrastructure means coverage will reach virtually
          everywhere where people live.
      •   Many devices can operate simultaneously because
          of the advanced coexistence mechanisms in the LTE
          standard and licensed band operation, as is already
          proven today with the large number of cellphones used
          concurrently within a small area.

      •   No limiting regulatory regulations, so you can transmit
          up to 23 dBm and negotiate for as much airtime as you
          need.

      •   Standard TLS/DTLS security for end-to-end security
          is supported on top of the on-air encryption of the LTE
          network aided by the SIM credentials. This keeps data
          secure from the device to the cloud server.

      •   As cellular network coverage increases and technologies
          are available in low-complexity, low-­power variants,
          cellular technology is a great choice for the world’s IoT
          needs.

5? G Cellular
The first-generation mobile network (1G) was all about voice and used
analogy technology. 2G enabled voice and texting (short messaging
service – SMS) using digital technology. 3G was about voice, texting, and
data. 4G was everything in 3G but faster, and 5G will be even faster. 5G
will be fast enough to download a full-length HD movie in seconds. The
transition from 2G to 4G happened in a span of about 20 years as shown in
Figure 5-14.

                                                             User
                                                          Experience,
                                                             new
                                                           verticals
                                                           verrticals

                                                  Apps,
                                                  vi
                                                   ideo
                                                     e
                                                  video
                           SMS, data
            Voice
            V
            Voice

            1995              2000                2010        2020

Figure 5-14. Evolution of cellular technologies

      The real performance of a cellular network will vary by provider,
their configuration of the network, the number of active connections in a
given cell, the radio environment in a specific location, the capability of
the device in use, plus all the other factors that affect radio performance.
It is safe to assume that the throughput will be much closer to the lower
bound for data throughput, and the latency will be trending toward the
higher bound for packet latency for a given generation. Table 5-9 provides
a summary of data rates and latency of different generations of cellular
technologies.

Table 5-9. Comparison of Data Rates and Latencies of Different
Generations of Cellular Technologies
Generation Peak Data       Practical Data Latency         Description
           Rate            Rate

1G          No Data        No Data         No Data        Analog systems
2G          100s of Kbps   100–400 Kbps 300–1000 mS First digital systems
                                                    as overlays or parallel
                                                    to analog systems
3G          10s of Mbps    400 Kbps–       100–500 mS     Dedicated digital
                           5 Mbps                         networks deployed
                                                          in parallel to analog
                                                          systems
4G          100s of Mbps 1–50 Mbps         <100 mS        Digital and packet-
                                                          only networks
5G          10s of Gbps    TBD             1–20 mS        Digital and packet-
                                                          only networks

      5G is much more than just faster networks. It supports the unique
combination of high-speed connectivity, very low latency, and ubiquitous
coverage, making it natively suitable for supporting IoT use cases. 5G will
enable us to control more devices remotely in applications where real-­time
network performance is critical, enabling new user experiences in many
different verticals. For example, it can be used for remote control of heavy
machinery in hazardous environments, thereby improving worker safety. With
its low latency, it can improve access to healthcare by enabling remote surgery.
5G connectivity will support smart vehicles and transport infrastructure such
as connected cars, where the variation in delay could mean the difference
between a smooth flow of traffic and an accident. It is evident that 5G will spur
innovation across many industries and prove to be an enabling platform for
IoT solutions to become an integral part of our economy.

  ey Standards, Regulatory, and Industry Bodies
K
Involved in 5G
There are multiple cellular standards and release versions, and the
classification of any given network as 3G, 4G, or 5G is definitely too coarse.
Here is a quick survey of the key players behind the evolution of various
cellular technologies:

      •     ITU: (International Telecommunications Union)
            Agency of the UN, coordinating telecom operations
            and services globally. Their ITU-R sector is charged
            with developing future 5G standards and coordinating
            harmonized spectrum use.

      •     3GPP: Collaboration between seven global
            telecommunications standards organizations engaged
            in research and development of 5G standards.

      •     ETSI: Organization in Europe producing globally
            applicable standards for Information and
            Communication Technologies.

      •     OCF: Comprised of technology suppliers for product,
            software, platform, and silicon dedicated to driving
            open standards for IoT solutions.

      •     IEEE: A technical professional organization dedicated
            to enabling the development of new use cases and
            standards to accelerate time to market of technologies
            developed on a consensus basis.

      •     5G-ACIA: 5G Alliance for Connected Industries and
            Automation ensures the best possible applicability of 5G
            technology and 5G networks for the manufacturing and
            process industries by addressing, discussing, and evaluating
            relevant technical, regulatory, and business aspects.

 New Use Cases Enabled by 5G
5G addresses existing, emerging, and future use cases. 3GPP (3rd Generation
Partnership Project) has grouped the high-level use cases of 5G into three
categories, based on the functionality and performance that 5G would need
to enable these use cases. The three sets of use cases, primarily based on the
5G performance attributes, are listed here and are shown in Figure 5-15:

      •   Enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB): Use cases
          requiring high data rates across a wide coverage area,
          providing immersive experiences such as augmented
          reality and virtual reality. eMBB will initially be an
          extension to existing 4G services and will be among the
          first 5G services. The three main attributes of 5G that
          enable eMBB use cases are

          Higher capacity: Which makes broadband access
          available in densely populated areas, both indoors
          and outdoors, like city centers, office buildings, and
          public venues like stadiums or conference centers.

          Enhanced connectivity: Broadband access must
          be available, with adequate quality of service
          everywhere to provide a consistent user experience.

          Higher user mobility: Will enable mobile broadband
          services in moving vehicles including cars, buses,
          trains, and even planes.

          eMBB traffic is characterized by large payloads and
          by a device connection pattern that remains stable
          over an extended time interval. This allows the
          network to schedule wireless resources to the eMBB
          devices preventing the chance of two eMBB devices

            accessing the same resource simultaneously. The
            objective of the eMBB service is to maximize the
            data rate while guaranteeing a moderate reliability.

      •     Massive Machine-Type Communications (mMTC): This
            addresses the need to support a very large number
            of devices in a small area, which may only send data
            sporadically. IoT use cases such as smart homes, smart
            cities, and weather and agricultural smart sensors
            are good examples. A large number of mMTC devices
            may be connected to a given cellular network, but at a
            given time only a subset of them could be active and
            attempt to communicate their data. The large number
            of potentially active mMTC devices makes it infeasible
            to preallocate resources to individual mMTC devices.
            Instead, it is necessary to provide resources that can
            be shared through random access. The objective in the
            design of mMTC is to maximize the arrival rate that can
            be supported in a given radio resource.

      •     Ultra-Reliable Low-Latency Communications (URLLC):
            These use cases impose strict requirements on latency
            and reliability for mission-critical communications,
            such as remote surgery, autonomous vehicles, or
            industrial control applications. The number of
            potential devices supported per unit area is considered
            to be smaller than mMTC. Supporting URLLC
            transmissions requires a combination of scheduling,
            so as to ensure a certain amount of predictability
            in the available resources and thus support high
            reliability. Random access is also required in order to
            ensure that too many resources do NOT idle due to the
            intermittent nature of scheduled traffic. Due to the low

          latency requirements, a URLLC transmission should be
          localized in time. Diversity, which is critical to achieve
          high reliability, can be achieved by using multiple
          frequency or spatial resources. Compared to eMBB, the
          rate of a URLLC transmission is relatively low, and the
          main requirement is ensuring a high reliability level.

                                   ENHANCED MOBILE BROADBAND
                                                        3D video, UHD screens
                        Gigabytes in a second
                                                             Work and play in the cloud

                 Smart Home/Building                            Augmented reality

                                                                   Industry automation
                           Voice                                       Mission critical application
                 Smart City                     FUTURE IMT                  Self driving car

 MASSIVE MACHINE TYPE                                                           ULTRA-RELIABLE, LOW-LATENCY
     COMMUNICATIONS                                                             COMMUNICATIONS

Figure 5-15. New use cases enabled by 5G

 Key Technology Enablers for 5G
      •   5G NR: 5G New Radio is the new air interface
          technology being defined to support the features of
          5G. The air interface specifies the radio frequency (RF)
          section of the connection between a mobile device and
          the mobile network. OFDM (orthogonal frequency-­
          division multiplexing) family of waveforms will be
          used for 5G. This allows wireless network providers to
          more easily scale carrier bandwidth needed for each
          application and support diverse spectrum. 5G New
          Radio will use new spectrum well beyond the range of
          most current wireless technology, improving network

            availability and throughput. Massive MIMO (multiple
            input multiple output) technologies enable efficient
            use of large number of antennae and, along with 3D
            beamforming technologies, allow increase in capacity,
            coverage, and cell edge performance. The 5G NR self-­
            contained slot structure delivers significantly lower
            latency than LTE thanks to support for fast uplink/
            downlink turnaround and scalable slot durations.

      •     Network Function Virtualization (NFV): Today’s
            networks are dedicated, static, and hardware
            resource-based and can’t meet tomorrow’s demands.
            Decoupling and shifting network functions from
            proprietary hardware to software-based services on
            open servers “virtualizes” the network. To support the
            many new use cases for 5G, NFV provides significant
            capabilities for communication service providers that
            will lead to more innovation, fast service deployment,
            and reduced operating expenses.

      •     Software-Defined Networking (SDN): SDN is a
            framework for creating intelligent networks that are
            open, programmable, and application aware. It makes
            network programmable by separating the control
            plane (telling the network what goes where) from the
            data plane (sending packets to specific destinations) –
            centralizing and automating network engineering
            tasks and reducing the amount of manual intervention
            and coordination. This drives rapid service creation,
            reducing time to market for new offerings.

      •     Network Slicing: This can be employed to enable
            enhanced network flexibility. SDN and NFV create
            opportunity to “slice” networks, so that a single physical

                 network can be partitioned into many virtual networks.
                 Each slice is self-contained with all necessary functions
                 and is customized to match the level of delivery
                 complexity required by the service-level agreement,
                 as illustrated in Figure 5-16. Delivering customized
                 connectivity and computing power for different types
                 of segments, devices, and services opens new ways for
                 communication service providers to monetize their
                 offering. For example, they can provide third parties with
                 access to operate their slices independently, creating
                 new Network-as-a-Service (NaaS) business model.

                           5G Promise: All mobile services via all types of devices across all industries on a single network
                       Service/Device                                                                         Service/Industry
                                                          Multiple 5G Networks
 Mobile Broadband
 (20 Gbps)                                                         Broadband                                 Communication,
                                                                    Network                                  Internet

 Massive IoT
 (200,000/Km2)                                                    Massive IoT                                  Logistics,
                                                                   Network                                     Agriculture,
                                                                                                               Climate

 Mission-critical IoT
 (1ms)                                                            Mission-critical                           Automobile,
                                                                     Network                                 Factory

                                                             Network Slicing
                                                                                                                Communication,
                                                                                                                Internet
Mobile Broadband
(20 Gbps)                                                     Mobile Broadband Slice
                                                                                                                 Logistics,
                                                              Massive IoT Slice                                  Agriculture,
Massive IoT                                                                                                      Climate
(200,000/Km2)                                                 Mission critical IoT Slice

Mission-critical IoT                                                                                               Automobile,
(1ms)                                                          Single 5G Network                                   Factory

Figure 5-16. Network slicing concept

        •      C-RAN: Cloud or Centralized Radio Access Network
               helps to optimize network architecture by virtualizing
               base station functions; mobile base stations are
               comprised of a baseband unit (BBU), handling data
               processing, and a radio unit (RU), sending/receiving
               radio waves and managing the radio resources.
               Separating the BBU from the mobile base station radio
               unit pools data processing functions into a centralized
               server as shown in Figure 5-17. This allows multiple
               radio units to be controlled from one server reducing
               CAPEX and OPEX for communication service providers.
               This also increases the ability to address interference
               issue in high-density area and improves network
               efficiency with shared processing and load balancing.

                                                            RRH

                                                  Base Sta?on

      Cloud BBU Pool
                                                                            RRH

                                                                   Small Cell

  Centralized BBU Server                           RRH

                                         Base Sta?on

Figure 5-17. Cloud RAN concept

 LPWAN – Low-Power Wide Area Networks
Low-power wide area network (LPWAN) technologies have low power
draw and provide coverage to wide geographical areas. They provide
connectivity for devices and applications that require low mobility and low
speeds and infrequent data transfer, such as sensors. LPWAN technologies
fill the gap between mobile cellular (3G, LTE) and short-range wireless
(e.g., Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and Zigbee) networks and are designed for
machine-to-machine communications. LPWAN devices have a long
battery life because they transmit only small packets of data at infrequent
intervals. LPWAN solutions provide a wide area of coverage that is not
limited by distance between the access points (i.e., base stations or towers)
using new modulation techniques and frequency choices. They also do
not typically require line-of-sight communications. They therefore require
far fewer access points per unit area than traditional cellular wireless
technologies.
      There is no single standard for LPWAN, and there are a number
of competing technologies, providing different levels of coverage and
capacity. We will take a look at three of them.

L? oRa
LoRa Alliance is an open, nonprofit association with over 500 members
globally among telcos, system integrators, and manufacturers.
LoRaWAN is an open standard with a certification program to guarantee
interoperability that is governed by the LoRa Alliance. LoRaWAN
network semiconductor technology is proprietary to California-based
semiconductor manufacturer Semtech. See Table 5-10 for the summary of
technical specifications of LoRa technology.

Table 5-10. LoRa Overview
      Name of Standard              LoRaWAN

      Frequency Band                433/868/780/915 MHz ISM
      Channel Width                 EU: 8x125kHz, US 64x125kHz/8x125kHz
                                    Modulation: Chirp Spread Spectrum
      Range                         2-5k (urban), 15k (rural)
      End Node Transmit Power       EU:<+14dBm
                                    US:<+27dBm
      Packet Size                   Defined by User
      Uplink Data Rate              EU: 300 bps to 50 kbps
                                    US:900-100kbps
      Downlink Data Rate            EU: 300 bps to 50 kbps
                                    US:900-100kbps
      Devices per Access Point      Uplink:>1M
                                    Downlink:<100k
      Topology                      Star on Star
      End node roaming allowed      Yes
      Governing Body                LoRa Alliance
      Status                        Spec released June 2015, in deployment

S
  igfox
One of the most widely deployed proprietary LPWAN technologies is
Sigfox, which was established in France in 2009 and deployed its first
network in mid-2012. As of August 2018, there were networks in some
50 countries globally with a target of 60 by the end of the year. Table 5-11
captures the key features of Sigfox.

Table 5-11. Sigfox Overview
    Name of Standard              SigFox

    Frequency Band                868 MHz/902 MHz ISM
    Channel Width                 Ultra narrow band
    Range                         30-50km (rural), 3-10km (urban),
                                  1000km LoS
    End Node Transmit Power       -20 dBm to 20 dBm
    Packet Size                   12 bytes
    Uplink Data Rate              100 bps to 140 messages/day
    Downlink Data Rate            to 4 messages of 8 bytes/day
    Devices per Access Point      1M
    Topology                      Star
    End node roaming allowed      Yes
    Governing Body                SigFox (proprietary)
    Status                        In deployment

W
  eightless
Cambridge-based Weightless SIG (Special Interest Group) was founded
in 2008 to develop standards for M2M communications in white space
(unused TV spectrum). Weightless originally developed three standards
for different use cases which employ different technologies and
provide varying levels of packet size and data rates. Today it promotes
Weightless-P, which is shown in Table 5-12 – an ultra-narrowband protocol
for bidirectional communications now known simply as Weightless
technology.

Table 5-12. Weightless Overview

            Name of Standard               Weightless

            Frequency Band                 Sub-GHZ ISM
            Channel Width                  12.5 kHz
            Range                          2km (urban)
            End Node Transmit Power        17 dBm
            Packet Size                    10 byte min
            Uplink Data Rate               200 bps to 100 kbps
            Downlink Data Rate             same
            Devices per Access Point       Unlimited
            Topology                       Star
            End node roaming allowed       Yes
            Governing Body
            Status                         In deploymnet

  omparison of Low-Power LTE and Other LPWAN
C
Technologies
There are several technologies upon which LPWANs can be based as seen
earlier and can be classified into those based on proprietary systems and
those based on open standards.
    Low-power Long-Term Evolution (LTE) has taken off since the 3rd
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) introduced a specification for
two forms of the technology – LTE-M and Narrowband-IoT (NB-IoT) –
in Release 13 of the standard. The new specification makes it easier for
manufacturers to design and develop the inexpensive, compact, and low
power consumption wireless LTE modems that LPWANs demand.

     LTE is an open standard, operates in a licensed portion of the RF
spectrum, leverages existing infrastructure for coverage, and has coexistence
mechanisms that enable scaling to high node counts per base station.
     Low-power LTE operates in up to 44 different licensed frequencies
across the world, ranging from 450 MHz to 2.6 GHz. By using the licensed
spectrum, the owners of the spectrum allocation (the carriers) can control
and prioritize data, and the bands are immune from interference from
other sources of RF radiation.
     Because the spectrum allocation isn’t shared with other RF
transmissions, the coexistence between connected devices is much easier
to manage. LTE’s coexistence technology is based on proven frequency-
and time-domain solutions and other mechanisms such as “autonomous
denials” of conflicting RF signals. Consequently, LTE can support a node
density of up to 200,000 active low-power modems per base station.
Finally, data carried over LTE is safe from prying eyes because the standard
has incorporated advanced security from its inception. These features
ensure that carriers can offer reliability and high quality of service.
     In contrast, proprietary technologies limit the participation in the
vendor ecosystem and innovation in technology evolution over time. As
they operate in unlicensed allocations of the RF spectrum (typically sub-1
GHz), coexistence could also be a challenge. They must share RF spectrum
with many other services. While basic interference avoidance techniques
are employed, so many services are sharing the spectrum allocation that it is
extremely to match the node density, reliability, and quality of service of LTE.
     Proprietary LPWAN vendors are also faced with the major challenge
of building infrastructure to support their networks. These are likely to be
expensive and long-winded projects slowing adoption. In contrast, worldwide
LTE infrastructure is largely in place comprising 480 networks in 157
countries. Some upgrading (mainly of software) is required to support low-
power LTE, but this is relatively a less complex effort compared to building the
infrastructure in the first place. Because the infrastructure is installed, support
for low-power LTE is likely to be added rapidly, further encouraging its uptake.

Companies adopting low-power LTE for their IoT-connected products can
leverage this infrastructure without bearing its build or maintenance costs,
instead investing in their own services and business models.

 A Case Study – Smart Homes
A typical smart home gateway is illustrated in Figure 5-18.

                                                                                                                                                                             Home Service/Utility
                                                                                                                                                                               Provider Cloud
  Home Gateway

      iIOT SmartHome           iIOT SmartHome        iIOT SmartHome
      Service Object 1         Service Object 2     Service Object “n”                                                                                         User Auth
                              Application Framework                                                                                                         Rule Engine    Analytics
                                                                                                                             Cellular(LTE/5G)
                               Rule Engine                    Analytics                                                                                           Manageability &
          iIOT SmartHome                                                                                                                                             Security
                                                                                                Security & Edge Mgmt.

               Engine
            Accelerators                    Virtual Devices
                                                                                                         Intel

   IOTivity Framework (Device Abstraction)                        HomeLake Engine
                 Comm Abstraction                 Linux Kernel, Drivers, Operating System
                                                                                                                                                Appliance
                                                                      Platform HW BIOS & BSP                                                    Diag.
          WiFi        BLE     ZigBee    Ethernet                                  Local                                                         • Refrigerator
                                                                                 Storage
                                                                                                                                                • Water Unit Utility
                                                                                                                                                              • Electric
                                                                                                                                                              • Gas      Security
                                                                                                                                                              • WM
   WiFi Edge Devices           BLE Edge Devices                ZigBee Edge Devices          Ethernet Edge Devices                                                        • Video
                                                                                                                                                              • Water       Monitor
                                                                                                                                                              • City
                                                                                                                                                                         • Access
                                                                                                                                                                Services
                                                                                                                                                                         • Alarm
                                                                                                                                                                            Services
      S      S A     S A            S   A      S A            A     S A    A    S A         A         S A               A   S A

                                               Service Provider and/or User Installed Devices

Figure 5-18. Smart home system using multiple connectivity
technologies

     In reality, many IoT endpoints and gateways will employ multiple
communication technologies based on cost, improved flexibility, and
interoperability. A primary example is connected thermostat which
incorporates both Wi-Fi and ZigBee. Many smart meters support cellular,
ZigBee, RF mesh, and Wi-Fi capabilities. A key advantage of Wi-Fi and
Bluetooth is that they are already embedded in essentially all smartphones.
This type of coexistence of multiple technologies in a single system is
illustrated in the smart home IoT system example shown earlier. The
gateway supports Wi-Fi and Ethernet for LAN connections that need higher
bandwidth such as audio and video applications. PAN and mesh networks
based on Bluetooth Low Energy and ZigBee are used for energy-­efficient

