CHAPTER 6

IoT Vertical
Applications and
Associated Security
Requirements
      It is not the critic who counts; not the man who points out how
      the strong man stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could
      have done them better. The credit belongs to the man who is
      actually in the arena, whose face is marred by dust and sweat
      and blood.
                                                               —Theodore Roosevelt1

Throughout the previous chapters of this book, we have presented how
different parts of an IoT system could be built and what components and
frameworks are important and useful. In this chapter, we present what
Intel is doing in the arena of IoT as complete vertical solutions. IoT spans a
broad range of different markets, and therefore solutions must be tailored
to the specific purposes of those markets and the specific security threats

1
  www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/44567.Theodore_Roosevelt
© The Author(s) 2020                                                                  413
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8_6

encountered or expected in those environments. There are similarities, to
be sure. Each industry has different security demands due to the nature
of the information handled and the mandate to conform to particular
regulatory and industry standard bodies’ requirements. This chapter
will provide an overview of the different verticals, associated security
requirements, threats, and mitigations.
     The IoT ecosystem is fragmented by nature with multiple verticals, but
at the end of the day, we strive to leverage a common set of hardware and
software building blocks, augmented with accelerators, to meet domain
unique requirements. Security is a horizontal capability, as we have
shown in Chapters 3 and 4. However, because of the differences within
each vertical market, frequently different verticals expand and enhance
the common set of security capabilities in order to achieve what their
particular market demands. This perspective is shown in Figure 6-1 which
articulates unique vertical security and regulatory requirements built from
a common set of security minimal viable platform features. Successfully
accomplishing this customization necessitates a system of systems
perspective, which is an understanding that no system exists in a vacuum
but must interact with other systems – human, technological, and process.
As we delve into each vertical market in this section, common themes from
the security MVP will stand out to the reader, but these will be adapted
by each domain to address security and privacy by design, security-
performance trade-offs at the system level, and integration into existing
systems and processes – the system of systems perspective.
     Before diving deeply into each vertical domain, we present a
brief overview of each domain and point out the commonalities, and
differences, between them.

       Transportation                 Retail Solutions                     Industrial                 Military/Aero/Govt          Digital Surveillance
    Standard Compliance            Remote Manageability       Intrinsic Security to IIoT Gateways    Ruggedized & Robust                  System
   • Security + Functional       • vPro Active Management       • Hardened Virtualization           •  Performant Crypto            Intrinsic Security
     Safety                         Technology                  • Provisioning & Life Cycle         •  Memory encryption            NVR & Gateways
   • SAEJ3101                    • Hardened Virtualization          Management                      •  Configurable RoT       •   Multiple RoT with
   • Innovation for OEMs         • Future Manageability         • Network Protection &              •  Physical Tamper            FPGA and Movidius
   • HW supported &                  • AMT 5G WWAN                  Attestation                        Detection/Prevention   •   Provisioning
     Hardened Virtualization         • Provisioning             • SW Orchestration, Software        • Offline attestation     •   Encrypted/Authenticated
   • Anti-tampering +                • Recovery                     Defined Industrial Systems      • Configurability:            Video streams
     memory zeroization              • Predictive analytics         (SDIS)                             Debug Disable,         •   Video watermarking
   • Anti-cloning                                                                                      power, clock
                                                                                                    • FIPS Certification

        Consistency        Security MVP – {TEE: SGX, VM} {Secure Boot} {Secure Storage: PTT/TPM} {PKI Device ID}
                                                  {Crypto: HW accelerated} {FIPS 140-2}

Figure 6-1. IoT vertical framework: enhance the foundation with
value-added features to enable verticals

    The Transportation Solutions domain is focused on safety and
leverages the foundational security MVP, augmenting HW/FW/SW
capabilities to meet the prevalent standards and regulations including SAE
J-3101, EVITA, HIS, AutoSAR, and autonomous driving standard (levels
L1–L5). Anti-tampering which is related to preventing and/or detecting
an attempt to alter or modify the platform for stealing secrets is critical to
achieving transportation safety. Anti-cloning is related to preventing and/
or detecting an attempt to copy or clone the platform including the HW/
FW/SW. Some of these capabilities may align with other verticals. The
Transportation Solutions domain also has some unique requirements
such as memory zeroization where the state of the memory is initialized
to a known value (zero) to eliminate the secrets from DRAM and to meet
safety requirements for known state of software structures and variables.
Virtualization support in hardware is mandatory for the transportation
domain in order to maximize hardware utilization while minimizing
cost without compromising security – this usually involves VTd and VTx
technologies as we saw in the ACRN hypervisor in Chapter 4.
    When a capability is aligned across more than two verticals, it makes
sense to move this capability into the security MVP foundation. This then
implies that some verticals do not make use of every security MVP feature.
However, as we have found at Intel, as features move into the security

MVP, other vertical domains begin to leverage that capability as well. An
example of this is FIPS 140 Level 2 which is now a common requirement
across all the verticals.
     The Retail Solution domain’s security is focused on protecting the
credit card payment information and the data in financial transactions.
The identity of the users at the POS terminals is also of significance,
leading to unique protections to handle personally identifiable
information (PII). A new retail segment known as responsive retail
addresses targeted marketing for the brick-and-mortar retailer while
improving the shopping experience for consumers using advertisements
customized according to the age, gender (using facial and body imaging),
and other characteristics of the consumer. The retail domain in general
is also heavily invested in remote manageable devices (upgradable and
recoverable) over wired and wireless networks (in-band and out-of-
band). Provisioning devices with the proper software loads and unique
credentials to facilitate transactions to financial institutions and suppliers
is an important, though not unique, characteristic of retail IoT systems.
     In the in-band recovery scenario, a corrupt application can be
recovered with the help of the operating system, and a corrupt operating
system can be recovered with the help of the BIOS/UEFI/boot loader. We
discussed some of these capabilities in Chapter 4, where we introduced the
difficult problem of upgrading the platform firmware, such as the BIOS/
UEFI/boot loader itself. For these situations, an out-of-band capability
or physical access is required to recover the platform from corrupted
firmware.
     The Industrial Solutions domain covers the convergence of IT
(information technology) with OT (operational technology), along with
the related issues of incorporating existing systems and infrastructure
(brownfield deployments) with new systems, capabilities, and
infrastructure (greenfield deployments). Traditionally OT dealt with the
factory and manufacturing floor tasks, and IT infrastructure managed

the office and back-end tasks. Creating a smart factory requires the
convergence of IT and OT, allowing the data to flow seamlessly between IT
and OT for effective decision making and factory process execution. In a
brownfield scenario, industries have long been deploying the devices and
equipment with legacy bus interfaces and little to no network connectivity.
The greenfield scenario is where the equipment and devices can all be
true IoT with maximum high (or higher) bandwidth connectivity. Bridging
the gap between brownfield and greenfield requires the use of proxy
gateways with network protections and network admission technologies
using device attestation. Software orchestration is essential in Industrial
IoT (IIOT) where standards compliant architecture such as ISA-95 and
Software-Defined Industrial Systems (SDIS) are federated for service
orchestration, allowing all devices to both consume and provide services.
Security services center around integrity and availability, and device
recovery and reprovisioning for new services or changeovers to new tasks
must be done quickly and efficiently or the loss on revenue can be steep.
     The Military, Aerospace, and Government domain has the highest
and most robust security requirements, and the need for performant
crypto features, including encryption/decryption, digital signature/
verification, and random number generation, has high-throughput
requirements. This domain also demands a configurable Root of Trust
(RoT), augmenting the Intel RoT with a particular custom hardware Root
of Trust private to the domain with higher robustness requirements. The
alternative roots of trust include customized RoT in an Intel SoC/PCH
or an FPGA. Physical tamper prevention, detection, and recovery are
key features which are also tied to the secure debug ports, protections
from side-channel attacks on clock, and prevention/detection of power
glitching, among a host of other hardware-specific attacks. When attesting
the IoT devices in this domain, in addition to remote attestation, a local
or offline attestation feature is a mandatory requirement. Many advanced
security requirements appear first in the Government domain and then

slowly begin to appear in other domains. Side-channel resistance is a
recent example; protection from covert and side channels has been a long-
standing requirement in the military domain, but not until the appearance
of the Spectre and Meltdown attacks the side-channel protections are
included in commercial RFPs. However, since these attacks were disclosed,
side-channel protections are the new baseline and part of the common
security MVP.
     The Digital Surveillance System (DSS) domain is focused on network
video recorders, networked Internet Protocol (IP) cameras, and computer
vision accelerators. In a DSS system of systems, there is a need for multiple
roots of trust including Intel SoC, FPGA, and Movidius. Provisioning the
DSS cameras and video recorders is critical to prevent the IP camera–
related attacks, including the Mirai botnet attacks which used default and
brute-force login credentials2 and the Persirai botnet which took over
cameras using a recent zero-day vulnerability.3 DSS systems also require
performant crypto features, since the video stream must be encrypted
and watermarked at line rate speeds. Another critical requirement for the
DSS segment is data provenance, authenticated and integrity-protected
metadata and attributes attached to the video and photographic data to
prove the data, time, location, and device used for collection.
     The DSS domain encounters some unique data protection and privacy
regulations such as EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and
the California data privacy regulations which impact every type of business
and impose severe penalties for not complying.

2
  h? ttps://motherboard.vice.com/en_us/article/8q8dab/15-million-
   connected-cameras-ddos-botnet-brian-krebs
3
    www.darkreading.com/attacks-breaches/new-iot-botnet-discovered-120k-
    ip-cameras-at-risk-of-attack/d/d-id/1328839

  ommon Domain Requirements
C
and the Security MVP
The IoT Base Platform MVP is defined with foundational building blocks
and the realization that the security requirements are achieved, up to
nearly 90% in many cases, through common silicon used across all the
domains. System design is dynamic, and decision vectors usually include
security, privacy, resiliency, availability, and safety. The MVP is a triad
of HW, FW, and SW capabilities that enables dynamic design where the
domain features from HW, FW, and SW are selected diligently to reflect the
trade-offs and optimize for the relevant decision vector. The NIST Cyber-
Physical Systems Framework4 for HW and SW co-design articulates trade-
offs between the cyber and physical components of the IoT system.
      Matthew Rosenquist articulated in a blog post5 that although security
is valuable, it comes at a cost – the cost for new equipment, the cost for
training personnel on new technology, and the cost to develop new
processes to utilize the technology. But just because we do not pay the cost
to build security into our systems does not mean the cost goes away. We
still incur costs due to the risks we inherently adopt by rejecting certain
security features and the potential (and actual costs) to clean up after a
security incident. These choices leading to costs of failure determine the
risk management process as shown in Figure 6-2. A potential future cost of
a security incident must be weighed against the actual cost to add security
and the soft cost incurred by productivity impacts due to additional
security. Good security design involves teaming up with customers and
end users to understand these costs and balance the overall system to
achieve reasonable security, preventing or deterring the most egregious

4
  h? ttps://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.1500-
   201.pdf
5
    https://itpeernetwork.intel.com/security-is-about-balancing-tradeoffs/

and most likely threats while providing a useful and useable system.
Often ignored are the external costs where unrelated third-party entities
suffer the consequences of attacks, and one specific example is the DNS-
administrating company Dyn. For almost an entire day, Mirai botnet took
down the sites including Twitter, CNN, Guardian, Netflix, and so on whose
DNS services were being administered by Dyn.6 The optimal security is
a balance of cost, user experience, and risk. Since the IoT domains are
different, and the threats are ever evolving, and the user interface and
experience paradigms change, this balancing act becomes a dynamic
living act. The security MVP is only the start of that act. Engagement in the
domain and balancing domain-specific requirements is the process. The
detailed sections that follow articulate Intel’s perspective and engagement
in these IoT-specific domains.

                                  Cost and
                                 Maintenance

                                 Enterprises

                     Risk and                  Productivity and
                    Compliance                 User Experience

Figure 6-2. Balancing security against cost, risk, and productivity

    One additional comment is warranted to the reader at this point. It has
become a norm to employ complementary technologies such as FPGA
accelerators, Movidius Computer Vision IP, and ASIC accelerators to meet
the requirements from applications in various domain solutions. These
complementary technologies augment the base platform for increased

6
  www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/26/ddos-attack-dyn-mirai-botnet

performance, HSM7 needs, functional safety, and real-time latency
workloads. These technologies are outside the scope of this book, but
details on these technologies can be found on the Intel web site.8 Finally,
although we provide a reasonable overview of the use cases, threats, and
security objectives for the domains, the following coverage is not meant
to be comprehensive, and to do so would require a much more exhaustive
threat modeling exercise, with subsequent peer reviews, to refine the
threat model and design for specific products.

 Some Common Threats
Just as the domains share a common hardware and software security MVP,
the domains have threats that are common across all vertical domains as
well. These common threats are discussed in this section.
    Device masquerading: A device employed or modified by a
hacker is tricked to identify as a legitimate system on the IoT network.
This sometimes can be extremely difficult to detect and rectify. The
consequences and methods employed to launch such an attack depend
upon the particular use case, and these idiosyncrasies are discussed next.
    Boot integrity compromise: The pre-OS FW such as BIOS or
other boot loaders can be tampered with by modifying or replacing/
reprogramming the image on flash device. This can have serious
consequences since all other layers in the stack are on the top of this layer
in the bootstrapping sequence.
    Offline storage–related attacks: Mass storage or any removable
storage media can be attacked offline by copying the media or stealing the
physical media device, and then sifting through the data to find secrets, or
using brute force techniques on keys or passwords to reveal sensitive data.

7
    ardware security module (HSM) for key storage and trusted cryptographic
  H
  operations
8
   www.intel.com

 Retail Solutions
The retail POS devices are becoming a part of the IoT domain, and
increasingly these devices such as the POS terminals, mobile payments,
and so on are connected to the Internet and accessed by cashiers and staff
using tablets and other mobile devices. In this section, we’ll discuss what is
required to be Payment Card Industry (PCI) compliant on Intel platforms
and a way to get there.
    According to the PCI specification, the hackers are mainly interested in
stealing the cardholder data. “By obtaining the Primary Account Number
(PAN) and sensitive authentication data, a thief can impersonate the
cardholder, use the card, and steal the cardholder’s identity.”
    Sensitive cardholder data can be stolen from many places including a
compromised card reader or data in a payment system database, snooping
the store’s wireless or wired networks. Each of these is a trust boundary,
and the assets need to be protected as they traverse each boundary.
    Securing the cardholder data starts where it is captured at the point
of sale and as it flows into the payment system. The ideal approach is
refraining from storing any cardholder data. The protection should span
card readers, POS systems, networks and wireless access routers, payment
card data storage and transmission, and online payment applications and
shopping carts.
    Not complying with PCI and the associated security objectives will
result in potential liabilities including the following: customer base
loses confidence and goes to other merchants resulting in decreased
sales, additional cost of reissuing new payment cards, losses from fraud
claims, higher incremental costs of compliance, legal costs, settlements
and judgments, fines and penalties due to financial regulation violation,
termination of ability to accept payment cards, lost jobs (C-suite security
and other positions), and in the worst case going out of business.

   The PCI Data Security Standard (DSS)9 version 3.2.1 high-level
overview is reproduced in Figure 6-3, and the Intel security assets that
enable building a PCI compliant device are discussed.

                                  PCI Data Security Standard – High Level Overview
                                      1.   Install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder data
    Build and Maintain a Secure
                                      2.   Do not use vendor-supplied defaults for system passwords and other
    Network and Systems
                                           security parameters
                                      3.   Protect stored cardholder data
    Protect Cardholder Data
                                      4.   Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public networks
                                      5.   Protect all systems against malware and regularly update anti-virus
    Maintain a Vulnerability
                                           software or programs
    Management Program
                                      6.   Develop and maintain secure systems and applications
                                      7.   Restrict access to cardholder data by business need to know
    Implement Strong Access
                                      8.   Identify and authenticate access to system components
    Control Measures
                                      9.   Restrict physical access to cardholder data
    Regularly Monitor and Test       10.   Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder data
    Networks                         11.   Regularly test security systems and processes
    Maintain an Information
                                     12.   Maintain a policy that addresses information security for all personnel
    Security Policy

Figure 6-3. High-level overview of PCI Data Security Standard

 Security Objectives and Requirements
Assets in a retail IoT device include the following:

          •      Data at rest and in transit: Cardholders’ data and
                 transactional information.

          •      Identity of the consumer: Personally identifiable
                 information (PII) should be stored under strict access
                 control, preferably using encryption for data-at-rest.

          •      Identity of the POS device: Device’s credentials are
                 essential to mitigate the remote hacker attacks and
                 to have a robust connection to the device cloud
                 infrastructure.

9
  www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/

      •     The hardware components: The HW BOM list in the
            platform must always be protected via a transparent
            supply chain during production and deployment and
            guarded in the field as appropriate.
      •     The FW including pre-OS boot loader: The FW on the
            platform is a critical asset.

      •     Kernel and user mode SW components: The OS kernel
            and user mode SW components including applications
            are all important assets.

T? hreats
The PCI DSS standard has outlined high-level threat groups. Figure 6-4 takes
those groups and extends it to include responsive retail. System compromise
or theft can be realized by masquerading the retail POS device. Data at rest or
data in transit can be stolen by leveraging offline data and network sniffers/
monitors for traffic analysis. The provisioning step can be compromised or
missed/blocked updates can be leveraged to compromise the system. Identity
theft and credit card disclosure of payment information are equally important
concerns. The retail advertisement terminals can be compromised to display
graffiti or distorted images on digital bulletin boards. The runtime environment
of a retail POS or another device can be infected with malware to do extensive
persistent damage to the assets on the device and on the Cloud. The following
bills from California State Legislature mandate provisioning a unique password
and a device certificate for unique authentication before first use:

      •     California Senate Bill10 No. 327, CHAPTER 886 TITLE
            1.81.26. SECURITY OF CONNECTED DEVICES,
            1798.91.04. (b) (1) and (2).

10
  h? ttp://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.
   xhtml?bill_id=201720180SB327

        •      California Assembly Bill11 No. 1906, CHAPTER 860
               TITLE 1.81.26. SECURITY OF CONNECTED DEVICES,
               1798.91.04. (b) (1) and (2).

        VIRUS/MALWARE                                                SYSTEM COMPROMISE
                                                                          OR THEFT

 CONTENT GRAFFITI                                                           DATA THEFT

            IDENTITY THEFT                                           PROVISIONING/UPDATING

Figure 6-4. Threat groups of retail segment including responsive
retail

    The same threats can be mapped to a typical platform stack shown in
Figure 6-5, and the mitigations using Intel technologies are also included.
The HW layer includes all the relevant HW components including the
System on Chip, storage, SRAM, scanner, communications modules, and
so on. The stack continues upward with boot loader FW, OS Kernel to
services to applications.

11
  h? ttps://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billTextClient.
   xhtml?bill_id=201720180AB1906

       Threats to Device – Retail POS                                                                                       1 INTEL® BOOT GUARD
                                                                                                                              Enforced secure boot allowing
                                                                                                                              only signed & untampered
                                                                                                                              firmware to run
                                               5      Unauthorized device access
       2    Rogue provisioning                                                                                              2 INTEL® SECURE DEVICE ONBOARD
                                                                                                                              Provides service that uses HW
                                               6
                                                                                                                              key to secure the rendezvous
                                                                                                                              of device to its owner
                                                                                       3         Insecure data-in-transit          ®
                                                                                                                            3 INTEL AES-NI
                                                                                       7                                      Enable AES computation
                                                                                                                              without compromising
                                                                                                                              performance
                                                                                                                                   ®
                                               POS
                                               apps
                                                      Payment         INV                                                   4 INTEL PLATFORM TRUST TECHNOLOGY
                                                        apps                               App
                                                                                                                              fTPM enables cryptographic
                                          Services (rmm, database, apps, IO broker)        Services                           keys to be securely stored in
                                                            OS                             Kernel                             tampered-resistant keys vault
                                                         Bootloader                        FW
                                                      eMMC/
                                         MSR    SOC    SDXC   SRAM     Scanner COMMS       HW                               5 PKI BASED ID (PTT ENDORSEMENT KEY)
                                                                                                                              Utilize unique HW based key for
                                                                                                                              secure channel establishment
   1       Unsigned firmware

                                                                                                           POS server       6 CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE
                                    4   Insecure key storage                                                                  Automate FW/SW over-the-air
                                                                                                                              update

                                                                      Separate secure and                                     INTEL® SOFTWARE GUARD
                                                                      non-secure application realm                          7 EXTENSION

Figure 6-5. Threats to Retail POS devices with mitigation using Intel
HW security building blocks

    Threat #1: Allows hacker to easily break the integrity of the boot
firmware and OS image. Hacker infiltrates the system by subverting
execution flow. The mitigation is to implement Boot Guard as explained in
Chapter 3 to establish a chain of trust based on a HW Root of Trust. When
a FW is tampered and an attempt is made to boot with this unsigned FW,
the Boot Guard will detect and will hold the device in reset to prevent
further compromises of the sensitive assets.
    Threat #2: Unauthorized actors could provision devices to their
preferences including usernames, passwords, password reminders, and
so on. The Intel Secure Device Onboarding technology could be leveraged
to provision the device persona and force to change the default passwords
with stricter ones and strong password reminders plus a dual factor
authentication. Refer to Chapter 4 for details on SDO.
    Threats #3, #7: Transaction data, logging to POS server. This is a critical
threat for which an exploit could violate the P2PE requirements of PCI DSS
where the cardholder’s data could be obtained by hackers on the network.
Intel AES technology in the CPU can be used to encrypt the cardholder’s

information to enforce confidentiality. To increase the robustness of this
part of the solution, the encryption process can be done inside an SGX
enclave to protect from ring 0 or rootkit attacks.
    Threat #4: Leaves the cryptographic keys used to protect platform
and owner secrets easily recovered or potentially retained in storage. This
is once again a critical task to protect the keys used for encrypting the
cardholders’ data by storing the keys in a PTT/TPM so that these keys are
never exposed to hackers.
    Threats #5, #6: Weakness may grant remote hacker access to the
device and in turn local network from any remote location. This is a
powerful exploit, and mitigation requires strong device credentials such
as the Endorsement Key in PTT/TPM to be authenticated by device cloud
infrastructure without much manual intervention (to eliminate potential
and expensive human errors). All the POS devices should have the firewall
and intrusion detection systems implemented. The network routers both
wired and wireless must have firewall and intrusion detection SW actively
monitoring the network traffic for logging anomalies in real time and store
the data for analytics SW. It is important to have analytics SW to mine
these logs for patterns for zero-day or known vulnerabilities. A complete
platform security stack built pertinent to retail Solutions with Intel security
ingredients is shown in Figure 6-6.

                                                                                       WHITELISTING
                              MANAGEABILITY
                               INTEL AMT/EMA
                                                        Applications                         SYSTEM PROTECTION
                        ENCRYPTION
                                                                                                 VIRUS SCAN
    Intel® Software Guard Extensions
    (SGX)                                                                                             SECURE OS
                                                      Operating System
                   MANAGEABILITY
 INTEL AMT/EMA/HDC                                                                             MALWARE PREVENTATION

                                                      Virtual Machine           INTEL® SOFTWARE GUARD EXTENSIONS (SGX)

           SECURE ISOLATION
             HYPERVISOR
                                                          (Optional)
   HARDENED OS
                                                            BIOS                             ENCRPTION & DECRYPTION
                                                                                                  INTEL® AES-NI
 INTEL® OS GUARD

            BOOT ATTESTATION
     INTEL® BOOT GUARD & BIOS GUARD
                                                         Hardware
                                                                                     SECURE ENCRYPTION
                                                                                     INTEL® SECURE KEY
                           MANAGEABILITY
                            INTEL® AMT
                                                                                     PLATFORM PROTECTION
                                                                              INTEL® PLATFORM TRUST TECHNOLOGY

Figure 6-6. Platform security stack built pertinent to Retail Solutions

    At the HW layer, the manageability with Intel Active Management
Technology (AMT), secure boot with attestation, encryption, secure key,
PTT/TPM, and platform protection are required to be implemented.
UEFI/BIOS layer leverages the HW root of trust from Boot Guard and
extends the chain of trust (transitive) to the upper layers in the stack. The
hypervisor or VMM is optional; if present, it authenticates the VM pre-OS
FW and the OS VMs while leveraging the VT HW capabilities to provide the
necessary isolation between VMs. The OS is expected to be hardened by
leveraging the Intel HW security features such as OS Guard for preventing
ring 0 privilege escalation attacks, PTT for secure key storage, and AES
and SHA New Instructions for performant crypto operations. The OS can
also leverage the SGX for TEE applications and all the while enabling
the in-band manageability features via Intel AMT. The application layer
implements app whitelisting, virus/malware scanning, and so on.
    The end-to-end data flow in a retail POS architecture is shown
in Figure 6-7. The entities involved include the payment terminals,
peripherals, the POS software inside an Intel-based platform, secure
channels of communication, service provider data centers, bank gateway,
and store servers.
                                                                 Service Provider
                                                                   Data Center

                                                             5

                    2

                                                                                    Bank Gateway
            1            POS Software   TEE Applet       4

                                                                                    Store Servers
                                  1
                    3
            3

Figure 6-7. The end-to-end data flow in a Retail POS architecture

      1. Native devices pair (cryptographically) directly
         with the applet for private/secure communications
         which involves mutual authentication via digital
         signatures and confidentiality through encryption/
         decryption and integrity through sign/verify.
         Establish secure channels from peripherals and
         servers to process data through the TEE applet. The
         TEE applet could be an SGX application enclave
         running inside the TEE to protect the sensitive
         and valuable code and the data. This will prevent
         the exposure of credit card or other PII during
         processing in the memory since the memory
         contents are encrypted inline.

      2. Legacy devices should encrypt the data to the applet
         using the Derived Unique Key Per Transaction
         (DUKPT) with AES-256. DUKPT is a method to
         manage the key between two endpoints; this key has
         properties: unique per transaction, symmetric, is a
         derived key from Base Derivation Key (BDK) known
         to both endpoints. This key is used in the AES
         algorithm for encryption and decryption. Currently
         Triple DES (TDES) is being used, but according to
         the guidance from NIST on Transitioning the Use of
         Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Lengths, two-key
         TDES is deprecated and three-key TDES should be
         used only for 220 (64-bit) blocks and should not be
         used after 2023.12

12
  h? ttps://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/sp/800-131a/rev-2/
   draft/documents/sp800-131Ar2-draft.pdf

      3. The Dock protects legacy insecure devices to
         the applet; sample devices include magnetic ink
         character recognition, keyboards, and barcode
         scanner. This Dock performs as a proxy for the legacy
         devices which inherently may be insecure and
         abstracts the devices by consuming the data in the
         clear and protecting it before sending to TEE applet.

      4. Data can be encrypted for transmission to bank
         gateways or store servers. Use TEE applet to create a
         safe place to process transactions and enact policies.

      5. Management servers manage policies and behavior
         of the system. Through a secure channel from a
         console to the applet, the provisioning of keys,
         credentials, and policies is performed. This helps
         in managing peripheral crypto keys and telemetry
         data remotely and enables pull requests to access
         transactions at the request of the retailer.

     Design trade-offs: Considering the PCI standard and vectors,
functional safety is not a primary factor, but security and privacy are the
critical factors. As outlined in PCI DSS standard, the resiliency in terms of
mitigating physical attack threats is also applicable where a card reader
could be stolen and replace legitimate devices with fraudulent devices to
steal the card data.

 Standards – Regulatory and Industry
The PCI Digital Security Standard (PCI DSS) is one of the main standards
that mandate most of the preceding security objectives. The PCI DSS also
mandates FIPS 140-2 for secure storage of keys via a PTT/TPM.13

13
   www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/

T? ransportation Solutions14
The solutions in a vehicle can be grouped into Software-Defined Cockpit
(SDC) as shown in Figure 6-8. Intel Silicon and solutions enable building
SDC applications for the next generation of advanced automotive
electronics. The SDC itself can be subdivided into rear seat entertainment,
digital instrument cluster, in-vehicle infotainment, and advanced driver-
assistance system (ADAS). The rear seat entertainment solutions include a
DVD/Blu-ray player, virtual office, and connection to IVI front system and
mobile devices with Cloud connectivity.
     The digital instrument cluster unit includes display for speed, fuel
level, odometer, trips, and so on. This cluster may also be able to project
images on the windshield (heads-up display) with alerts for low fuel or low
tire pressure via tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS).
     The in-vehicle infotainment (IVI) unit includes the GPS-based
navigation system, audio/video entertainment systems, and connection
to mobile devices for phone communication and music with voice
recognition features. This unit also includes a backup camera and cameras
for parking assist. The unit may include gesture or touch inputs.
     The advanced driver-assistance system (ADAS) is a complex system
of systems with features including blind spot monitoring, adaptive cruise
control, lane departure warning, cross traffic warning, brake assist and
collision avoidance, self-parking, and driver monitoring for fatigue or
undesirable distractions.

14
    redit: David Zage, Platform Solutions Architect from TSD for domain expertise
  C
  and the content.

 In Vehicle Experience Solutions

 Rear Seat Entertainment                                           Digital Instrument Cluster

    Entertainment system                                              Display speed, fuel level, trip miles and
    Virtual office                                                    more
    Connection to IVI front system and mobile                         Project images on the windshield, with
    devices (cloud connectivity)                                      alerts for low fuel or tire pressure (HUD)

                                                                   In-vehicle Infotainment (IVI)
 Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS)
                                                                      Navigation systems, radios and
    Blind spot monitoring                                             Entertainment systems
    Adaptive cruise control                                           Connection to mobile devices for calls,
    Lane departure warning                                            music and applications via voice
    Cross-traffic warning                                             recognition
    Brake assist and collision avoidance                              Back-up camera
    Self-parking systems                                              Multiple cameras for surround-view
                                                                      parking assist
    Driver Monitoring
                                                                      Gesture Recognition / Touch (HMI)

Figure 6-8. Software-Defined Cockpit – in-vehicle experience solutions

 Connected Vehicle Infrastructure
As the vehicles start communicating with the external environment
spanning more than just the Cloud, many IoT-related threats become
pertinent. In Figure 6-9, the vehicle communicates with many clusters
including GPS systems, Vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) network, local repair shop
or dealership network, roadside assistance network, mobile devices, Radio
Data Systems, and Internet backbone via Internet service provider (ISP)
through 4G/5G wireless. Some of these network clusters such as repair shops
and roadside assistance may also connect to the Internet backbone.
    The devices in a car communicate with different external entities in
regular and autonomous driving applications:

           •        Vehicle to vehicle (V2V): These communications are
                    occurring in real time between vehicles on the roads.

           •        Vehicle to infrastructure (V2I): These communications
                    are occurring between the vehicle and the
                    infrastructure such as dealership or an auto body shop
                    or a traffic management system.

     •          Vehicle to device (V2D): These communications
                are occurring between a vehicle and a device such
                as smartphone over Bluetooth, remote control key,
                wireless diagnostics device, and so on.
     •          Vehicle to Cloud (V2C): These communications are
                occurring between a vehicle and a private or a public
                cloud to retrieve or upload the recent traffic/weather
                updates via GPS and Radio Data interfaces.

   CONNECTED INFRASTRUCTURE
   Connectivity Is More than Just Devices and the Cloud
                                                                                             Local
                                                      V2V                                  Service            AP
                                             GPS                                            Local repair
                                                                                           shop network                           Road Side
                                                                                                                                  Unit (RSU)
                                                                                                                                               Local
                                                                                                                        Open AP                Service
                                                                                                                      Roadside Assistance

                         Electric
                        Chargers                                            BS
                                                                                                        ISP
                                                                      ISP        BS    Internet
                                                                                      Backbone
      Access Point (AP)
                                                                                                  ISP
      Uni-directional
      Communication

      Bi-directional
                                                                                               External systems and networks support new
      Communication                                                                            services and interactions ... and increase risk.
      Authenticate,                    Radio Data           Mobile
      encrypt/decrypt/sign/verify    Systems (RDS)          Devices

Figure 6-9. Connected vehicle infrastructure – more than just devices
and Cloud

 Security Objectives and Requirements
     •          Each electronic control unit (ECU) in the connected
                vehicle is expected to have the following security attributes:

                •          A unique, hardware-based ID that’s immutable and
                           standards compliant

                •          Capability for mutual authentication

                •          A HW root of trust

            •     Protected Boot (verified and measured)

            •     Secure storage for key material

            •     Tamper detection, prevention, and policy
                  enforcement

            •     A Trusted Execution Environment

      •     All intra-car information has the option of integrity
            (hash, HMAC), confidentiality (encryption),
            authentication (digital signatures), and nonrepudiation
            (digital signatures).

            •     All data pertaining to users/occupants is encrypted
                  to maintain privacy.

            •     All inter-car information is authenticated and
                  has integrity (hash, HMAC) and confidentiality
                  (encryption).

            •     Near real-time, secure over-the-air updates for SW
                  and FW.

      •     All safety-critical operations are partitioned; other
            services are virtualized for both efficiency and security.
      •     Car network

            •     Runs Anomaly Detection SW on the device and
                  the gateway within the vehicle for detecting known
                  and zero-day vulnerabilities. This SW could also
                  connect to a Threat Intelligence database on the
                  Cloud for cross-referencing the signatures for
                  quantifying and classifying against known viruses
                  and malware signatures/patterns.

            •     Provides whitelisting for identities allowed to
                  authenticate and send data externally

T? hreats
With the preceding security objectives in the context, let’s discuss the
attacker profiles, threat surfaces, and specific threats. Figure 6-10 depicts
five attacker profiles with diverse technical knowledge, access levels, and
goals. A car thief possesses varied technical knowledge with wireless and/
or physical access with a goal of stealing the car which may entail disabling
the alarm and jumping the wires to start the car and drive off. A car thief
may employ remote attacks through Telematics Control Unit (TCU)/IVI
and On-Board Diagnostics (e.g., On-Board Diagnostics (OBD-II) routinely
accessed during service or tuning in the clear).
     A hacker may possess medium to high technical knowledge with a
remote/wireless access and may operate with goals to either get fame
or steal any PII including passwords to music, credit card payment
information, and so on. A hacker may employ device masquerading
and launch remote attacks through Telematics Control Unit (TCU)/IVI.
A hacker may also go after information disclosure of third-party
algorithm/IP.
     A criminal may possess medium to very high technical knowledge with
wireless and/or physical access with an intent to harm the passengers and
the bystanders. A criminal may employ remote attacks through Telematics
Control Unit (TCU)/IVI and On-Board Diagnostics (e.g., OBD-II).
     A workshop technician may possess medium to very high technical
knowledge with physical access and will operate with a goal to modify the
settings such as rewinding the odometer, fuel usage/statistics, and so on
by leveraging the On-Board Diagnostics (e.g., OBD-II). A similar attack
profile is where a persistent vehicle alteration is done by a legitimate
user to modify the original design by either increasing the performance,
jailbreaking, customizing the user interface, adding new regions into DVD/
Blu-ray player, and so on.

    A counterfeiter or a competitor may possess high to very high technical
knowledge with physical access and may wish to study the design/
architecture to reverse engineer and steal Intellectual Property or clone
the device. This attacker has physical access to the device in a laboratory
environment with access to sophisticated tools/logic analyzers, IR/
thermal scanning, differential power analysis, and so on to monitor the
vehicle networking bus traffic using On-Board Diagnostics (e.g., OBD-II)
interfaces. The potential assets to be recovered could be intellectual
property spanning Silicon, board-level HW, FW, and OS-level ingredients.

                       Technical
 Attacker                                   Access              Goal
                       Knowledge
 Car-thief             Varied               Wireless/Physical   Steal car

 Hacker                Medium - High        Wireless            Fame

 Criminal              Medium - Very high   Wireless/Physical   Harm passengers

 Workshop/tuner        Medium - Very high   Physical            Modify settings
 Counterfeiter/
                       High - Very high     Physical            Study architecture
 competitor

Figure 6-10. Attacker profiles in the Transportation Solutions domain

    Automotive Threat Surfaces: Refer to Figure 6-11 for distinct hackable
areas in a vehicle. These areas can be organized into three groups,
physical access, in-vehicle network structure, and wireless/remote access
to the vehicle.
    Physical access

      •      On-Board Diagnostics (e.g., OBD-II routinely accessed
             during service or tuning in the clear)

      •      Entertainment media (e.g., DVD, USB, etc.)
      •      Access to ECUs

      •      External sensors (vision, acoustic, radar, LIDAR, etc.)

   In-vehicle network structure

     •        Connections to OBD-II

     •        Vehicle networking bus (CAN, KLINE, MOST, Ethernet
              AVB, etc.) connections to various ECUs

   Wireless access to vehicle

     •        Keyless entry

     •        Bluetooth and Bluetooth-connected devices

     •        TPMS

     •        Cellular, Internet, and applications (V2X)

     •        Radio/audio system(s)

     •        Remote telematics

   15 DISTINCT HACKABLE AREAS
                                                                Airbag ECU
                                                                        OBD II
          DSRC Based Receiver
                 (V2X)                                                           USB

     Passive Keyless Entry                                                        Bluetooth
                                                                                        Remote Link Type App
            Remote Key

                    TPMS
                                                                                              Vehicle Access System ECU

                           ADAS System ECU                                                     Steering & Breaking ECU

                Smartphone
                                                                                       Engine & Transmission ECU
                                       Lighting System ECU
                                        (Interior & Exterior)

Figure 6-11. Distinct hackable areas in a vehicle

M
  itigations
Mitigating the preceding threats would require a defense in depth
approach as shown in Figure 6-12, beginning with securing the vehicle
systems and followed by securing the communications:
    Securing the vehicle systems includes the following assets:

        •   Sensors and actuators: All the sensors and actuators
            must be authenticated (digital signatures) before
            communicating and protect the integrity (sign/verify
            using SHA3) and confidentiality (using AES-256) of the
            valuable data on the bus interfaces.

        •   Computer vision and AI (path planning): The machine
            learning or deep learning assets such as the weights,
            training data, test/validation data, models, and so
            on must be protected by encrypting the assets on the
            storage and decrypting into the memory in a TEE. The
            details for this architecture are outside the scope of this
            book.

        •   Networks and ECUs: The networks and any gateways
            must have firewalls and intrusion detection systems,
            and the ECUs must be securely booted and deploy the
            HW security building blocks as listed here.

      Securing communications:

        •   Vehicle to everything (V2X): All the devices on the
            V2X interfaces must be mutually authenticated
            (using digital signatures) before communicating and
            protect the integrity (sign/verify using SHA3) and
            confidentiality (using AES-256) of the valuable data on
            the bus interfaces.

       •         Maps, code, and data to/from the Cloud: The maps
                 database and access to online databases must be
                 authenticated and authorized via digital signatures and
                 login credentials. Any data exchange with the Cloud
                 must also be subjected to the same protections.

       •         Infotainment, mobile devices, wearables:
                 The infotainment devices and mobile devices
                 including wearables/smartphones/others must be
                 mutually authenticated (digital signatures) before
                 communicating and protect the integrity (sign/verify
                 using SHA3) and confidentiality (using AES-256) of the
                 valuable data on the bus interfaces

   DEFENSE-IN-DEPTH
      GPS                                           ISP        BS
                                                                    Baseline IoT Security Architecture
                                                          BS
                                                                                  Over-the-air updates
                                                                                  IDPS/anomaly detection
                                                                                  Network enforcement
                                                                       SOFTWARE

                                                    V2X antenna                   Certificate management services
                                                                                  Anti-malware and remote monitoring
                                                                                  Biometrics

                                                                                                                               Trust and Context
                                                                                  Fast cryptographic performance
                                                                                  Device identification
                                                                                  Isolated execution
                                                                                  (Message) authentication
    Occupant safety
    Surround sensors
                                                                                         Trusted Execution Environment
                                                                       HARDWARE

    Brake control system
    Electric power streering                                                            Hardware and Software Identities
    CAN bus
                                                                                    Protected Boot         Protected Storage
                                              iOS

                   Electric Chargers   Mobile Devices

Figure 6-12. Defense in depth architecture

    The threats explained earlier can be effectively mitigated by leveraging
the Intel HW security building blocks shown in Figure 6-13. The boot
integrity of the automotive systems can be secured with protected
boot (verified and measured boot). The protected storage feature can
be leveraged to store the keys securely and perform low bandwidth

encryption/decryption and sign/verify of the message data. For higher
robustness and high bandwidth use cases, the authentication of data
whether it is messages or others can be achieved in the TEE such as SGX
by invoking SHA-NI in the CPU instruction set.
    Hardware security building blocks:

       1. Unique Device ID using PKI compliant keys/
          certificates via PTT/TPM.

       2. True RNG using the RNG instructions in the
          CPU. With reasonably good entropy to be used as a
          nonce or a seed for subsequent key generation.

       3. Verified boot using Boot Guard to ensure a HW Root
          of Trust and a robust transient chain of trust.

       4. Secure storage using PTT/TPM for both data and
          keys.

       5. Trusted Execution Environment using SGX.

       6. Cryptographic acceleration using AES and SHA new
          instructions.

       7. Key generation using PTT/TPM for application keys.
       8. Secure clock using tamper-resistant HW supplied
          timers for precise logging of retail transactions.

       9. Monotonic counters – HW supplied and tamper-
          resistant counters that are guaranteed to
          increment only.
      10. Secure debug for locking/disabling the debug
          ports at the factory and ability to unlock/enable to
          securely debug.

      11. Physical tamper detection and protection against
          side-channel attacks.

                                                           Defense in Depth

       Hardware security building blocks

           Platform boot integrity and chain of trust
           Secure storage (keys and data)
           Secure communication
           Secure debug
           Tamper detection and protection from
           side channel attacks

Figure 6-13. HW security building blocks for defense in depth

    Design trade-offs: For the Transportation Solutions domain,
functional safety, security, privacy, and resiliency are all pertinent. The
automobiles have a long life and are safety/life critical by design; it is
essential to integrate safety and security to prevent false positives and false
negatives from functional safety infrastructure. There is also a need for
the automobiles to detect the physical tamper and send a “kill pill” to the
platform to trigger a lockdown of the security engine and vault the secrets
to avoid unauthorized disclosure. This is critical so that Break Once Run
Everywhere (BORE) attacks to retrieve the universal keys are mitigated.

 Standards – Regulatory and Industry
The SAE J3101 is one of the main government regulations that mandate
most of the preceding security objectives. FIPS 140-2 L2/3 and NHTSA are
also considered vital for the US markets.

I?ndustrial Control System (ICS)
 and Industrial IoT (IIoT)
As the manufacturers and producers seek to respond to greater pressures
for higher production rates, lower production costs, and the ability to
compete in a global marketplace, they continue to embrace the efficiencies
created by a transition to Industry 4.0 and the Industrial IoT (IIoT). These
are broad terms that encompass the concept of a combined information
technology (IT) and operational technology (OT) and include flexible
automation of OT processes, application of artificial intelligence to OT
problems, automated device and process orchestration, and higher
resiliency in the presence of system failures, to name a few of the more
prevalent topics. In Figure 6-14, a notional diagram of an IIoT architecture
is portrayed for the purpose of identifying security concerns and
discussing threats and security objectives.

                                         Data Ingest              Manage                                                                                                                HMI
            Protocols

                                                                  Agent                                                                                         Data
                                                                                                                                                                                   Controller
                                             Command              Security              Industrial Ethernet
                                                                                        ProfiNET
                                                   Simple Device Gateway                Time-Sensitive Network                                               Container
                                                                                                                                                                                         Apps
                                                                                        Modbus                                                                Images
                                                                  Manage                                                                 Orchestration
            Protocols

                                                                                                                                                              Storage               Compute
                                              Execution                                                                                   & Workload
                                                                  Agent                                                                                       Cluster                Cluster
                                              Containers                                                                                    Mgmnt
                                                                  Security
                                                                                                                                                     High-Availability Virtualization
                                                            Smart Gateway
                                                                                                                                                                             OT Control Center
                        SCADA System
                         (Brownfield)

                                                                                                                 Real-Time Service Bus

                                                                                                                                          Security           Security Policies &          Device
                                                                                                                                         Management              Metadata               Attestation

                                                   Data Ingest               Manage                                                         Security          Device &
                                 Protocols

                                                                                              Wi-Fi + LP WiFi                                                                       Network
                                                       Analysis              Agent                                                       Intelligence &        Asset
                                                                                              Bluetooth + BTLE                                                                      Security
                                                                                                                                            Analytics          Mgmnt
                                                   Command                   Security         3G/4G/LTE (GPRS)
                                                                                              Zigbee®, Zwave®                                        High-Availability Virtualization
                                                                   Service Gateway            RFIG
                                                                                                                                                                             IT Control Center

Figure 6-14. Notional Industrial IoT architecture

     This architecture in Figure 6-14 is notional because it is not created
from any actual deployment nor is it intended to portray a particular type
of industrial plant. Instead it depicts different types of components in an
industrial setting that are typical of the devices Intel produces or contributes
components for in the IIoT. The notional diagram depicts an Edge-to-
Cloud and a SCADA-to-Edge-to-Cloud architecture. On the left side of the
diagram are various gateways that control devices. Simple devices such
as meters, tank levels, temperature sensors, and vibration sensors can be
controlled using a simple gateway. These gateways may control many such
devices simultaneously. More complex devices such as industrial robots
or CNC machines require more advanced smart gateways. These devices
have the ability to load different types of control programs and workloads
and may include real-time control loops that encompass line and human
safety protocols. Finally, existing systems also need connectivity to the
back-end IIoT systems and are connected through a service gateway that
supports existing protocols and may translate those data elements into
different forms to be carried in newer protocols and reformatted messages.
All three types of gateways may be connected by various communications
technologies including wired and wireless technology.
     The back-end systems are still logically segmented into OT and IT
concerns, though in the IIoT they may share some physical computing
devices and servers. OT control is focused on orchestration and workload
management and providing clear visibility of the systems and operations
to OT engineers.

 Security Objectives and Requirements
Assets in the IIoT gateways are included in the following security
objectives, where sub-bullets are security objectives derived from top-level
security objectives. These objectives are aligned with the IIC.15

15
  I? ndustrial Internet Consortium. Industrial Internet of Things Volume G4: Security
   Framework. September 2016. www.iiconsortium.org/white-papers.htm

      •     Data at rest and in transit: All commands received by
            the gateway from the OT/IT control centers must be
            protected from modification (integrity), duplication
            (replay), and optionally disclosure (confidentiality).
      •     Identity of the device: All devices shall maintain at
            least one identity public and private key pair used to
            uniquely identify the device to other entities.

      •     Identity of the control authority: All commands
            received by the gateway from the OT/IT control centers
            must be verified as authentic by comparing the signing
            public key with authorized trust anchor keys. This
            security objective and the previous one imply the
            following derived security objective to address trust
            anchors and identity keys.

            •     Protection of trust anchors and identity keys:
                  All identity keys and trust anchors must be
                  securely stored in the gateway to prevent use by
                  unauthorized software processes/users. A trust
                  anchor key is a public key of an entity (like the OT
                  control center) that is inherently trusted by the
                  device; an identity key is a public and private key
                  pair that is used to prove the device’s identity to
                  other entities. Protection of identity keys should
                  include limiting the use of the identity key to a RoT
                  (see Chapter 3).

      •     Integrity of the boot system and operating system:
            Verification of boot firmware and software, with secure
            storage of trusted measurements collected during boot,
            shall be enforced at every soft and hard boot event.

 •   Trusted reporting of device health: Devices shall be
     capable of reporting their current health including
     measurements from their last boot cycle and any
     software or firmware updates performed since their
     last boot. This reporting must include a proof of origin
     signature that unambiguously attests to the source
     of the report (Root of Trust for Reporting) and all
     claimants producing data for the report (Root of Trust
     for Measurement).

 •   Verification of software updates, configuration,
     and workloads: All updates to the device shall come
     from an authorized source verified against one of the
     device’s trust anchors; updates shall be protected from
     modification (integrity) and verified by the device prior
     to first use that the update has not been corrupted.
     Updates include new or updated software and
     firmware, configuration files, and workloads.

 •   Whitelisting of applications and network endpoints:
     Devices shall maintain a whitelist of authorized
     software and the identity and address of network
     endpoints that are authorized to communicate with the
     device, and the device shall prevent the execution of
     any software not on the whitelist and ignore/terminate
     any communication streams from network endpoints
     not on the whitelist.

 •   Management of connected peripherals: Devices shall
     maintain a whitelist and authorized configuration of
     all connected peripherals, whether wired or wirelessly
     connected to the device, and ignore or disconnect any
     peripherals not authorized to be connected with the
     device.

      •     Storage integrity: Devices shall maintain the integrity
            of stored elements including software, configuration
            files, workloads, data measurements, and processing
            logs; devices shall prevent unauthorized access to
            stored elements.

    Design trade-offs: Industrial systems are designed specifically for
harsh environments and for interoperability with existing systems and
devices. Requirements around these constraints dominate the design
decisions. Oftentimes, this means removing security protections, like
encryption, because end systems cannot perform those security functions
or intermediary systems are dependent on receiving this data unencrypted
and do not have the capability to add this layer of protection. In addition,
industrial type systems tend to require low power profiles, either because
they are deployed in a remote location (oil pumping station) with limited
power capabilities or crowded together in a small space where heat from
power dissipation is considered a problem. In both cases, lower powered
devices tend to have fewer security capabilities. The important trade-off
in these cases is to support security features that address the most critical
threat – identification of proper control authorities using protected trust
anchors for authentication of commands, configuration, and software
update.

T? hreats
The threats to IIoT systems are composed of both external threat actors
and insiders. Both groups can mount destructive attacks on IIoT systems,
though most threat analysis focuses on external attackers. Figure 6-15
identifies the primary threats and consequences.

                                                                                            Least Trusted

           Threat                          Threat                                                                                                   Threat                        Threat
      Device Hijacking                Application Level                                                                                       Permanent Denial of            Man in-the-Middle
                                      Denial of Service                               Enterprise or Outside World                               Service (PDoS)
                                           (PDoS)

                                                                                                DMZ Firewall
      Countermeasures                Countermeasures                                                                                           Countermeasures               Countermeasures
     Device Identification             Authentication,                     ...                                          ...                      Authentication,            Authentication and
     and Access Control,            Encryption, Access                     ...                                          ...                   Encryption, Access            Encryption, Security
      Security Lifecycle                Control and                        ...                                          ...                       Control and                    Lifecycle
        Management                   Application Level                                                                                         Application Level               Management
                                      DDoS Protection,                  Alarm Server                               Controller Server            DDoS Protection,
                                    Security Monitoring                                    SCADA Network                                      Security Monitoring
                                        and Analysis                                                                                              and Analysis
                                                            ...                                                                        ...
                                                            ...                                                                        ...
                                                            ...                                                                        ...
                                                          Application            HMI Operator                  Engineering         Database
                                                            Server                 Station                       Station            Server
                          Station 1                                                                                                                                Station 2

                                                           Process Control Network                                 Process Control Network
          An attacker gains control of the robotic arm                                                                                              Attacker gains control of the active robot
              and alters the original programmed
                                                                                                  Gateway                                           to spoof the status, setting the machine
                      manufacturing flow.                                                                                                           to “offline” and allowing safety doors to
                                                                                            Most Trusted                                                 open, even though the robot is
                                                                                                                                                                 still in operation.

Figure 6-15. Primary IIoT threats and consequences16

    Threat #1: Device hijacking – An attacker uses vulnerabilities in the
device software to inject their own software or firmware on the device and
corrupt data, stop executing processes, falsify health or data reporting, or
disrupt the industrial operations flow.

                •           Mitigation: Use of advanced containment techniques
                            to isolate software, including virtualization, containers,
                            and TEEs. Ability to restart workloads or execute
                            workloads as microservices limits the attack surface
                            and time an attack can be active.

     Threat #2: Device masquerading – An attacker creates a digital twin
of the real device and intercepts or copies data to discover proprietary
information or to deny the real device access to important information,
commands, or workloads.

16
   Diagram from www.rambus.com/iot/industrial-iot/

      •     Mitigation: Device identity and mutual authentication
            for all communications flows from the OT/IT center
            are vital to prevent these attacks. Physical and logical
            protection of the device’s identity credentials prevents
            an adversary from stealing credentials. Storage of
            a device’s unique identity credentials within a TEE
            is required to prevent the use of a digital twin to
            masquerade as the real device.

    Threat #3: Application-level data tampering and denial of service –
An attacker uses metadata spoofing or replay, SQL injection attacks, or
resource exhaustion attacks to trick a device into performing an improper
action or creating a temporary DoS attack on the device.

      •     Mitigation: End-to-end authentication of all command
            flows and proper whitelisting of network endpoints are
            critical to preventing such attacks. Recognizing and
            responding to DoS and DDoS network attacks requires
            network infrastructure and the ability to reconfigure
            network components to isolate and quarantine
            misbehaving devices.

    Threat #4: Permanent denial of service (PDoS) attacks – An attacker is
able to inject a firmware update or critical operating system update that
damages the hardware of the device or takes the device offline requiring
depot-level service to repair the device.

      •     Mitigation: All updates and changes to the device
            require an authorized command from the OT that
            is cryptographically verified from a secured trust
            anchor on the device. Device management agents with
            privileged capabilities on the device must not also have

          direct network capability, in order to reduce network
          attacks that also give attackers elevated privileges on
          the device, because such elevated privileges allow an
          attacker to perform actions that can modify the base
          firmware and software on the device.

    Threat #5: Tampering and information disclosure of OT data – An
attacker modifies or collects data flowing between the OT center and a
device, exposing proprietary data.

      •   Mitigation: All data between the OT/IT centers and the
          device should include confidentiality protection (end-
          to-end security), but minimally must include integrity
          protections.

 Standards – Regulatory and Industry
There is not one standard that defines the Industrial IoT (IIoT), and
within different segments of the industrial industry there are different
regulatory or standards groups provide specific guidance and direction.
It is not possible to cover all of these groups here. Generally, standards
and industry groups attempt to create a set of interoperable frameworks
and middleware, along with connectivity and data or protocol standards
that enable the creation of heterogeneous system of systems to enable the
IIoT. Figure 6-16 provides an overview of the major standards influencing
Intel designs.

                                            IIOT System Standards
                            ISA-95 Enterprise Control System Integration
                            ISA-62443 Security for Industrial Automation and Control Systems
                            IIC Industrial IOT Standards
                            The Open Group – Open Process Automation (OPAF)

              IIOT Middleware Standards                             IIOT Protocol Standards
            OMG Data Distribution Service                       IETF CoRE / CoAP
            OMG Unified Component Model                         MQTT
            OPC-Unified Architecture

                                    IIOT Connectivity Standards
                                  4-20mA Loop       WiFi           IEEE 802.15.4
                                  Modbus            Bluetooth
                                  ProfiBUS          2G/3G
                                  ProfiNET          4G/LTE
                                  TSN Ethernet      5G

Figure 6-16. Common IIoT standards, middleware, protocols, and
connectivity standards

 Digital Surveillance System
Information security in digital surveillance systems (DSS) became a public
problem in 2015 and 2016, culminating in the Mirai DDoS attacks, the largest
botnet-based distributed denial of service attacks ever at that time in which
two separate attacks took Akamai and Dyn (and all their customers) offline
for hours. Because surveillance devices often need to be accessible over the
Internet, not to mention that the industry moved only recently from analog
interconnections to digital IP interconnections, information security is a
new problem for the DSS segment. What can compound this problem is the
industry is a physical security–driven industry (as opposed to IT driven), and
the industry’s expertise in cybersecurity for surveillance systems has lagged
the general Internet cybersecurity awareness.

    The DSS segment spans more than just traditional building
surveillance and closed-circuit TV (CCTV) systems. DSS includes mobile
surveillance around vehicles and human beings, including vehicular
cameras and emergency response body camera systems. And extending
beyond simple surveillance, DSS includes the use of camera systems in
smart cities for intelligent traffic control and smart toll collection systems.
As briefly discussed in the last section, the use of camera systems in retail
can aid a business in understanding customer experiences in brick-and-­
mortar retail establishments, adding extending information to the business
intelligence systems that improve customer experience, inform decisions
on product placement, and aid the design of store layout. As usage of
these DSS systems increase, the opportunity for a repeat of the attacks like
Mirai, Persirai,17 Devil’s Ivy,18 and Peekaboo19 can become more of a threat.
Intel®’s robust hardware-based integrated security provides a capability
stack which improves system security.

17
     rend Micro. May 9, 2017. Persirai: New Internet of Things (IoT) Botnet Targets IP
   T
   Cameras. https://blog.trendmicro.com/trendlabs-security-intelligence/
   persirai-new-internet-things-iot-botnet-targets-ip-cameras/
18
    Senrio. July 18, 2017. Devil’s Ivy: Flaw in Widely Used Third-Party Code Impacts
    Millions. https://blog.senr.io/blog/devils-ivy-flaw-in-widely-used-
    third-party-code-impacts-millions
19
     Threatpost. September 17, 2018. Zero-Day Bug Allows Hackers to Access CCTV
     Surveillance Cameras. https://threatpost.com/zero-day-bug-allows-
     hackers-to-access-cctv-surveillance-cameras/137499/

                              camera2
   camera1                                                             camera3                                                 camera4
                                                    i Phone
                                                                                      Multifunction Print Device

                                                Managed Switch

                                   Protected VLAN             General Use LAN        General Use LAN

                                                                                                                                          Laptop

                                      NVR VMS
             monitor                                                                                               GP Server
                                                Video Storage / Analytics Server
 Download stream
        Upnp
       Telnet                Internet Modem / Router
  Port forwarding
       DDNS                                                                                                                    ISP       Client access
 Cloud Phone Home
                                                                                           WAN public internet
        VPN                                                           ISP
                                      ISP network or
                                       internet WAN

                Edge / Cloud on premises
                          Cloud

                                                                                             Cloud
                                                        Video Storage / Analytics Server
                                                                                                                     monitor

Figure 6-17. Digital Surveillance System (DSS) typical network
architecture

    In Figure 6-17, the network architecture of a typical DSS system is
portrayed. Video flows from the camera to a managed switch where
many devices may actually be connected, including other servers and
individual laptops. The video data is typically separated from other traffic
on the managed switch via a protected VLAN. This does not encrypt or
otherwise protect the traffic or video streams, it merely creates a different
logical segment on the network reserved only for video traffic. Depending
on the type of managed switch, this may not present much difficulty for
an attacker to overcome. Besides the cameras, a network video recorder
(NVR) video management system (VMS) is also connected to the managed
switch. This system enables the recording of multiple video streams to

a storage array. There is typically a local storage array also connected
to the managed switch on the VLAN, but a remote storage array in the
Cloud provides long-term storage. This means that the NVR VMS and
the local storage device are involved in uploading the video streams to
the Cloud. Viewing of the video streams may be done locally, off the NVR
VMS system, or remotely. Remote access may be enabled to the NVR VMS
system, or more may be provided only from the Cloud, depending on the
network security at the local installation and the security features enabled
on the NVR VMS.20
     From the network architecture in Figure 6-17, it is also seen that
input to the NVR VMS may come from devices other than video cameras.
Multifunction print devices are capable of capturing scanned images
and using the NVR VMS to store those images for the user. Additionally,
a phone can be used to pipe in multimedia including audio only, audio
and video, or other encoded streams as a download service (where
the phone is acting as a modem) and supply those inputs to the NVR
VMS. These input streams are important to understand in the overall DSS
segment, since maintaining security for devices other than IP cameras
needs to be incorporated into the network security, monitoring, and
patch update systems.
     The Cloud segment of the DSS system includes analytics and advanced
artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms used to process media files (audio,
video, and still image) and collect data or file/index media according to
criteria. This section does not address cloud security concerns, which must
be properly accounted for in any DSS system. Cloud security is adequately
addressed by other resources.

20
    redit: Jody Booth, Platform Solutions Architect, DSS team, IOTG, Intel – source
  C
  of DSS Network Architecture diagram

 Security Objectives and Requirements
Using Figure 6-17 as the target for security analysis, the DSS segment
includes the following security objectives, which focus on the primary
video and audio assets in the system:

      •     Data at rest and in transit: All incoming data streams
            received by the NVR VMS from the managed switch
            must be protected from modification (integrity),
            duplication (replay), and disclosure (confidentiality).

      •     Identity of the device: All devices attached to the
            managed switch should be uniquely identified; the
            use of MAC addresses is not considered secure as
            these can be spoofed by a network adversary. Devices
            should maintain at least one identity public and
            private key pair used to uniquely identify the device to
            other entities and used to set up protected (integrity
            protected) streams to the NVR VMS.

      •     Integrity of the boot system and operating system:
            Verification of boot firmware and software, with secure
            storage of trusted measurements collected during boot,
            shall be enforced at every soft and hard boot event
            for all elements of the system, including peripherals
            connected to the managed switch, the NVR VMS, and
            the local storage array.

      •     Trusted reporting of device health: Devices shall be
            capable of reporting their current health including
            measurements from their last boot cycle and any
            software or firmware updates performed since their
            last boot. This reporting must include a proof of origin
            signature that unambiguously attests to the source
            of the report (Root of Trust for Reporting) and all

     claimants producing data for the report (Root of Trust
     for Measurement). This reporting should be collected
     by the NVR VMS system when devices connect to
     record/store their multimedia streams.
 •   Verification of software updates, configuration,
     and workloads: All updates to the device shall come
     from an authorized source verified against one of the
     device’s trust anchors; updates shall be protected from
     modification (integrity) and verified by the device prior
     to first use that the update has not been corrupted.
     Updates include new or updated software, firmware,
     and configuration files.

 •   Whitelisting of network endpoints: Devices shall
     maintain a whitelist of authorized network endpoints
     that are authorized to communicate with the device, and
     the device shall ignore/terminate any communication
     streams from network endpoints not on the whitelist.

 •   Management of connected peripherals: The managed
     switch shall maintain a whitelist of all connected
     peripherals, whether wired or wirelessly connected to
     the switch, and ignore or disconnect any peripherals
     not authorized to be connected with the device.
     Authentication of connected devices should be
     performed via cryptographic credentials, not merely
     MAC or IP addresses which can be spoofed.

 •   Storage integrity: Devices shall maintain the integrity
     of stored elements including media streams, media
     metadata, software, configuration files, and processing
     logs; devices shall prevent unauthorized access
     to stored elements. Particular care must be taken
     to protect private keys and symmetric encryption

            keys that are used for signatures, in transit data
            confidentiality and integrity or storage confidentiality
            and integrity. Many systems are required to
            produce evidence (surveillance videos, body cams,
            vehicle cams) and this evidence must provide
            cryptographically assured provenance of the media
            files and the media file’s metadata which ensures those
            data items are free from tampering. This protection
            is paramount to support legally binding evidentiary
            claims for authenticity and originating source.
     Design trade-offs: DSS systems, especially the end collection devices
(cameras and audio recorders), are extremely cost sensitive, yet must
compete on the ability to collect data in various formats and transmit that
data over the network. Those two primary goals translate to specialized
hardware capabilities. But the end devices must also operate on very
limited power budgets, not unlike the industrial systems, and therefore
design trade-offs tend to remove the majority of the security features.
Based on the history of attacks these systems have encountered, protection
of the software running on these devices are most important. Protected
trust anchors that authenticate control authorities and authorize firmware
and software updates have the most effect on maintaining security for
these devices. Back-end infrastructure, such as the video recorders,
control systems, and storage arrays, are normally standard off-the-shelf
server class devices that can utilize the full suite of hardware and software
protections available on the commercial market.

 Threats
Threats to DSS systems are primarily from outside network adversaries.
However, from some systems, privileged insiders may need to be included in
the threat analysis, especially when such DSS systems are used for building
or other surveillance, and a privileged insider can be coerced, bribed,

or forced to delete or modify evidence captured by the NVR VMS. Stolen
credentials can also make a network outsider appear to be an authorized
insider. The following threats should be considered in any DSS system:
     Threat #1: Device hijacking – An attacker uses weak authentication
credentials (Mirai attack) to take control of a peripheral device on the DSS
system; or an attacker uses vulnerabilities in the peripheral device software
(Devil’s Ivy or Perisai attacks) to inject their own software or firmware on
the device and stop media capture, falsify metadata, or misuse the device
computing power to perform other actions (mine for Bitcoin, perform a
DDoS attack).

      •   Mitigation #1: Device credentials must be changed prior
          to installation and fielding of devices. Intel’s Secure
          Device Onboarding protocol provides a fast and secure
          mechanism to provision devices with new credentials
          and configuration without requiring specialized or highly
          skilled system installation crews. Devices must never
          have default credentials or default management logins.
          Inspection of open ports and SNMP capabilities are
          required to ensure no unauthenticated or easily guessable
          password credentials are available to an attacker.

      •   Mitigation #2: Although this threat is virtually the same
          as seen in other segments, the mitigation requirements
          due to power limitations and smaller compute often
          prevent using TEEs or software containers to prevent
          or limit the impact of compromised software. Frequent
          health checks on the device firmware are required to
          monitor for any potential zero-day attacks, and response
          to firmware corruption requires signed updates using a
          hardware root-of-trust (RoT) that cannot be modified by
          an attacker, even one that replaces the firmware through
          physical attack. Careful thought and study of recent
          attacks (Devil’s Ivy and Perisai) must be done.

     Threat #2: Device masquerading – An attacker creates a digital twin
of the real device and jams or blocks transmission from the real device to
inject false media streams into the system.

      •     Mitigation: Device identity must be used to set up mutually
            authenticated streams from the collection peripherals to the
            NVR VMS system; additionally the managed switch should
            perform access control on all connected devices. Physical
            and logical protection of the device’s identity credentials
            prevents an adversary from stealing credentials and
            creating an evil digital twin. Storage of a device’s unique
            identity credentials within a TEE is required to prevent the
            use of a digital twin to masquerade as the real device.

    Threat #3: Permanent denial of service (PDoS) attacks – An attacker is
able to inject a firmware update or critical operating system update that
damages the hardware of the device or takes the device offline requiring
depot-level service to repair the device.

      •     Mitigation: All updates and changes to the device
            require a signed update package that cryptographically
            verifies against a secured trust anchor on the device. No
            changes to the software, and especially the firmware,
            can be made without a signed package update
            command that comes from a trusted, authenticated
            source. Additionally, software and firmware updates
            must be protected against rollback attacks, where an
            adversary installs validly signed but older software
            versions that install an old security vulnerability onto
            the device. Rollback attacks must be prevented by using
            a protected value to store the software version number
            for the currently installed software/firmware, and this
            must be verified against the integrity-protected software
            version found in the signed software update package.

    Threat #4: Unauthorized access to surveillance data – An attacker
gains access to surveillance footage that includes private or confidential
information to which that attacker should not have access.

       •   Mitigation: Proper access control for all surveillance
           footage is required. Best practice is to encrypt
           such footage and provide access control on the
           cryptographic keys. This ensures that all copies of
           the footage are equally protected, including backups.
           This of course shifts the burden of access control
           to the keys themselves. Proper key storage should
           include hardware-based protection with two-factor
           authentication to access the keys. Since backups are
           encrypted, the backup storage of keys becomes an
           issue. Having cold or warm sites with hardware security
           modules (HSM) that are unlocked with smartcards or
           other hardware tokens is best practice.

 Standards – Regulatory and Industry
There are two primary industry standards organized around IP cameras
and DSS: ONVIF and PSIA.21 ONVIF (Open Network Video Interface
Forum) was formed in 2008 as a nonprofit industry organization to
define an interoperable interface standard for IP cameras allowing better
interoperability between different manufacturers. ONVIF was originally
formed by Axis Communications, Bosch Security Systems, and Sony Corp,
but now has over 480 members. ONVIF has defined four profiles for video
cameras (Profiles S, G, Q, and T)22; however, as shown in Figure 6-18,
necessary security features are not yet mandatory in many profiles.

21
   I? FSEC Global. 2014, November 23. ONVIF and PSIA: Guide to Standards
    in Video Surveillance. www.ifsecglobal.com/video-surveillance/
    guide-to-standards-in-video-surveillance-onvif-v-psia/
22
     Profile categories C and A are reserved for access control devices, like door locks.

                                                                                                                          Profiles

                                   Features                               G                     Q                     S                     T                     C                     A

                                                                 Device       Client   Device       Client   Device       Client   Device       Client   Device       Client   Device       Client

                                                                  General
     System Settings                                               M            C       M             C       M            C        M            C        M            C        M             C

     User Authentication                WS-Username Token                                                     M            M
                                        Digest Authentication      M           M        M            M         O           M        M            M        M            M        M            M

     User Handling                                                 M            C       M            M        M            C        M            C        M            C        M            M
     Query Services and Capabilities                               M           M        M            M        M            M        M            M        M            M        M            M
     Device Discovery                                              M            C       M            M        M            C        M            M        M            C        M            M

     Default Access Policy                                                              M

     Network Configuration                                         M            C       M             C       M            C        M            M        M            M        M             C
     Zero Configuration                                                                  C            C        C           C

     Firmware Upgrade                                                                    C            C
     Backup and Restore                                                                  C            C

     TLS Configuration                                                                   C            C
     IP Address Filtering                                                                                      C           C                                                    C             C

     NTP                                                                                                       C           C         C           C                              M             C
     Automatic IP Assignment                                                             C            C

     Media Profile Configuration                                                                              M            C        M            C
     Media Transport                    RTP/UDP                    M           M                              M                     M
                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                           M                    M1
                                        RTP/RTSP/HTTP/TCP          M           M                              M                     M
                                        RTP/RTSP/HTTPS/TCP         C            C                                                    C           C

                                        RTP/RTSP/TCP/WebSocket                                                                       C           O
                                        RTP/UDP Multicast                                                      C           C        M            C

Figure 6-18. ONVIF general requirements by profile category23

   PSIA (Physical Security Interoperability Alliance) is another industry
consortium formed in 2008 covering the interoperability of IP media
devices, recording and content management for recorders and video
analytics.24 PSIA was founded by 20 member companies including
Honeywell, GE Security, and Cisco, but adoption under this specification

23
     NVIF. (2018). ONVIF Overview. www.onvif.org/wp-content/uploads/
   O
   2018/10/ONVIF_Profile_Feature_overview_v2-2.pdf
24
    Honeywell. (2014). IP Video Standards. www.security.honeywell.com/-/
    media//Security/Resources/PDF/News%20and%20events/White%20papers/
    IP_Video_Standards%20pdf

has stalled with the last publication from this body in 2010. Although
there are still many cameras and devices on the market carrying PSIA
compliance, PSIA is not considered a leading force in the industry.
    Of all the driving forces for security in IP cameras, GDPR and the
California Data Privacy Law in the United States are the main concerns.
According to the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS),25
surveillance footage can be used to identify people directly or indirectly
and therefore falls within the GDPR regulations. The EDPS provides
guidelines26 to maintain compliance in digital surveillance systems,
and much of this guidance focuses on policy, proper notifications
through signage, and careful site planning and configuration. EDPS
recommended protections cover data in transit (prevent transmissions
from interception), data at rest (restriction on access to stored media,
including backups), and access control, but these controls must follow
the recommendations resulting from a threat analysis. Of all these
issues, access control becomes the most difficult and requires good
key management that is based in hardware-protected key storage
and roots-of-trust. Compliance with the California law should follow
similar guidance.
    HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) may also
be applicable in the medical field, relating to building surveillance systems
used in hospitals and medical facilities, which must comply with the added
burden of inference correlation between a person captured in a video feed
within a medical facility and a person’s medical treatment privacy.

25
   h? ttps://edps.europa.eu/data-protection/data-protection/
    reference-library/video-surveillance_en
26
     https://edps.europa.eu/sites/edp/files/publication/10-03-17_video-
     surveillance_guidelines_en.pdf

S
  ummary
IoT security in the current fragmented ecosystem requires a completely
different mindset. This includes leveraging the common Intel security
building blocks and accelerators such as Movidius and Intel (Altera) FPGA
solutions. It is feasible to maintain a baseline of security capabilities and
add the domain-specific features on the top to make the security solution
complete for deployment. In some cases, the solution may include a
heterogeneous architecture with assets from Intel SoC and accelerators
such as FPGA/Movidius. We have seen how the retail Solution domain
is influenced by the PCI DSS standard and how this standard can be met
with compliance on Intel product–based devices. We have also seen how
the Transportation Solutions domain is changing with the connected
vehicle concept and the plethora of threats looming over this domain. The
specific requirements of TSD can be met using Intel security technologies.
Industrial and Digital Surveillance System have their unique robustness
and mandatory standards for compliance. Only a subset of IoT verticals
are covered in this chapter, but most of these concepts apply readily to the
medical field, gaming, print imaging, and so on.

                Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms
                of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International
License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits
use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if
changes were made.
    The images or other third party material in this chapter are included
in the chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise
in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder.
