 APPENDIX

Conclusion
The world’s most massive living organism1 is named Pando, Latin for
“I spread out.” It is a quaking aspen clonal colony in south-central Utah
in the United States located at the western edge of the Colorado Plateau
in the Fishlake National Forest. It has a shared root system that is an
estimated 80,000 years old,2 making it one of the oldest living organisms
as well as being the most massive. The colony of individual male trees has
identical genetic markers due to one of its reproductive strategies, sending
up stems cloned from its massive underground root system. The frequent
intense forest fires that sweep through the colony trigger radicle stem
growth that become saplings and eventually replacement trees for those
consumed by forest fires.
    Pando might very well be a reasonable metaphor for understanding
security in the context of the Internet of Things. Even though malware,
like forest fires, may compromise individual devices and services,
hardware-roots-of-trust remain insulated from the effects of attack. Root-
of-trust building blocks focus on securely restarting devices and services
that allow automated resumption and continued operation of the Internet
of Things colony.

1
    rant, Michael C. (October 1993). “The Trembling Giant.” Discover. Vol. 14 no. 10.
  G
  Chicago. pp. 82–89. Retrieved 8 May 2008.
2
   “Quaking Aspen.” Bryce Canyon National Park. U.S. National Park Service.
   February 24, 2015. Retrieved 17 November 2018.
© The Author(s) 2020                                                             463
S. Cheruvu et al., Demystifying Internet of Things Security,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4842-2896-8

     In the era of personal computing, the computer virus was the
predominant term borrowed from biology. It seemed to adequately
characterize computer security challenges. The antivirus scan and
computer emergency response processes that counter viral attacks follow
a strategy summarized as detect, contain, and correct. Detection improves
with constant profile updates used by antivirus scanners. Containment is
achieved through various techniques to quarantine software, services, and
devices. Vulnerabilities are corrected by installing patches and software
updates that also resist future attacks. Detect-contain-correct has been a
major focus for security practitioners since the first PCs were connected
to the Internet. However, these response processes required significant
manual intervention that insufficiently scale when billions of new nodes
are added to the Internet of Things.
     In the era of IoT, Pando may be the more appropriate security
paradigm where the focus turns to hardware-roots-of-trust that become
the building blocks for resilient security. Automated recovery and
re-­instantiation of trustworthy IoT endpoints and services follows an
outbreak. Pando-style security mechanisms are still in their infancy as IoT
evolution transitions from its first phase of massive connectivity growth to
its second and third phases of smarter autonomous systems.
     In this book, we looked at the economics of constrained devices and its
impact on security, the role of IoT frameworks in enabling interoperability,
improved developer experiences, and complexity hiding; we reviewed
currently available hardware security capabilities and their role as
hardware-roots-of-trust. We also described some of the challenges facing
system software, virtualization, and software frameworks when trying to
use hardware security capabilities and expose those security services to
the various software layers above them. Attestation was highlighted as a
way for peer nodes to evaluate trustworthiness characteristics of hardware
security capabilities. We saw how an increase in connectivity options leads
to increased complexity in gateways, hubs, routers, and other networking
infrastructure as constrained endpoints continue to implement narrow

slices of connection technology. We also saw how system design objectives
can lead to security, safety, availability, and usability trade-offs and how
vertically aligned components, software, and operations rely on the
continued preservation of vertical boundaries in light of technology that
breaks through many of the historical technological and physical barriers.
    In particular, we want to highlight several core security concepts and
ideas that contradict conventional thinking when taken in light of very
large-scale IoT deployments.

 Economics of Constrained Roots-of-Trust
In Chapter 1 we described the economics and impact of scaling security
down to constrained devices which constitute the vast majority of connected
devices in the IoT ecosystem. The traditional expectation that approximately
5–10% of device resources being security-related becomes inverted where, in
many cases, a majority of resources are security functionality focused. This is
motivated by root-of-trust security capabilities that anticipate interoperable
trusted behaviors designed to initialize, boot, discover, provision, configure,
and decommission IoT devices without human involvement. Devices
lacking these capabilities simply will not be allowed to connect.

 IoT Frameworks – Necessary Complexity
In Chapter 2 we observed how IoT frameworks achieve the multifaceted
goal of enabling broad connectivity, improving device manageability,
simplifying distributed application development and operation while
promising increased interoperability. Unfortunately, interoperability ethos
isn’t universally shared among framework providers as some vendors
pursue proprietary IoT strategies and others are overeager to create a
multitude of similar but different framework standards that further dilute
the promise of interoperability. We further observed that IoT framework
standards almost universally ignore specifying secure binding of security

functionality that incorporates hardware-roots-of-trust technology to
framework layers that would ensure framework layers are not easily
overtaken by malware interposers.

 Hardware Security – More Than a Toolbox
In Chapter 3 we walked through an array of hardware security technologies
available for integration into IoT solutions. We explained essential
protections for identity, initialization, storage, and execution require
hardware-roots-of-trust that are secure by design. This principle should be
common to all secure IoT platforms. We also characterized attacks on IoT
platforms observing that attack pathology often follows a transition from
applications to user mode, user mode to kernel mode, kernel mode to pre-­
OS boot loader, and pre-OS to hardware. Ultimately, hardware is the last
line of defense. Hardware is also the first point of recovery when rebuilding
a clean system. Consequently, hardware security should be where the
most care should be applied to ensure robust predictable behavior.
We showed how HW security elements can be used by upper layers to
implement defense-in-depth strategies that enable layered approach to
attack mitigation and resilient recovery.

 IOT Software – Building Blocks with Glue
In Chapter 4 we considered the role software plays in securing IoT
solutions and showed some of the ways popular system software and
applications approach implementation of security features. We also
motivated the need for hardware security integration and observed that
integration is often nontrivial requiring adaptation and rework on behalf
of firmware and software developers. For example, a Trusted Execution
Environment (TEE) such as Intel SGX anticipates modularizing application
software so that security relevant operations are performed within a secure

enclave. System software may require modification to remove unnecessary
features that add exploit risk and prohibit operation inside of a more secure
virtual machine. We took a tour through multiple OSs and how they expose
HW security features and described criteria for securely implementing and
enabling solutions that build on top of hardware security mechanisms that
act like security glue that holds the software layers together.

E? thernet TSN – Everybody’s Common
 Choice?
In Chapter 5 we described a host of communications technologies that
will be employed to one extent or another in the broad IoT landscape.
The reality is many IoT endpoints will employ multiple communications
technologies based on cost, improved flexibility, and interoperability
all the while realizing the diverse security implications. The IEEE
has standardized dozens of use cases and applications involving
interoperation between disparate IoT protocols. Nevertheless, complexity
for complexity’s sake isn’t justifiable as the IoT industry will inevitably
select a few connectivity technologies that broadly satisfy requirements
unique to IoT; in other words, the industry will find everybody’s second
choice technology. Before the Internet Protocol (IP),3 every major
computer vendor had a local area network solution, most of which
didn’t interoperate. IP became everybody’s second choice option
since supporting every possible combination of vendor proprietary
solutions was intractable. We anticipate a second convergence phase of
connectivity technologies will occur for the Internet of Things. Our focus
on Ethernet TSN plus IPv6 as our first choice to replace fieldbus-based

3
 I? nformation Sciences Institute, University of Southern California, “Internet
  Protocol DARPA Internet Program Protocol Specification,” September 1981. IETF
  RFC791. https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc791

solutions is in anticipation of the eventual consolidation of the
fragmented state of brownfield IoT. We think brownfield IoT will regard
TSN as a popular second choice.

  ecurity MVP – The Champion Within
S
a Fractured IoT Ecosystem
In Chapter 6 we broadened the view of vertical applications addressed by
IoT to include any industry informed by “smart” devices. Each of these
industries has different security requirements due to the nature of the
information handled and to meet regulatory and industry standard bodies’
requirements. An overview was provided of the different verticals and
associated security requirements. IoT ecosystem is fragmented by nature
with multiple verticals, but at the end of the day, we need a common set of
HW/SW building blocks and augmenting accelerators to meet the domain
unique requirements. We discussed technology layering characteristics
where layered security functionality needs to be rooted in hardware where
a security minimum viable platform (MVP) defines a core set of security
ingredients that are by and large common across all nodes participating
in the larger IoT system. Systems architects stand a better chance at
designing secure IoT systems when the MVP set of hardware security
capabilities is available for implementation of security enforcement points
rather than relying on a mix of options that span the continuum of cyber
and physical ingredients.

 The Way Forward
The journey to demystify IoT Security doesn’t end with this book. We
anticipate there remains a huge scaling problem where the key to realizing
secure IoT operation is anchored in autonomous response and recovery

in the face of attacks. A “pragmatic” security-minded industry recognizes
that heterogeneous networks constructed using devices having different
HW and SW architectures, components, and capabilities are likely to
coexist for the foreseeable future as some devices are expected to remain
in deployment for nearly 30 years. Nevertheless, all devices need to be
reachable and serviceable or reliably disabled and excluded. Given the
IoT continues to be a target for attack and compromise, defense-in-depth
layering supported by robust hardware security capabilities is essential.
The security community refers to this as hardware-roots-of-trust, we think
of it as a Pando security layer that isn’t easily compromised and resiliently
restarts in the face of attack.
     We’ve presented a perspective to trusted computing that is intrinsic
to a device and is recognizable to other IoT devices; looking ahead we
anticipate distributed trust will become commonplace where trust may be
distributed across millions of devices. Blockchain4 technology might be a
good example, where a consensus of participant devices may determine
whether an individual device is configured with minimum viable root-­
of-­trust capabilities. For more information about blockchain, see the
Hyperledger Project,5 a Linux Foundation open source effort, and these
additional references.[6, 7, 8 ]

4
    ikipedia, “blockchain” (as of this publication date). https://en.wikipedia.
  W
  org/wiki/Blockchain
5
   www.hyperledger.org
6
    Khwaja Shaik, “Why blockchain and IoT are best friends”,
    January 12, 2018. www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2018/01/
    why-blockchain-and-iot-are-best-friends/
7
     Postscapes – A list of projects and companies, “Blockchains and the IoT,” January
     5, 2019. www.postscapes.com/blockchains-and-the-internet-of-things/
8
      Phillip J. Windley, Ph.D., Chair Sovrin Foundation, “Identity, Sovrin,
      and the Internet of Things,” July 27, 2017. https://blog.sovrin.org/
      identity-sovrin-and-the-internet-of-things-8ef911fa715d

    Security combined with artificial intelligence (AI)[9, 10, 11] and machine
learning (ML)[12, 13] is another area ripe for innovation where Intel is
conducting research.14 Post-quantum cryptography15 and resilient
computing16 are additional areas of technical exploration that are out of
scope for this book that nevertheless promise impactful Pando security
advances.

9
 I? ntel Artificial Intelligence Overview. www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/
  analytics/artificial-intelligence/overview.html
10
     Torsten George, Security Week, “The Role of Artificial Intelligence
     in Cyber Security,” January 11, 2017. www.securityweek.com/
     role-artificial-intelligence-cyber-security
11
      Justin Jett, Threat Post, “Security and Artificial Intelligence:
      Hype vs. Reality,” August 23, 2018. https://threatpost.com/
      security-and-artificial-intelligence-hype-vs-reality/136837/
12
       Jason Knight, Intel AI Products Group blog, “The Importance of
       Systems in Machine Learning,” February 15, 2018. www.intel.ai/
       systems-machine-learning/#gs.4FOjLznH
13
        MIT Technology Review Insights/Research, “Machine Learning-driven
        analytics: Key to digital transformation,” 2018. www.intel.com/content/www/
        us/en/analytics/mit-machine-learning-advanced-analytics-key-to-
        transformation.html
14
         Georgia Tech Institute for Information Security & Privacy,
         “Georgia Tech Launches New Research on the Security of
         Machine-Learning Systems,” Oct 31, 2016. www.iisp.gatech.edu/
         georgia-tech-launches-new-research-security-machine-learning-systems
15
          Simona Samardjiska, Digital Security Group Radbound University, RIOT Summit
          2017, “Post Quantum Cryptography for the IoT.” https://riot-os.org/files/
          RIOT-Summit-2017-slides/3-4-Security-session-Simona.pdf
16
           Kemal A. Delic, Ubiquity, Publications of the ACM, “On Resilience of IoT
           Systems” The Internet of Things Symposium, February 2016. https://ubiquity.
           acm.org/article.cfm?id=2822885

