Foreword

Static Single Assignment (SSA) form is now the dominant framework upon which
program analysis and transformation tools are currently built. It is possible to pro-
duce a state-of-the-art optimizing compiler that transforms the incoming program
into SSA form after the initial syntactic and semantic analysis, and maintain that
representation throughout the entire optimization process only to leave SSA form
when the final machine code is emitted. This book describes the state-of-the-art
representations of SSA form and the algorithms that use it.
   The landscape of techniques for program analysis and transformation was very
different when the two of us started the initial development of SSA form. Many
of the compilers being built at the time were very simple, similar to what a student
might generate in a first compiler class. They produced code based on a template for
each production in the grammar of the language. The initial optimizing compilers
transformed the code based on the branch-free context of the surrounding code,
perhaps removing computation if the results were not to be used, perhaps computing
a result in a simpler way by using a previous result.
   The first attempts at more ambitious optimization occurred at IBM, in a few
small companies in the Boston area and in a small number of academic institutions.
These people demonstrated that large gains in performance were available if the
scope of the optimizations was increased beyond the local level. In general, an
optimizing compiler can make transformations to an intermediate representation of a
program provided that the preconditions exist for the transformation to preserve the
semantics of the program. Before SSA form, the dominant provers would construct
a summary of what must be true about the state of the program before and after every
statement in the program. The proof constructed would proceed by understanding
what parts of the state were modified by the statement. This entire process was
known as dataflow analysis. The results of that analysis were then used to make
transformations to the intermediate code.

                                                                                   v
vi                                                                         Foreword

     This framework had several drawbacks:
• The represented state was not sparse. The analysis to prove the set of facts
  involved solving a series of simultaneous equations which proved the validity
  of every proposition needed for that phase, at every location in the program.
  Because the state of the entire program had to be represented at each point in the
  program, the analysis was slow.
• The transformations voided the validity of the analysis. While incrementally
  updating the proofs was, in theory, possible, such algorithms were impractical
  because the representations were not sparse. Thus, each pass of the compiler
  consisted of an analysis phase followed by a transformation phase.
• Each type of transformation had its own set predicates that it needed to prove.
  Since the analysis was discarded after each transformation, there was no reason
  to try to prove any fact that was not necessary for the subsequent transformation.
      This had the effect of making it more difficult to design a new transformation
  because the programmer had to first figure out exactly what information was
  needed and then figure out how to perform the proofs before performing the
  transformation.
• The transformations were fragile. The intermediate representations available
  in early compilers used the programmer’s variable names to express the data
  dependencies between different parts of the program. Part of designing any
  transformation involved separating those names into the values that reached each
  statement.
   While significant work by many people had been done to improve the efficiency
of the analysis process, the cost of having to perform the analysis from scratch,
coupled with the need to represent every fact at each point, was significant.
Fundamentally, this process did not scale: at the time that we developed SSA form,
programs were getting larger and there was a desire to make optimizing compilers
much more aggressive.
   Many people were aiming to fix these problems separately. Def-use chains joined
the origin of a value and its use but attempted to do this independently of control
flow. Shapiro and Saint refined def-use chains by describing the birthpoints of
values. These birthpoints would become the locations where SSA form introduces
phi-functions. John Reif used birthpoints for some interesting analyses and found
better algorithms to determine them than Shapiro and Saint. But birthpoints were
expressed as an analysis technique of the original program and transformations still
required rerunning the analysis between phases.
   Our initial motivation for SSA form was to build a sparse representation that
avoided the cost of proving every fact at every location. Our primary idea was to
encode the data and control dependencies into a naming scheme for the variables.
We chose to solve the extended form of the constant propagation problem which
had been well studied by Wegbreit. We presented the algorithm at the 12th POPL
conference. The algorithm was much more efficient than Wegbreit’s version, but
it also had one very interesting and unique property that was not appreciated
Foreword                                                                         vii

at the time: the transformation did not adversely effect the correctness of the
representation.
   The first work was incomplete. It didn’t cover the semantics of many common
storage classes, and the construction algorithm was not well thought through. But
the surprising lesson was that by constructing a uniform representation in which
both transformations and analysis could be represented, we could simplify and
improve the efficiency of both.
   Over the next few years, we teamed up with others within IBM to develop not
only an efficient method to enter SSA form but also a suite of techniques that each
used SSA form and left the representation intact when finished. These techniques
included dead code elimination, value numbering, and invariant code motion.
   The optimizations that we developed are in fact quite simple, but that simplicity
is a result of pushing much of the complexity into the SSA representation. The
dataflow counterparts to these optimizations are complex, and this difference in
complexity was not lost on the community of researchers outside of IBM. Being able
to perform optimizations on a mostly functional representation is much easier than
performing them on a representation that had all of the warts of a real programming
language.
   By today’s standards, our original work was not really that useful: there were
only a handful of techniques and the SSA form only worked for unaliased variables.
But that original work defined the framework for how programming language
transformation was to be performed. This book is an expression of how far SSA
form has come and how far it needs to go to fully displace the older techniques with
more efficient and powerful replacements. We are grateful and humbled that our
work has led to such a powerful set of directions by others.

Chappaqua, NY, USA                                                Kenneth Zadeck
Yorktown Heights, NY, USA                                        Mark N. Wegman
March 2021
