Chapter 1
Introduction

Jeremy Singer

In computer programming, as in real life, names are useful handles for concrete
entities. The key message of this book is that having unique names for distinct
entities reduces uncertainty and imprecision.
   For example, consider overhearing a conversation about “Homer.” Without any
more contextual clues, you cannot disambiguate between Homer Simpson and
Homer the classical Greek poet; or indeed, any other people called Homer that you
may know. As soon as the conversation mentions Springfield (rather than Smyrna),
you are fairly sure that the Simpsons television series (rather than Greek poetry) is
the subject. On the other hand, if everyone had a unique name, then there would
be no possibility of confusing twentieth century American cartoon characters with
ancient Greek literary figures.
   This book is about the Static Single Assignment form (SSA), which is a naming
convention for storage locations (variables) in low-level representations of computer
programs. The term static indicates that SSA relates to properties and analysis of
program text (code). The term single refers to the uniqueness property of variable
names that SSA imposes. As illustrated above, this enables a greater degree of
precision. The term assignment means variable definitions. For instance, in the code

                                        x = y + 1;

the variable x is being assigned the value of expression (y + 1). This is a definition,
or assignment statement, for x. A compiler engineer would interpret the above
assignment statement to mean that the lvalue of x (i.e., the memory location labeled
as x) should be modified to store the value (y + 1).

J. Singer (?)
School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
e-mail: Jeremy.Singer@glasgow.ac.uk

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022      3
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_1

1.1 Definition of SSA

The simplest, least constrained, definition of SSA can be given using the following
informal prose:
    A program is defined to be in SSA form if each variable is a target of exactly one assignment
    statement in the program text.

    However, there are various, more specialized, varieties of SSA, which impose
further constraints on programs. Such constraints may relate to graph-theoretic
properties of variable definitions and uses, or the encapsulation of specific control-
flow or data-flow information. Each distinct SSA variety has specific characteristics.
Basic varieties of SSA are discussed in Chap. 2. Part III of this book presents more
complex extensions.
    One important property that holds for all varieties of SSA, including the simplest
definition above, is referential transparency: i.e., since there is only a single
definition for each variable in the program text, a variable’s value is independent of
its position in the program. We may refine our knowledge about a particular variable
based on branching conditions, e.g., we know the value of x in the conditionally
executed block following an if statement that begins with

                                          if(x == 0) .

However, the underlying value of x does not change at this if statement. Programs
written in pure functional languages are referentially transparent. Such referentially
transparent programs are more amenable to formal methods and mathematical
reasoning, since the meaning of an expression depends only on the meaning of
its subexpressions and not on the order of evaluation or side effects of other
expressions. For a referentially opaque program, consider the following code
fragment.

                                           x = 1;
                                           y = x + 1;
                                           x = 2;
                                           z = x + 1;

A naive (and incorrect) analysis may assume that the values of y and z are equal,
since they have identical definitions of (x + 1). However, the value of variable x
depends on whether the current code position is before or after the second definition
of x, i.e., variable values depend on their context. When a compiler transforms this
program fragment to SSA code, it becomes referentially transparent. The translation

process involves renaming to eliminate multiple assignment statements for the same
variable. Now it is apparent that y and z are equal if and only if x1 and x2 are equal.

                                         x1 = 1;
                                         y = x1 + 1;
                                         x2 = 2;
                                         z = x2 + 1;

1.2 Informal Semantics of SSA

In the previous section, we saw how straight-line sequences of code can be
transformed to SSA by simple renaming of variable definitions. The target of the
definition is the variable being defined, on the left-hand side of the assignment
statement. In SSA, each definition target must be a unique variable name. Con-
versely variable names can be used multiple times on the right-hand side of any
assignment statements, as source variables for definitions. Throughout this book,
renaming is generally performed by adding integer subscripts to original variable
names. In general this is an unimportant implementation feature, although it can
prove useful for compiler debugging purposes.
    The φ-function is the most important SSA concept to grasp. It is a special
statement, known as a pseudo-assignment function. Some call it a “notational
fiction.”1 The purpose of a φ-function is to merge values from different incoming
paths, at control-flow merge points.
    Consider the following code example and its corresponding control-flow graph
(CFG) representation:

1 Kenneth Zadeck reports that φ-functions were originally known as phoney-functions, during the

development of SSA at IBM Research. Although this was an in-house joke, it did serve as the basis
for the eventual name.

   There is a distinct definition of y in each branch of the if statement. So
multiple definitions of y reach the print statement at the control-flow merge point.
When a compiler transforms this program to SSA, the multiple definitions of y are
renamed as y1 and y2 . However, the print statement could use either variable,
dependent on the outcome of the if conditional test. A φ-function introduces a
new variable y3 , which takes the value of either y1 or y2 . Thus the SSA version of
the program is

   In terms of their position, φ-functions are generally placed at control-flow merge
points, i.e., at the heads of basic blocks that have multiple direct predecessors
in control-flow graphs. A φ-function at block b has n parameters if there are n
incoming control-flow paths to b. The behaviour of the φ-function is to select
dynamically the value of the parameter associated with the actually executed
control-flow path into b. This parameter value is assigned to the fresh variable
name, on the left-hand side of the φ-function. Such pseudo-functions are required
to maintain the SSA property of unique variable definitions, in the presence of
branching control flow. Hence, in the above example, y3 is set to y1 if control
flows from basic block A and set to y2 if it flows from basic block B. Notice
that the CFG representation here adopts a more expressive syntax for φ-functions
than the standard one, as it associates direct predecessor basic block labels Bi
with corresponding SSA variable names ai , i.e., a0 = φ(B1 : a1 , . . . , Bn : an ).
Throughout this book, basic block labels will be omitted from φ-function operands
when the omission does not cause ambiguity.
   It is important to note that, if there are multiple φ-functions at the head of a basic
block, then these are executed in parallel, i.e., simultaneously not sequentially. This
distinction becomes important if the target of a φ-function is the same as the source
of another φ-function, perhaps after optimizations such as copy propagation (see
Chap. 8). When φ-functions are eliminated in the SSA destruction phase, they are
sequentialized using conventional copy operations, as described in Algorithm 21.6.
This subtlety is particularly important in the context of register allocated code (see
Chap. 22).

   Strictly speaking, φ-functions are not directly executable in software, since
the dynamic control-flow path leading to the φ-function is not explicitly encoded
as an input to φ-function. This is tolerable, since φ-functions are generally only
used during static analysis of the program. They are removed before any program
interpretation or execution takes place. However, there are various executable
extensions of φ-functions, such as φif or γ functions (see Chap. 14), which take an
extra parameter to encode the implicit control dependence that dictates the argument
the corresponding φ-function should select. Such extensions are useful for program
interpretation (see Chap. 14), if conversion (see Chap. 20), or hardware synthesis
(see Chap. 23).
   We present one further example in this section, to illustrate how a loop control-
flow structure appears in SSA. Here is the non-SSA version of the program and its
corresponding control-flow graph SSA version:

    The SSA code features two φ-functions in the loop header; these merge incoming
definitions from before the loop for the first iteration and from the loop body for
subsequent iterations.
    It is important to outline that SSA should not be confused with (dynamic) single
assignment (DSA or simply SA) form used in automatic parallelization. Static
Single Assignment does not prevent multiple assignments to a variable during
program execution. For instance, in the SSA code fragment above, variables y3
and x3 in the loop body are redefined dynamically with fresh values at each loop
iteration.

    Full details of the SSA construction algorithm are given in Chap. 3. For now, it
is sufficient to see that:
1. A φ-function has been inserted at the appropriate control-flow merge point where
   multiple reaching definitions of the same variable converged in the original
   program.
2. Integer subscripts have been used to rename variables x and y from the original
   program.

1.3 Comparison with Classical Data-Flow Analysis

As we will discover further in Chaps. 13 and 8, one of the major advantages of SSA
form concerns data-flow analysis. Data-flow analysis collects information about
programs at compile time in order to make optimizing code transformations. During
actual program execution, information flows between variables. Static analysis
captures this behaviour by propagating abstract information, or data-flow facts,
using an operational representation of the program such as the control-flow graph
(CFG). This is the approach used in classical data-flow analysis.
   Often, data-flow information can be propagated more efficiently using a func-
tional, or sparse, representation of the program such as SSA. When a program is
translated into SSA form, variables are renamed at definition points. For certain
data-flow problems (e.g., constant propagation) this is exactly the set of program
points where data-flow facts may change. Thus it is possible to associate data-flow
facts directly with variable names, rather than maintaining a vector of data-flow facts
indexed over all variables, at each program point.
   Figure 1.1 illustrates this point through an example of non-zero value analysis.
For each variable in a program, the aim is to determine statically whether that
variable can contain a zero integer value (i.e., null) at runtime. Here 0 represents
the fact that the variable is null, 0?A the fact that it is non-null, and ? the fact that it
is maybe-null. With classical dense data-flow analysis on the CFG in Fig. 1.1a, we
would compute information about variables x and y for each of the entry and exit
points of the six basic blocks in the CFG, using suitable data-flow equations. Using
sparse SSA-based data-flow analysis on Fig. 1.1b, we compute information about
each variable based on a simple analysis of its definition statement. This gives us
seven data-flow facts, one for each SSA version of variables x and y.
   For other data-flow problems, properties may change at points that are not
variable definitions. These problems can be accommodated in a sparse analysis
framework by inserting additional pseudo-definition functions at appropriate points
to induce additional variable renaming. See Chap. 13 for one such instance.
However, this example illustrates some key advantages of the SSA-based analysis.
1. Data-flow information propagates directly from definition statements to uses, via
   the def-use links implicit in the SSA naming scheme. In contrast, the classical

                    dense                                                  SSA based

Fig. 1.1 Example control-flow graph for non-zero value analysis, only showing relevant definition
statements for variables x and y

   data-flow framework propagates information throughout the program, including
   points where the information does not change or is not relevant.
2. The results of the SSA data-flow analysis are more succinct. In the example, there
   are fewer data-flow facts associated with the sparse (SSA) analysis than with the
   dense (classical) analysis.
   Part II of this textbook gives a comprehensive treatment of some SSA-based
data-flow analysis.

1.4 SSA in Context

Historical Context Throughout the 1980s, as optimizing compiler technology
became more mature, various intermediate representations (IRs) were proposed
to encapsulate data dependence in a way that enabled fast and accurate data-flow
analysis. The motivation behind the design of such IRs was the exposure of direct
links between variable definitions and uses, known as def-use chains, enabling
efficient propagation of data-flow information. Example IRs include the program
dependence graph [118] and program dependence web [215]. Chapter 14 gives
further details on dependence graph style IRs.

   Static Single Assignment form was one such IR, which was developed at IBM
Research and announced publicly in several research papers in the late 1980s [6, 89,
249]. SSA rapidly acquired popularity due to its intuitive nature and straightforward
construction algorithm. The SSA property gives a standardized shape for variable
def-use chains, which simplifies data-flow analysis techniques.
Current Usage The majority of current commercial and open source compilers,
including GCC, LLVM, the HotSpot Java virtual machine, and the V8
JavaScript engine, use SSA as a key intermediate representation for program
analysis. As optimizations in SSA are fast and powerful, SSA is increasingly used
in just-in-time (JIT) compilers that operate on a high-level target-independent
program representation such as Java byte-code, CLI byte-code (.NET MSIL), or
LLVM bitcode.
    Initially created to facilitate the development of high-level program transforma-
tions, SSA form has gained much interest due to its favourable properties that often
enable the simplification of algorithms and reduction of computational complexity.
Today, SSA form is even adopted for the final code generation phase (see Part IV),
i.e., the back-end. Several industrial and academic compilers, static or just-in-time,
use SSA in their back-ends, e.g., LLVM, HotSpot, LAO, libFirm, Mono. Many
compilers that use SSA form perform SSA elimination before register allocation,
including GCC, HotSpot, and LLVM. Recent research on register allocation (see
Chap. 22) even allows the retention of SSA form until the very end of the code
generation process.
SSA for High-Level Languages So far, we have presented SSA as a useful feature
for compiler-based analysis of low-level programs. It is interesting to note that some
high-level languages enforce the SSA property. The SISAL language is defined in
such a way that programs automatically have referential transparency, since multiple
assignments are not permitted to variables. Other languages allow the SSA property
to be applied on a per-variable basis, using special annotations like final in Java,
or const and readonly in C#.
   The main motivation for allowing the programmer to enforce SSA in an explicit
manner in high-level programs is that immutability simplifies concurrent program-
ming. Read-only data can be shared freely between multiple threads, without any
data dependence problems. This is becoming an increasingly important issue, with
the shift to multi- and many-core processors.
   High-level functional languages claim referential transparency as one of the cor-
nerstones of their programming paradigm. Thus functional programming supports
the SSA property implicitly. Chapter 6 explains the dualities between SSA and
functional programming.

1.5 About the Rest of This Book

In this chapter, we have introduced the notion of SSA. The rest of this book presents
various aspects of SSA, from the pragmatic perspective of compiler engineers and
code analysts. The ultimate goals of this book are:
1. To demonstrate clearly the benefits of SSA-based analysis
2. To dispel the fallacies that prevent people from using SSA
This section gives pointers to later parts of the book that deal with specific topics.

1.5.1 Benefits of SSA

SSA imposes a strict discipline on variable naming in programs, so that each
variable has a unique definition. Fresh variable names are introduced at assignment
statements, and control-flow merge points. This serves to simplify the structure of
variable def-use relationships (see Sect. 2.1) and live ranges (see Sect. 2.3), which
underpin data-flow analysis. Part II of this book focuses on data-flow analysis using
SSA. There are three major advantages to SSA:
Compile time benefit. Certain compiler optimizations can be more efficient
  when operating on SSA programs, since referential transparency means that
  data-flow information can be associated directly with variables, rather than with
  variables at each program point. We have illustrated this simply with the non-zero
  value analysis in Sect. 1.3.
Compiler development benefit. Program analyses and transformations can be
  easier to express in SSA. This means that compiler engineers can be more
  productive, in writing new compiler passes, and debugging existing passes.
  For example, the dead code elimination pass in GCC 4.x, which relies on an
  underlying SSA-based intermediate representation, takes only 40% as many lines
  of code as the equivalent pass in GCC 3.x, which does not use SSA. The SSA
  version of the pass is simpler, since it relies on the general-purpose, factored-out,
  data-flow propagation engine.
Program runtime benefit. Conceptually, any analysis and optimization that can
  be done under SSA form can also be done identically out of SSA form. Because
  of the compiler development mentioned above, several compiler optimizations
  are shown to be more effective when operating on programs in SSA form. These
  include the class of control-flow insensitive analyses, e.g., [139].

1.5.2 Fallacies About SSA

Some people believe that SSA is too cumbersome to be an effective program
representation. This book aims to convince the reader that such a concern is
unnecessary, given the application of suitable techniques. The table below presents
some common myths about SSA, and references in this first part of the book contain
material to dispel these myths.

 Myth                                    Reference
 SSA greatly increases the number of     Chapter 2 reviews the main varieties of SSA,
 variables                               some of which introduce far fewer variables
                                         than the original SSA formulation.
 SSA property is difficult to maintain   Chapters 3 and 5 discuss simple techniques for
                                         the repair of SSA invariants that have been
                                         broken by optimization rewrites.
 SSA destruction generates many copy     Chapters 3 and 21 present efficient and
 operations                              effective SSA destruction algorithms.
