Chapter 2
Properties and Flavours

Philip Brisk and Fabrice Rastello

Recall from the previous chapter that a procedure is in SSA form if every variable is
defined only once, and every use of a variable refers to exactly one definition. Many
variations, or flavours, of SSA form that satisfy these criteria can be defined, each
offering its own considerations. For example, different flavours vary in terms of the
number of φ-functions, which affects the size of the intermediate representation;
some variations are more difficult to construct, maintain, and destruct than others.
This chapter explores these SSA flavours and provides insights into their relative
merits in certain contexts.

2.1 Def-Use and Use-Def Chains

Under SSA form, each variable is defined once. Def-use chains are data structures
that provide, for the single definition of a variable, the set of all its uses. In turn,
a use-def chain, which under SSA consists of a single name, uniquely specifies
the definition that reaches the use. As we will illustrate further in the book (see
Chap. 8), def-use chains are useful for forward data-flow analysis as they provide
direct connections that shorten the propagation distance between nodes that generate
and use data-flow information.
   Because of its single definition per variable property, SSA form simplifies def-
use and use-def chains in several ways. First, SSA form simplifies def-use chains

P. Brisk ()
UC Riverside, Riverside, CA, USA
e-mail: philip@cs.ucr.edu
F. Rastello
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022      13
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_2
14                                                                     P. Brisk and F. Rastello

                      non-SSA                                  SSA form

Fig. 2.1 Def-use chains (dashed) for non-SSA form and its corresponding SSA form program

as it combines the information as early as possible. This is illustrated by Fig. 2.1
where the def-use chain in the non-SSA program requires as many merges as there
are uses of x, whereas the corresponding SSA form allows early and more efficient
combination.
   Second, as it is easy to associate each variable with its single defining operation,
use-def chains can be represented and maintained almost for free. As this constitutes
the skeleton of the so-called SSA graph (see Chap. 14), when considering a program
under SSA form, use-def chains are implicitly considered as a given. The explicit
representation of use-def chains simplifies backward propagation, which favours
algorithms such as dead-code elimination.
   For forward propagation, since def-use chains are precisely the reverse of use-
def chains, computing them is also easy; maintaining them requires minimal
effort. However, even without def-use chains, some lightweight forward propagation
algorithms such as copy folding1 are possible: Using a single pass that processes
operations along a topological order traversal of a forward CFG,2 most definitions
are processed prior to their uses. When processing an operation, the use-def
chain provides immediate access to the prior computed value of an argument.
Conservative merging is performed when, at some loop headers, a φ-function
encounters an unprocessed argument. Such a lightweight propagation engine proves
to be fairly efficient.

1 Copy folding removes any copy a = b by renaming subsequent (dominated) uses of a by b. It is

usually coupled with the SSA renaming phase.
2 A forward control-flow graph is an acyclic reduction of the CFG obtained by removing back

edges.
2 Properties and Flavours                                                            15

2.2 Minimality

SSA construction is a two-phase process: placement of φ-functions, followed
by renaming. The goal of the first phase is to generate code that fulfils the
single reaching-definition property, as already outlined. Minimality is an additional
property relating to code that has φ-functions inserted, but prior to renaming;
Chap. 3 describes the classical SSA construction algorithm in detail, while this
section focuses primarily on describing the minimality property.
   A definition D of variable v reaches a point p in the CFG if there exists a path
from D to p that does not pass through another definition of v. We say that a code
has the single reaching-definition property iff no program point can be reached by
two definitions of the same variable. Under the assumption that the single reaching-
definition property is fulfiled, the minimality property states the minimality of the
number of inserted φ-functions.
   This property can be characterized using the following notion of join sets. Let
n1 and n2 be distinct basic blocks in a CFG. A basic block n3 , which may or may
not be distinct from n1 or n2 , is a join node of n1 and n2 if there exist at least two
non-empty paths, i.e., paths containing at least one CFG edge, from n1 to n3 and
from n2 to n3 , respectively, such that n3 is the only basic block that occurs on both
of the paths. In other words, the two paths converge at n3 and no other CFG node.
Given a set S of basic blocks, n3 is a join node of S if it is the join node of at least
two basic blocks in S. The set of join nodes of set S is denoted by J (S).
   Intuitively, a join set corresponds to the placement of φ-functions. In other words,
if n1 and n2 are basic blocks that both contain a definition of variable v, then
we ought to instantiate φ-functions for v at every basic block in J ({n1 , n2 }).
Generalizing this statement, if Dv is the set of basic blocks containing definitions
of v, then φ-functions should be instantiated in every basic block in J (Dv ). As
inserted φ-functions are themselves definition points, some new φ-functions should
be inserted at J (Dv ∪J (Dv )). Actually, it turns out that J (S ∪J (S)) = J (S),
so the join set of the set of definition points of a variable in the original program
characterizes exactly the minimum set of program points where φ-functions should
be inserted.
   We are not aware of any optimizations that require a strict enforcement of
minimality property. However, placing φ-functions only at the join sets can be done
easily using a simple topological traversal of the CFG as described in Chap. 4,
Sect. 4.4. Classical techniques place φ-functions of a variable v at J (Dv ∪ {r}),
with r the entry node of the CFG. There are good reasons for that, as we will explain
further. Finally, as explained in Chap. 3, Sect. 3.3 for reducible flow graphs, some
copy-propagation engines can easily turn a non-minimal SSA code into a minimal
one.
16                                                                      P. Brisk and F. Rastello

2.3 Strict SSA Form and Dominance Property

A procedure is defined as strict if every variable is defined before it is used
along every path from the entry to the exit point; otherwise, it is non-strict. Some
languages, such as Java, impose strictness as part of the language definition; others,
such as C/C++, impose no such restrictions. The code in Fig. 2.2a is non-strict
as there exists a path from the entry to the use of a that does not go through the
definition. If this path is taken through the CFG during the execution, then a will
be used without ever being assigned a value. Although this may be permissible in
some cases, it is usually indicative of a programmer error or poor software design.
    Under SSA, because there is only a single (static) definition per variable,
strictness is equivalent to the dominance property: Each use of a variable is
dominated by its definition. In a CFG, basic block n1 dominates basic block n2
if every path in the CFG from the entry point to n2 includes n1 . By convention,
every basic block in a CFG dominates itself. Basic block n1 strictly dominates n2
if n1 dominates n2 and n1 = n2 . We use the symbols n1 dom n2 and n1 sdom n2 to
denote dominance and strict dominance, respectively.
    Adding a (undefined) pseudo-definition of each variable to the entry point
(root) of the procedure ensures strictness. The single reaching-definition property
discussed previously mandates that each program point be reachable by exactly one
definition (or pseudo-definition) of each variable. If a program point U is a use
of variable v, then the reaching definition D of v will dominate U ; otherwise, there
would be a path from the CFG entry node to U that does not include D. If such a path
existed, then the program would not be in strict SSA form, and a φ-function would

                   Non-strict code                     SSA with dominance property

Fig. 2.2 A non-strict code and its corresponding strict SSA form. The presence of ⊥ indicates a
use of an undefined value
2 Properties and Flavours                                                               17

need to be inserted somewhere in J (r, D), as in our example of Fig. 2.2b where
⊥ represents the undefined pseudo-definition. The so-called minimal SSA form is a
variant of SSA form that satisfies both the minimality and dominance properties. As
shall be seen in Chap. 3, minimal SSA form is obtained by placing the φ-functions
of variable v at J (Dv , r) using the formalism of dominance frontier. If the original
procedure is non-strict, conversion to minimal SSA will create a strict SSA-based
representation. Here, strictness refers solely to the SSA representation; if the input
program is non-strict, conversion to and from strict SSA form cannot address errors
due to uninitialized variables. To finish with, the use of an implicit pseudo-definition
in the CFG entry node to enforce strictness does not change the semantics of the
program by any means.
    SSA with dominance property is useful for many reasons that directly originate
from the structural properties of the variable live ranges. The immediate dominator
or “idom” of a node N is the unique node that strictly dominates N but does not
strictly dominate any other node that strictly dominates N . All nodes but the entry
node have immediate dominators. A dominator tree is a tree where the children
of each node are those nodes it immediately dominates. Because the immediate
dominator is unique, it is a tree with the entry node as root. For each variable,
its live range, i.e., the set of program points where it is live, is a sub-tree of the
dominator tree. Among other consequences of this property, we can cite the ability
to design a fast and efficient method to query whether a variable is live at point q or
an iteration-free algorithm to compute liveness sets (see Chap. 9). This property also
allows efficient algorithms to test whether two variables interfere (see Chap. 21).
Usually, we suppose that two variables interfere if their live ranges intersect (see
Sect. 2.6 for further discussions about this hypothesis). Note that in the general case,
a variable is considered to be live at a program point if there exists a definition of that
variable that can reach this point (reaching-definition analysis), and if there exists a
definition-free path to a use (upward-exposed use analysis). For strict programs, any
program point from which you can reach a use without going through a definition is
necessarily reachable from a definition.
    Another elegant consequence is that the intersection graph of live ranges belongs
to a special class of graphs called chordal graphs. Chordal graphs are significant
because several problems that are NP-complete on general graphs have efficient
linear-time solutions on chordal graphs, including graph colouring. Graph colouring
plays an important role in register allocation, as the register assignment problem can
be expressed as a colouring problem of the interference graph. In this graph, two
variables are linked with an edge if they interfere, meaning they cannot be assigned
the same physical location (usually, a machine register, or “colour”). The underlying
chordal property highly simplifies the assignment problem otherwise considered
NP-complete. In particular, a traversal of the dominator tree, i.e., a “tree scan,” can
colour all of the variables in the program, without requiring the explicit construction
of an interference graph. The tree scan algorithm can be used for register allocation,
which is discussed in greater detail in Chap. 22.
    As we have already mentioned, most φ-function placement algorithms are based
on the notion of dominance frontier (see Chaps. 3 and 4) and consequently do
18                                                               P. Brisk and F. Rastello

provide the dominance property. As we will see in Chap. 3, this property can be
broken by copy propagation: In our example of Fig. 2.2b, the argument a1 of the
copy represented by a2 = φ(a1 , ⊥) can be propagated and every occurrence of
a2 can be safely replaced by a1 ; the now identity φ-function can then be removed
obtaining the initial code, that is, still SSA but not strict anymore. Making a non-
strict SSA code strict is about the same complexity as SSA construction (actually
we need a pruned version as described below). Still, the “strictification” usually
concerns only a few variables and a restricted region of the CFG: The incremental
update described in Chap. 5 will do the work with less effort.

2.4 Pruned SSA Form

One drawback of minimal SSA form is that it may place φ-functions for a variable
at a point in the control-flow graph where the variable was not actually live prior to
SSA. Many program analyses and optimizations, including register allocation, are
only concerned with the region of a program where a given variable is live. The
primary advantage of eliminating those dead φ-functions over minimal SSA form
is that it has far fewer φ-functions in most cases. It is possible to construct such
a form while still maintaining the minimality and dominance properties otherwise.
The new constraint is that every use point for a given variable must be reached by
exactly one definition, as opposed to all program points. Pruned SSA form satisfies
these properties.
    Under minimal SSA, φ-functions for variable v are placed at the entry points
of basic blocks belonging to the set J (S, r). Under pruned SSA, we suppress the
instantiation of a φ-function at the beginning of a basic block if v is not live at
the entry point of that block. One possible way to do this is to perform liveness
analysis prior to SSA construction, and then use the liveness information to suppress
the placement of φ-functions as described above; another approach is to construct
minimal SSA and then remove the dead φ-functions using dead-code elimination;
details can be found in Chap. 3.
    Figure 2.3a shows an example of minimal non-pruned SSA. The corresponding
pruned SSA form would remove the dead φ-function that defines Y3 since Y1 and
Y2 are only used in their respective definition blocks.

2.5 Conventional and Transformed SSA Form

In many non-SSA and graph colouring based register allocation schemes, register
assignment is done at the granularity of webs. In this context, a web is the maximum
unions of def-use chains that have either a use or a def in common. As an example,
the code in Fig. 2.4a leads to two separate webs for variable a. The conversion to
2 Properties and Flavours                                                                       19

               Non-pruned SSA form                           After value numbering

Fig. 2.3 Non-pruned SSA form allows value numbering to determine that Y3 and Z3 have the
same value

Fig. 2.4 (a) Non-SSA register webs of variable a and (b) corresponding SSA φ-webs {a1 } and
{a2 , a3 , a4 }; (b) conventional and (c) corresponding transformed SSA form after copy propagation
of a1
20                                                               P. Brisk and F. Rastello

minimal SSA form replaces each web of a variable v in the pre-SSA program with
some variable names vi . In pruned SSA, these variable names partition the live
range of the web: At every point in the procedure where the web is live, exactly
one variable vi is also live; and none of the vi is live at any point where the web
is not.
    Based on this observation, we can partition the variables in a program that has
been converted to SSA form into φ-equivalence classes that we will refer as φ-
webs. We say that x and y are φ-related to one another if they are referenced
by the same φ-function, i.e., if x and y are either parameters or defined by the φ-
function. The transitive closure of this relation defines an equivalence relation that
partitions the variables defined locally in the procedure into equivalence classes,
the φ-webs. Intuitively, the φ-equivalence class of a resource represents a set of
resources “connected” via φ-functions. For any freshly constructed SSA code, the
φ-webs exactly correspond to the register web of the original non-SSA code.
    Conventional SSA form (C-SSA) is defined as SSA form for which each φ-
web is interference-free. Many program optimizations such as copy propagation
may transform a procedure from conventional to a non-conventional (T-SSA for
Transformed SSA) form, in which some variables belonging to the same φ-web
interfere with one another. Figure 2.4c shows the corresponding transformed SSA
form of our previous example: Here variable a1 interferes with variables a2 , a3 , and
a4 , since it is defined at the top and used last.
    Bringing back the conventional property of a T-SSA code is as “difficult” as
translating out of SSA (also known as SSA “destruction,” see Chap. 3) . Indeed,
the destruction of conventional SSA form is straightforward: Each φ-web can be
replaced with a single variable; all definitions and uses are renamed to use the new
variable, and all φ-functions involving this equivalence class are removed. SSA
destruction starting from non-conventional SSA form can be performed through
a conversion to conventional SSA form as an intermediate step. This conversion
is achieved by inserting copy operations that dissociate interfering variables from
the connecting φ-functions. As those copy instructions will have to be inserted at
some points to get rid of φ-functions, for machine-level transformations such as
register allocation or scheduling, T-SSA provides an inaccurate view of the resource
usage. Another motivation for sticking to C-SSA is that the names used in the
original program might help capture some properties otherwise difficult to discover.
Lexical partial redundancy elimination (PRE) as described in Chap. 11 illustrates
this point.
    Apart from those specific examples most current compilers choose not to
maintain the conventional property. Still, we should outline that, as later described
in Chap. 21, checking if a given φ-web is (and if necessary turning it back to)
interference-free can be done in linear time (instead of the naive quadratic time
algorithm) in the size of the φ-web.
2 Properties and Flavours                                                           21

2.6 A Stronger Definition of Interference

Throughout this chapter, two variables have been said to interfere if their live
ranges intersect. Intuitively, two variables with overlapping lifetimes will require
two distinct storage locations; otherwise, a write to one variable will overwrite
the value of the other. In particular, this definition has applied to the discussion
of interference graphs and the definition of conventional SSA form, as described
above.
    Although it suffices for correctness, this is a fairly restrictive definition of
interference, based on static considerations. Consider for instance the case when
two simultaneously live variables in fact contain the same value, then it would
not be a problem to put both of them in the same register. The ultimate notion of
interference, which is obviously undecidable because of a reduction to the halting
problem, should decide for two distinct variables whether there exists an execution
for which they simultaneously hold two different values. Several “static” extensions
to our simple definition are still possible, in which, under very specific conditions,
variables whose live ranges overlap one another may not interfere. We present two
examples.
    Firstly, consider the double-diamond graph of Fig. 2.2a again, which, although
non-strict, is correct as soon as the two if conditions are the same. Even if a and
b are unique variables with overlapping live ranges, the paths along which a and b
are respectively used and defined are mutually exclusive with one another. In this
case, the program will either pass through the definition of a and the use of a, or
the definition of b and the use of b, since all statements involved are controlled by
the same condition, albeit at different conditional statements in the program. Since
only one of the two paths will ever execute, it suffices to allocate a single storage
location that can be used for a or b. Thus, a and b do not actually interfere with
one another. A simple way to refine the interference test is to check if one of the
variables is live at the definition point of the other. This relaxed but correct notion
of interference would not make a and b in Fig. 2.2a interfere while variables a1
and b1 of Fig. 2.2b would still interfere. This example illustrates the fact that live
range splitting required here to make the code fulfil the dominance property may
lead to less accurate analysis results. As far as the interference is concerned, for a
SSA code with dominance property, the two notions are strictly equivalent: Two live
ranges intersect iff one contains the definition of the other.
    Secondly, consider two variables u and v, whose live ranges overlap. If we can
prove that u and v will always hold the same value at every place where both
are live, then they do not actually interfere with one another. Since they always
have the same value, a single storage location can be allocated for both variables,
because there is only one unique value between them. Of course, this new criterion
is in general undecidable. Still, a technique such as global value numbering that is
straightforward to implement under SSA (see Chap. 11.5.1) can do a fairly good
job, especially in the presence of a code with many variable-to-variable copies, such
22                                                              P. Brisk and F. Rastello

as one obtained after a naive SSA destruction pass (see Chap. 3). In that case (see
Chap. 21), the difference between the refined notion of interference and the non-
value-based one is significant.
   This refined notion of interference has significant implications if applied to SSA
form. In particular, the interference graph of a procedure is no longer chordal, as
any edge between two variables whose lifetimes overlap could be eliminated by this
property.

2.7 Further Reading

The advantages of def-use and use-def chains provided almost for free under SSA
are well illustrated in Chaps. 8 and 13.
    The notion of minimal SSA and a corresponding efficient algorithm to compute
it were introduced by Cytron et al. [90]. For this purpose they extensively develop
the notion of dominance frontier of a node n, DF (n) = J (n, r). The fact
that J + (S) = J (S) was actually discovered later, with a simple proof by
Wolfe [307]. More details about the theory on (iterated) dominance frontier can be
found in Chaps. 3 and 4. The post-dominance frontier, which is its symmetric notion,
also known as the control dependence graph, finds many applications. Further
discussions on control dependence graph can be found in Chap. 14.
    Most SSA papers implicitly consider the SSA form to fulfil the dominance
property. The first technique that really exploits the structural properties of the
strictness is the fast SSA destruction algorithm developed by Budimlić et al. [53]
and revisited in Chap. 21.
    The notion of pruned SSA has been introduced by Choi, Cytron and
Ferrante [67]. The example of Fig. 2.3 to illustrate the difference between pruned
and non-pruned SSA has been borrowed from Cytron et al. [90]. The notions of
conventional and transformed SSA were introduced by Sreedhar et al. in their
seminal paper [267] for destructing SSA form. The description of the existing
techniques to turn a general SSA into either a minimal, a pruned, a conventional, or
a strict SSA is provided in Chap. 3.
    The ultimate notion of interference was first discussed by Chaitin in his seminal
paper [60] that presents the graph colouring approach for register allocation. His
interference test is similar to the refined test presented in this chapter. In the
context of SSA destruction, Chap. 21 addresses the issue of taking advantage of
the dominance property with this refined notion of interference.
