Chapter 3
Standard Construction and Destruction
Algorithms

Jeremy Singer and Fabrice Rastello

This chapter describes the standard algorithms for construction and destruction of
SSA form. SSA construction refers to the process of translating a non-SSA program
into one that satisfies the SSA constraints. In general, this transformation occurs as
one of the earliest phases in the middle-end of an optimizing compiler, when the
program has been converted to three-address intermediate code. SSA destruction
is sometimes called out-of-SSA translation. This step generally takes place in
an optimizing compiler after all SSA optimizations have been performed, and
prior to code generation. Note however that there are specialized code generation
techniques that can work directly on SSA-based intermediate representations such
as instruction selection (see Chap. 19), if-conversion (see Chap. 20), and register
allocation (see Chap. 22).
   The algorithms presented in this chapter are based on material from the seminal
research papers on SSA. These original algorithms are straightforward to implement
and have acceptable efficiency. Therefore such algorithms are widely implemented
in current compilers. Note that more efficient, albeit more complex, alternative
algorithms have been devised. These are described further in Chaps. 4 and 21.
   Figure 3.1 shows the control-flow graph (CFG) of an example program. The
set of nodes is {r, A, B, C, D, E}, and the variables used are {x, y, tmp}. Note that
the program shows the complete control-flow structure, denoted by directed edges
between the nodes. However, the program only shows statements that define relevant
variables, together with the unique return statement at the exit point of the CFG.
All of the program variables are undefined on entry. On certain control-flow paths,

J. Singer ()
University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
e-mail: Jeremy.Singer@glasgow.ac.uk
F. Rastello
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022    23
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_3
24                                                                       J. Singer and F. Rastello

Fig. 3.1 Example
control-flow graph, before
SSA construction occurs

some variables may be used without being defined, e.g., x on the path r → A →
C. We discuss this issue later in the chapter. We intend to use this program as a
running example throughout the chapter, to demonstrate various aspects of SSA
construction.

3.1 Construction

The original construction algorithm for SSA form consists of two distinct phases.
1. φ-function insertion performs live range splitting to ensure that any use of a
   given variable v is reached1 by exactly one definition of v. The resulting live
   ranges exhibit the property of having a single definition, which occurs at the
   beginning of each live range.
2. Variable renaming assigns a unique variable name to each live range. This
   second phase rewrites variable names in program statements such that the
   program text contains only one definition of each variable, and every use refers
   to its corresponding unique reaching definition.
   As already outlined in Chap. 2, there are different flavours of SSA with distinct
properties. In this chapter, we focus on the minimal SSA form.

1 A program point p is said to be reachable by a definition of v if there exists a path in the CFG

from that definition to p that does not contain any other definition of v.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                  25

3.1.1 Join Sets and Dominance Frontiers

In order to explain how φ-function insertions occur, it will be helpful to review the
related concepts of join sets and dominance frontiers.
   For a given set of nodes S in a CFG, the join set J (S) is the set of join nodes of
S, i.e., nodes in the CFG that can be reached by two (or more) distinct elements of
S using disjoint paths. Join sets were introduced in Chap. 2, Sect. 2.2.
   Let us consider some join set examples from the program in Fig. 3.1.
1. J ({B, C}) = {D}, since it is possible to get from B to D and from C to D
   along different, non-overlapping, paths.
2. Again, J ({r, A, B, C, D, E}) = {A, D, E} (where r is the entry), since the
   nodes A, D, and E are the only nodes with multiple direct predecessors in the
   program.
    The dominance frontier of a node n, DF(n), is the border of the CFG region that
is dominated by n. More formally,
• Node x strictly dominates node y if x dominates y and x = y.
• The set of nodes DF(n) contains all nodes x such that n dominates a direct
  predecessor of x but n does not strictly dominate x.
    For instance, in our Fig. 3.1, the dominance frontier of the y defined in block B
is the first operation of D, while the DF of the y defined in block C would be the
first operations of D and E.
    Note that DF is defined over individual nodes, but for simplicity of presentation,
we overload it to operate over sets of nodes too, i.e., DF(S) = s∈S DF(s). The
iterated dominance frontier DF+ (S) is obtained by iterating the computation of DF
until reaching a fixed point, i.e., it is the limit DFi→∞ (S) of the sequence:

                            DF1 (S) = DF(S)
                            DFi+1 (S) = DF (S ∪ DFi (S))

   Construction of minimal SSA requires for each variable v the insertion of φ-
functions at J (Defs(v)), where Defs(v) is the set of nodes that contain definitions
of v. The original construction algorithm for SSA form uses the iterated dominance
frontier DF+ (Defs(v)). This is an over-approximation of join set, since DF+ (S) =
J (S ∪ {r}), i.e., the original algorithm assumes an implicit definition of every
variable at the entry node r.

3.1.2 φ-Function Insertion

This concept of dominance frontiers naturally leads to a straightforward approach
that places φ-functions on a per-variable basis. For a given variable v, we place φ-
26                                                                J. Singer and F. Rastello

Fig. 3.2 Example
control-flow graph, including
inserted φ-functions for
variable x

functions at the iterated dominance frontier DF+ (Defs(v)) where Defs(v) is the set
of nodes containing definitions of v. This leads to the construction of SSA form that
has the dominance property, i.e., where each definition of each renamed variable
dominates its entire live range.
    Consider again our running example from Fig. 3.1. The set of nodes containing
definitions of variable x is {B, C, D}. The iterated dominance frontier of this set is
{A, D, E} (it is also the DF, no iteration needed here). Hence we need to insert φ-
functions for x at the beginning of nodes A, D, and E. Figure 3.2 shows the example
CFG program with φ-functions for x inserted.
    As far as the actual algorithm for φ-functions insertion is concerned, we will
assume that the dominance frontier of each CFG node is pre-computed and that the
iterated dominance frontier is computed on the fly, as the algorithm proceeds. The
algorithm works by inserting φ-functions iteratively using a worklist of definition
points, and flags (to avoid multiple insertions). The corresponding pseudo-code for
φ-function insertion is given in Algorithm 3.1. The worklist of nodes W is used
to record definition points that the algorithm has not yet processed, i.e., it has not
yet inserted φ-functions at their dominance frontiers. Because a φ-function is itself a
definition, it may require further φ-functions to be inserted. This is the cause of node
insertions into the worklist W during iterations of the inner loop in Algorithm 3.1.
Effectively, we compute the iterated dominance frontier on the fly. The set F is used
to avoid repeated insertion of φ-functions on a single block. Dominance frontiers
of distinct nodes may intersect, e.g., in the example CFG in Fig. 3.1, DF(B) and
DF(C) both contain D, but once a φ-function for a particular variable has been
inserted at a node, there is no need to insert another, since a single φ-function per
variable handles all incoming definitions of that variable to that node.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                                27

 Algorithm 3.1: Standard algorithm for inserting φ-functions
 1 for v: variable names in original program do
 2      F ← {}                                             set of basic blocks where φ is added
 3      W ← {}                                   set of basic blocks that contain definitions of v
 4      for d ∈ Defs(v) do
 5           let B be the basic block containing d
 6           W ← W ∪ {B}
 7      while W = {} do
 8          remove a basic block X from W
 9          for Y : basic block ∈ DF(X) do
10               if Y ∈ F then
11                    add v ← φ(. . .) at entry of Y
12                    F ← F ∪ {Y }
13                    if Y ∈
                           / Defs(v) then
14                         W ← W ∪ {Y }

Table 3.1 Walkthrough of                     while loop #    X    DF(X)     F            W
placement of φ-functions for
variable x in example CFG                    –               –    –         {}           {B, C, D}
                                             1               B    {D}       {D}          {C, D}
                                             2               C    {D, E}    {D, E}       {D, E}
                                             3               D    {E, A}    {D, E, A}    {E, A}
                                             4               E    {}        {D, E, A}    {A}
                                             5               A    {A}       {D, E, A}    {}

    We give a walkthrough example of Algorithm 3.1 in Table 3.1. It shows the stages
of execution for a single iteration of the outermost for loop, inserting φ-functions
for variable x. Each row represents a single iteration of the while loop that iterates
over the worklist W . The table shows the values of X, F , and W at the start of each
while loop iteration. At the beginning, the CFG looks like Fig. 3.1. At the end, when
all the φ-functions for x have been placed, then the CFG looks like Fig. 3.2.
    Provided that the dominator tree is given, the computation of the dominance
frontier is quite straightforward. As illustrated by Fig. 3.3, this can be understood
using the DJ-graph notation. The skeleton of the DJ-graph is the dominator tree
of the CFG that makes the D-edges (dominance edges). This is augmented with
J-edges (join edges) that correspond to all edges of the CFG whose source does
not strictly dominate its destination. A DF-edge (dominance frontier edge) is an
edge whose destination is in the dominance frontier of its source. By definition,
there is a DF-edge (a, b) between every CFG nodes a, b such that a dominates
a direct predecessor of b, but does not strictly dominate b. In other words, for
each J -edge (a, b), all ancestors of a (including a) that do not strictly dominate
b have b in their dominance frontier. For example, in Fig. 3.3, (F, G) is a J-edge,
so {(F, G), (E, G), (B, G)} are DF-edges. This leads to the pseudo-code given in
28                                                                    J. Singer and F. Rastello

                                     A                    A                     A

                                G         B           G       B            G         B

                                     E            C       E       C             E        C

                                     F        D           F       D             F        D

          CFG                        DJ-graph             DF-graph              DF+ -graph

Fig. 3.3 An example CFG and its corresponding DJ-graph (D-edges are top-down), DF-graph,
and DF+ -graph

Algorithm 3.2, where for every edge (a, b) we visit all ancestors of a to add b to
their dominance frontier.
   Since the iterated dominance frontier is simply the transitive closure of the
dominance frontier, we can define the DF+ -graph as the transitive closure of the
DF-graph. In our example, as {(C, E), (E, G)} are DF-edges, (C, G) is a DF+ -
edge. Hence, a definition of x in C will lead to inserting φ-functions in E and G.
We can compute the iterated dominance frontier for each variable independently, as
outlined in this chapter, or “cache” it to avoid repeated computation of the iterated
dominance frontier of the same node. This leads to more sophisticated algorithms
detailed in Chap. 4.

 Algorithm 3.2: Algorithm for computing the dominance frontier of each CFG
 node
 1 for (a, b) ∈ CFG edges do
 2      x←a
 3      while x does not strictly dominate b do
 4           DF(x) ← DF(x) ∪ b
 5           x ← immediate dominator(x)

    Once φ-functions have been inserted using this algorithm, the program usually
still contains several definitions per variable; however, now there is a single
definition statement in the CFG that reaches each use. For each variable use in
a φ-function, it is conventional to treat them as if the use actually occurs on the
corresponding incoming edge or at the end of the corresponding direct predecessor
node. If we follow this convention, then def-use chains are aligned with the CFG
dominator tree. In other words, the single definition that reaches each use dominates
that use.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                        29

3.1.3 Variable Renaming

To obtain the desired property of a Static Single Assignment per variable, it
is necessary to perform variable renaming, which is the second phase in the
SSA construction process. φ-function insertions have the effect of splitting the
live range(s) of each original variable into pieces. The variable renaming phase
associates each individual live range with a new variable name, also called a version.
The pseudo-code for this process is presented in Algorithm 3.3. Because of the
dominance property outlined above, it is straightforward to rename variables using
a depth-first traversal of the dominator tree. During the traversal, for each variable
v, it is necessary to remember the version of its unique reaching definition at some
point p in the graph. This corresponds to the closest definition that dominates
p. In Algorithm 3.3, we compute and cache the reaching definition for v in the
per-variable slot “v.reachingDef” that is updated as the algorithm traverses the
dominator tree of the SSA graph. This per-variable slot stores the in-scope, “new”
variable name (version) for the equivalent variable at the same point in the un-
renamed program.

 Algorithm 3.3: Renaming algorithm for second phase of SSA construction
    rename variable definitions and uses to have one definition per variable name
 1 foreach v : variable do
 2     v.reachingDef ← ⊥
 3 foreach BB: basic block in depth-first search preorder traversal of the dom. tree do
 4     foreach i : instruction in linear code sequence of BB do
 5         foreach v : variable used by non-φ-function i do
 6             updateReachingDef(v, i)
 7             replace this use of v by v.reachingDef in i
 8          foreach v : variable defined by i (may be a φ-function) do
 9              updateReachingDef(v, i)
10              create fresh variable v
11              replace this definition of v by v in i
12              v .reachingDef ← v.reachingDef
13              v.reachingDef ← v

14     foreach φ: φ-function in a direct successor of BB do
15         let v : variable used by φ coming from BB
16         updateReachingDef(v, end of BB)
17         replace this use of v by v.reachingDef in φ

   The variable renaming algorithm translates our running example from Fig. 3.1
into the SSA form of Fig. 3.4a. The table in Fig. 3.4b gives a walkthrough example
of Algorithm 3.3, only considering variable x. The labels li mark instructions
in the program that mention x, shown in Fig. 3.4a. The table records (1) when
30                                                                         J. Singer and F. Rastello

                   CFG                                Walk-through of renaming for variable x

Fig. 3.4 SSA form of the example of Fig. 3.1

x.reachingDef is updated from xold into xnew due to a call of updateReachingDef,
and (2) when x.reachingDef is xold before a definition statement, then xnew
afterwards.

 Procedure updateReachingDef(v,p) Utility function for SSA renaming
   Data: v : variable from program
   Data: p : program point
    search through chain of definitions for v until we find the closest definition that dominates
      p, then update v.reachingDef in-place with this definition
 1 r ←v
 2 repeat
 3      r ← r.reachingDef
 4 until r == ⊥ or definition(r) dominates p
 5 v.reachingDef ← r

   The original presentation of the renaming algorithm uses a per-variable stack
that stores all variable versions that dominate the current program point, rather than
the slot-based approach outlined above. In the stack-based algorithm, a stack value
is pushed when a variable definition is processed (while we explicitly update the
reachingDef field at this point). The top stack value is peeked when a variable use
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                   31

is encountered (we read from the reachingDef field at this point). Multiple stack
values may be popped when moving to a different node in the dominator tree (we
always check whether we need to update the reachingDef field before we read from
it). While the slot-based algorithm requires more memory, it can take advantage of
an existing working field for a variable and be more efficient in practice.

3.1.4 Summary

Now let us review the flavour of SSA form that this simple construction algorithm
produces. We refer back to several SSA properties that were introduced in Chap. 2.
• It is minimal (see Sect. 2.2). After the φ-function insertion phase, but before
  variable renaming, the CFG contains the minimal number of inserted φ-functions
  to achieve the property that exactly one definition of each variable v reaches every
  point in the graph.
• It is not pruned (see Sect. 2.4). Some of the inserted φ-functions may be dead,
  i.e., there is not always an explicit use of the variable subsequent to the φ-function
  (e.g., y5 in Fig. 3.4a).
• It is conventional (see Sect. 2.5). The transformation that renames all φ-related
  variables into a unique representative name and then removes all φ-functions is
  a correct SSA destruction algorithm.
• Finally, it has the dominance property (that is, it is strict—see Sect. 2.3). Each
  variable use is dominated by its unique definition. This is due to the use of
  iterated dominance frontiers during the φ-placement phase, rather than join sets.
  Whenever the iterated dominance frontier of the set of definition points of a
  variable differs from its join set, then at least one program point can be reached
  both by r (the entry of the CFG) and one of the definition points. In other words,
  as in Fig. 3.1, one of the uses of the φ-function inserted in block A for x does
  not have any actual reaching definition that dominates it. This corresponds to
  the ⊥ value used to initialize each reachingDef slot in Algorithm 3.3. Actual
  implementation code can use a NULL value, create a fake undefined variable at
  the entry of the CFG, or create undefined pseudo-operations on the fly just before
  the particular use.

3.2 Destruction

SSA form is a sparse representation of program information, which enables
simple, efficient code analysis and optimization. Once we have completed SSA-
based optimization passes, and certainly before code generation, it is necessary
to eliminate φ-functions since these are not executable machine instructions. This
elimination phase is known as SSA destruction.
32                                                                   J. Singer and F. Rastello

    When freshly constructed, an untransformed SSA code is conventional and its
destruction is straightforward: One simply has to rename all φ-related variables
(source and destination operands of the same φ-function) into a unique represen-
tative variable. Then, each φ-function should have syntactically identical names for
all its operands, and thus can be removed to coalesce the related live ranges.
    We refer to a set of φ-related variables as a φ-web. We recall from Chap. 2
that conventional SSA is defined as a flavour under which each φ-web is free
from interferences. Hence, if all variables of a φ-web have non-overlapping live
ranges, then the SSA form is conventional. The discovery of φ-webs can be
performed efficiently using the classical union-find algorithm with a disjoint-set
data structure, which keeps track of a set of elements partitioned into a number
of disjoint (non-overlapping) subsets. The φ-webs discovery algorithm is presented
in Algorithm 3.4.

 Algorithm 3.4: The φ-webs discovery algorithm, based on the union-find
 pattern
 1   for each variable v do
 2        phiweb(v) ← {v};
 3 for each instruction of the form adest = φ(a1 , . . . , an ) do
 4      for each source operand ai in instruction do
 5           union(phiweb(adest ), phiweb(ai ))

   While freshly constructed SSA code is conventional, this may not be the case
after performing some optimizations such as copy propagation. Going back to
conventional SSA form requires the insertion of copies. The simplest (although not
the most efficient) way to destroy non-conventional SSA form is to split all critical
edges, and then replace φ-functions by copies at the end of direct predecessor
basic blocks. A critical edge is an edge from a node with several direct successors
to a node with several direct predecessors. The process of splitting an edge, say
(b1 , b2 ), involves replacing edge (b1 , b2 ) by (1) an edge from b1 to a freshly
created basic block and by (2) another edge from this fresh basic block to b2 . As
φ-functions have a parallel semantic, i.e., have to be executed simultaneously not
sequentially, the same holds for the corresponding copies inserted at the end of
direct predecessor basic blocks. To this end, a pseudo instruction called a parallel
copy is created to represent a set of copies that have to be executed in parallel.
The replacement of parallel copies by sequences of simple copies is handled
later on. Algorithm 3.5 presents the corresponding pseudo-code that makes non-
conventional SSA conventional. As already mentioned, SSA destruction of such
form is straightforward. However, Algorithm 3.5 can be slightly modified to directly
destruct SSA by deleting line 13, replacing ai by a0 in the following lines, and
adding “remove the φ-function” after them.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                              33

 Algorithm 3.5: Critical edge splitting algorithm for making non-conventional
 SSA form conventional
 1 foreach B: basic block of the CFG do
 2     let (E1 , . . . , En ) be the list of incoming edges of B
 3     foreach Ei = (Bi , B) do
 4          let PCi be an empty parallel copy instruction
 5          if Bi has several outgoing edges then
 6                create fresh empty basic block Bi
 7                replace edge Ei by edges Bi → Bi and Bi → B
 8                insert PCi in Bi
 9          else
10                 append PCi at the end of Bi

11     foreach φ-function at the entry of B of the form a0 = φ(B1 : a1 , . . . , Bn : an ) do
12         foreach ai (argument of the φ-function corresponding to Bi ) do
13             let ai be a freshly created variable
14             add copy ai ← ai to PCi
15             replace ai by ai in the φ-function

   We stress that the above destruction technique has several drawbacks: first
because of specific architectural constraints, region boundaries, or exception han-
dling code, the compiler might not permit the splitting of a given edge; second, the
resulting code contains many temporary-to-temporary copy operations. In theory,
reducing the frequency of these copies is the role of the coalescing during the
register allocation phase. A few memory- and time-consuming coalescing heuristics
mentioned in Chap. 22 can handle the removal of these copies effectively. Coalesc-
ing can also, with less effort, be performed prior to the register allocation phase.
As opposed to a (so-called conservative) coalescing during register allocation, this
aggressive coalescing would not cope with the interference graph colourability.
Further, the process of copy insertion itself might take a substantial amount of time
and might not be suitable for dynamic compilation. The goal of Chap. 21 is to cope
both with non-splittable edges and difficulties related to SSA destruction at machine
code level, but also aggressive coalescing in the context of resource constrained
compilation.
   Once φ-functions have been replaced by parallel copies, we need to sequentialize
the parallel copies, i.e., replace them by a sequence of simple copies. This phase
can be performed immediately after SSA destruction or later on, perhaps even after
register allocation (see Chap. 22). It might be useful to postpone the copy sequential-
ization since it introduces arbitrary interference between variables. As an example,
a1 ← a2 b1 ← b2 (where inst1 inst2 represents two instructions inst1 and inst2
to be executed simultaneously) can be sequentialized into a1 ← a2 ; b1 ← b2 , which
would make b2 interfere with a1 while the other way round b1 ← b2 ; a1 ← a2 would
make a2 interfere with b1 instead.
34                                                                        J. Singer and F. Rastello

   If we still decide to replace parallel copies into a sequence of simple copies
immediately after SSA destruction, this can be done as shown in Algorithm 3.6.
To see that this algorithm converges, one can visualize the parallel copy as a graph
where nodes represent resources and edges represent transfers of values: the number
of steps is exactly the number of cycles plus the number of non-self-edges of this
graph. The correctness comes from the invariance of the behaviour of seq; pcopy.
An optimized implementation of this algorithm will be presented in Chap. 21.

 Algorithm 3.6: Replacement of parallel copies with sequences of sequential
 copy operations
 1 let pcopy denote the parallel copy to be sequentialized
 2 let seq = () denote the sequence of copies
 3 while ¬ [∀(b ← a) ∈ pcopy, a = b] do
 4      if ∃(b ← a) ∈ pcopy s.t.  ∃(c ← b) ∈ pcopy then               b is not live-in of pcopy
 5           append b ← a to seq
 6           remove copy b ← a from pcopy
 7     else                                  pcopy is only made-up of cycles; Break one of them
 8            let b ← a ∈ pcopy s.t. a = b
 9            let a be a freshly created variable
10            append a ← a to seq
11            replace in pcopy b ← a into b ← a

3.3 SSA Property Transformations

As discussed in Chap. 2, SSA comes in different flavours. This section describes
algorithms that transform arbitrary SSA code into the desired flavour. Making SSA
conventional corresponds exactly to the first phase of SSA destruction (described
in Sect. 3.2) that splits critical edges and introduces parallel copies (sequentialized
later in bulk or on-demand) around φ-functions. As already discussed, this straight-
forward algorithm has several drawbacks addressed in Chap. 21.
   Making SSA strict, i.e., fulfil the dominance property, is as “hard” as construct-
ing SSA. Of course, a pre-pass through the graph can detect the offending variables
that have definitions that do not dominate their uses. Then there are several possible
single-variable φ-function insertion algorithms (see Chap. 4) that can be used to
patch up the SSA, by restricting attention to the set of non-conforming variables.
The renaming phase can also be applied with the same filtering process. As the
number of variables requiring repair might be a small proportion of all variables, a
costly traversal of the whole program can be avoided by building the def-use chains
(for non-conforming variables) during the detection pre-pass. Renaming can then be
done on a per-variable basis or better (if pruned SSA is preferred) the reconstruction
algorithm presented in Chap. 5 can be used for both φ-functions placement and
renaming.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                  35

   The construction algorithm described above does not build pruned SSA form.
If available, liveness information can be used to filter out the insertion of φ-
functions wherever the variable is not live: The resulting SSA form is pruned.
Alternatively, pruning SSA form is equivalent to a dead code elimination pass after
SSA construction. As use-def chains are implicitly provided by SSA form, dead-
φ-function elimination simply relies on marking actual uses (non-φ-function ones)
as useful and propagating usefulness backwards through φ-functions. Algorithm 3.7
presents the relevant pseudo-code for this operation. Here, stack is used to store
useful and unprocessed variables defined by φ-functions.

 Algorithm 3.7: φ-function pruning algorithm
 1 stack ← ()
    — initial marking phase —
 2 foreach I : instruction of the CFG in dominance order do
 3     if I is φ-function defining variable a then mark a as useless
 5     else I is not φ-function
 6          foreach x : source operand of I do
 7               if x is defined by some φ-function then
 8                     mark x as useful; stack.push(x)

    — usefulness propagation phase —
 9 while stack not empty do
10     a ← stack.pop()
11     let I be the φ-function that defines a
12     foreach x : source operand of I do
13          if x is marked as useless then
14                mark x as useful; stack.push(x)

    — final pruning phase —
15 foreach I : φ-function do
16     if destination operand of I marked as useless then delete I

   To construct pruned SSA form via dead code elimination, it is generally much
faster to first build semi-pruned SSA form, rather than minimal SSA form, and then
apply dead code elimination. Semi-pruned SSA form is based on the observation
that many variables are local, i.e., have a small live range that is within a single
basic block. Consequently, pruned SSA would not instantiate any φ-functions for
these variables. Such variables can be identified by a linear traversal over each basic
block of the CFG. All of these variables can be filtered out: minimal SSA form
restricted to the remaining variables gives rise to the so-called semi-pruned SSA
form.
36                                                                       J. Singer and F. Rastello

3.3.1 Pessimistic φ-Function Insertion

Construction of minimal SSA, as outlined in Sect. 3.1, comes at the price of a
sophisticated algorithm involving the computation of iterated dominance frontiers.
Alternatively, φ-functions may be inserted in a pessimistic fashion, as detailed
below. In the pessimistic approach, a φ-function is inserted at the start of each CFG
node (basic block) for each variable that is live at the start of that node. A less
sophisticated, or crude, strategy is to insert a φ-function for each variable at the
start of each CFG node; the resulting SSA will not be pruned. When a pessimistic
approach is used, many inserted φ-functions are redundant. Code transformations
such as code motion, or other CFG modifications, can also introduce redundant φ-
functions, i.e., make a minimal SSA program become non-minimal.
    The application of copy propagation and rule-based φ-function rewriting can
remove many of these redundant φ-functions. As already mentioned in Chap. 2,
copy propagation can break the dominance property by propagating variable aj
through φ-functions of the form ai = φ(ax1 , . . . , axk ) where all the source operands
are syntactically equal to either aj or ⊥. If we want to avoid breaking the dominance
property we simply have to avoid applying copy propagations that involve ⊥. A
more interesting rule is the one that propagates aj through a φ-function of the
form ai = φ(ax1 , . . . , axk ) where all the source operands are syntactically equal
to either ai or aj . These φ-functions turn out to be “identity” operations, where all
the source operands become syntactically identical and equivalent to the destination
operand. As such, they can be trivially eliminated from the program. Identity φ-
functions can be simplified this way from inner to outer loops. To be efficient,
variable def-use chains should be pre-computed—otherwise as many iterations as
the maximum loop depth might be necessary for copy propagation. When the CFG
is reducible,2 this simplification produces minimal SSA. The underlying reason
is that the def-use chain of a given φ-web is, in this context, isomorphic with a
subgraph of the reducible CFG: All nodes except those that can be reached by
two different paths (from actual non-φ-function definitions) can be simplified by
iterative application of T1 (removal of self-edge) and T2 (merge of a node with
its unique direct predecessor) graph reductions. Figure 3.5 illustrates these graph
transformations. To be precise, we can simplify an SSA program as follows:
1. Remove any φ-node ai = φ(ax1 , . . . , axk ) where all axn are aj . Replace all
   occurrences of ai by aj . This corresponds to T2 reduction.
2. Remove any φ-node ai = φ(ax1 , . . . , axk ) where all axn ∈ {ai , aj }. Replace all
   occurrences of ai by aj . This corresponds to T1 followed by T2 reduction.

2 A CFG is reducible if there are no jumps into the middle of loops from the outside, so the only

entry to a loop is through its header. Section 3.4 gives a fuller discussion of reducibility, with
pointers to further reading.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                         37

Fig. 3.5 T1 and T2 rewrite rules for SSA-graph reduction, applied to def-use relations between
SSA variables

   This approach can be implemented using a worklist, which stores the candidate
nodes for simplification. Using the graph made up of def-use chains (see Chap. 14),
the worklist can be initialized with φ-functions that are direct successors of non-
φ-functions. However, for simplicity, we may initialize it with all φ-functions. Of
course, if loop nesting forest information is available, the worklist can be avoided
by traversing the CFG in a single pass from inner to outer loops, and in a topological
order within each loop (header excluded). But since we believe the main motivation
for this approach to be its simplicity, the pseudo-code shown in Algorithm 3.8 uses
a work queue.
   This algorithm is guaranteed to terminate in a fixed number of steps. At
every iteration of the while loop, it removes a φ-function from the work queue
W . Whenever it adds new φ-functions to W , it removes a φ-function from the
program. The number of φ-functions in the program is bounded so the number of
insertions to W is bounded. The queue could be replaced by a worklist, and the
insertions/removals done at random. The algorithm would be less efficient, but the
end result would be the same.
38                                                                      J. Singer and F. Rastello

 Algorithm 3.8: Removal of redundant φ-functions using rewriting rules and
 work queue
 1 W ← ()
 2 foreach I: φ-function in program in reverse post-order do
 3     W .enqueue(I ); mark I
 4 while W not empty do
 5     I ← W.dequeue(); unmark I
 6     let I be of the form ai = φ(ax1 , . . . , axk )
 7     if all source operands of the φ-function are ∈ {ai , aj } then
 8           Remove I from program
 9           foreach I : instruction different from I that uses ai do
10               replace ai by aj in I
11               if I is a φ-function and I is not marked then
12                    mark I ; W .enqueue(I )

3.4 Further Reading

The early literature on SSA form [89, 90] introduces the two phases of the
construction algorithm we have outlined in this chapter and discusses algorithmic
complexity on common and worst-case inputs. These initial presentations trace the
ancestry of SSA form back to early work on data-flow representations by Shapiro
and Saint [258].
   Briggs et al. [50] discuss pragmatic refinements to the original algorithms for
SSA construction and destruction, with the aim of reducing execution time. They
introduce the notion of semi-pruned form, show how to improve the efficiency of
the stack-based renaming algorithm, and describe how copy propagation must be
constrained to preserve correct code during SSA destruction.
   There are numerous published descriptions of alternative algorithms for SSA
construction, in particular for the φ-function insertion phase. The pessimistic
approach that first inserts φ-functions at all control-flow merge points and then
removes unnecessary ones using simple T1/T2 rewrite rules was proposed by
Aycock and Horspool [14]. Brandis and Mössenböck [44] describe a simple,
syntax-directed approach to SSA construction from well structured high-level
source code. Throughout this textbook, we consider the more general case of SSA
construction from arbitrary CFGs.
   A reducible CFG is one that will collapse to a single node when it is transformed
using repeated application of T1/T2 rewrite rules. Aho et al. [2] describe the concept
of reducibility and trace its history in early compilers literature.
   Sreedhar and Gao [263] pioneer linear-time complexity φ-function insertion
algorithms based on DJ-graphs. These approaches have been refined by other
researchers. Chapter 4 explores these alternative construction algorithms in depth.
3 Standard Construction and Destruction Algorithms                                 39

   Blech et al. [30] formalize the semantics of SSA, in order to verify the
correctness of SSA destruction algorithms. Boissinot et al. [35] review the history of
SSA destruction approaches and highlight misunderstandings that led to incorrect
destruction algorithms. Chapter 21 presents more details on alternative approaches
to SSA destruction.
   There are instructive dualisms between concepts in SSA form and functional
programs, including construction, dominance, and copy propagation. Chapter 6
explores these issues in more detail.
