Chapter 6
Functional Representations of SSA

Lennart Beringer

This chapter discusses alternative representations of SSA using the terminology and
structuring mechanisms of functional programming languages. The reading of SSA
as a discipline of functional programming arises from a correspondence between
dominance and syntactic scope that subsequently extends to numerous aspects of
control and data-flow structure.
   The development of functional representations of SSA is motivated by the
following considerations:
1. Relating the core ideas of SSA to concepts from other areas of compiler
   and programming language research provides conceptual insights into the SSA
   discipline and thus contributes to a better understanding of the practical appeal
   of SSA to compiler writers.
2. Reformulating SSA as a functional program makes explicit some of the syntactic
   conditions and semantic invariants that are implicit in the definition and use of
   SSA. Indeed, the introduction of SSA itself was motivated by a similar goal:
   to represent aspects of program structure—namely the def-use relationships—
   explicitly in syntax, by enforcing a particular naming discipline. In a similar way,
   functional representations directly enforce invariants such as “all φ-functions in a
   block must be of the same arity,” “the variables assigned to by these φ-functions
   must be distinct,” “φ-functions are only allowed to occur at the beginning of
   a basic block,” or “each use of a variable should be dominated by its (unique)
   definition.” Constraints such as these would typically have to be validated or
   (re-)established after each optimization phase of an SSA-based compiler, but
   are typically enforced by construction if a functional representation is chosen.

L. Beringer ()
Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA
e-mail: eberinge@cs.princeton.edu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022     63
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_6
64                                                                        L. Beringer

   Consequently, less code is required, improving the robustness, maintainability,
   and code readability of the compiler.
3. The intuitive meaning of “unimplementable” φ-instructions is complemented by
   a concrete execution model, facilitating the rapid implementation of interpreters.
   This enables the compiler developers to experimentally validate SSA-based anal-
   yses and transformations at their genuine language level, without requiring SSA
   destruction. Indeed, functional intermediate code can often be directly emitted as
   a program in a high-level mainstream functional language, giving the compiler
   writer access to existing interpreters and compilation frameworks. Thus, rapid
   prototyping is supported and high-level evaluation of design decisions is enabled.
4. Formal frameworks of program analysis that exist for functional languages
   become applicable. Type systems provide a particularly attractive formalism due
   to their declarativeness and compositional nature. As type systems for functional
   languages typically support higher-order functions, they can be expected to
   generalize more easily to interprocedural analyses than other static analysis
   formalisms.
5. We obtain a formal basis for comparing variants of SSA—such as the variants
   discussed elsewhere in this book—for translating between these variants, and for
   constructing and destructing SSA. Correctness criteria for program analyses and
   associated transformations can be stated in a uniform manner and can be proved
   to be satisfied using well-established reasoning principles.
   Rather than discussing all these considerations in detail, the purpose of the
present chapter is to informally highlight particular aspects of the correspondence
and then point the reader to some more advanced material. Our exposition is
example-driven but leads to the identification of concrete correspondence pairs
between the imperative/SSA world and the functional world.
   Like the remainder of the book, our discussion is restricted to code occurring in
a single procedure.

6.1 Low-Level Functional Program Representations

Functional languages represent code using declarations of the form

                              function f (x0 , . . . , xn ) = e                 (6.1)

where the syntactic category of expression e conflates the notions of expressions
and commands of imperative languages. Typically, e may contain further nested or
(mutually) recursive function declarations. A declaration of the form (6.1) binds the
formal parameters xi and the function name f within e.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                  65

6.1.1 Variable Assignment Versus Binding

A language construct provided by almost all functional languages is the let-binding:

                                      let x = e1 in e2 end

The effect of this expression is to evaluate e1 and bind the resulting value to variable
x for the duration of the evaluation of e2 . The code affected by this binding, e2 , is
called the static scope of x and is easily syntactically identifiable. In the following,
we occasionally indicate scopes by code-enclosing boxes and list the variables that
are in scope using subscripts.
   For example, the scope associated with the top-most binding of v to 3 in code

                       let v = 3 in
                             let y = (let v = 2 × v in 4 × v       end)
                                                               v                   (6.2)
                             in y × v         end
                                        v,y
                                                                          v
                       end

spans both inner let-bindings, the scopes of which are themselves not nested inside
one other as the inner binding of v occurs in the e1 position of the let-binding for y.
   In contrast to an assignment in an imperative language, a let-binding for variable
x hides any previous value bound to x for the duration of evaluating e2 but does not
permanently overwrite it. Bindings are treated in a stack-like fashion, resulting in
a tree-shaped nesting structure of boxes in our code excerpts. For example, in the
above code, the inner binding of v to value 2 × 3 = 6 shadows the outer binding
of v to value 3 precisely for the duration of the evaluation of the expression 4 × v.
Once this evaluation has terminated (resulting in the binding of y to 24), the binding
of v to 3 becomes visible again, yielding the overall result of 72.
   The concepts of binding and static scope ensure that functional programs enjoy
the characteristic feature of SSA, namely the fact that each use of a variable is
uniquely associated with a point of definition. Indeed, the point of definition for a
use of x is given by the nearest enclosing binding of x. Occurrences of variables in
an expression that are not enclosed by a binding are called free. A well-formed
procedure declaration contains all free variables of its body among its formal
parameters. Thus, the notion of scope makes explicit the invariant that each use
of a variable should be dominated by its (unique) definition.
   In contrast to SSA, functional languages achieve the association of definitions
to uses without imposing the global uniqueness of variables, as witnessed by the
duplicate binding occurrences for v in the above code. As a consequence of this
decoupling, functional languages enjoy a strong notion of referential transparency:
The choice of x as the variable holding the result of e1 depends only on the free
66                                                                               L. Beringer

variables of e2 . For example, we may rename the inner v in code (6.2) to z without
altering the meaning of the code:

                     let v = 3 in
                           let y = (let z = 2 × v in 4 × z         end)
                                                             v,z
                                                                                       (6.3)
                           in y × v         end
                                      v,y
                                                                          v
                     end

Note that this conversion formally makes the outer v visible for the expression 4×z,
as indicated by the index v, z decorating its surrounding box.
   In order to avoid altering the meaning of the program, the choice of the newly
introduced variable has to be such that confusion with other variables is avoided.
Formally, this means that a renaming

              let x = e1 in e2 end          to    let y = e1 in e2 [y ↔ x] end

can only be carried out if y is not a free variable of e2 . Moreover, in the event
that e2 already contains some preexisting bindings to y, the substitution of x by
y in e2 (denoted by e2 [y ↔ x] above) first renames these preexisting bindings in
a suitable manner. Also note that the renaming only affects e2 —any occurrences
of x or y in e1 refer to conceptually different but identically named variables, but
the static scoping discipline ensures these will never be confused with the variables
involved in the renaming. In general, the semantics-preserving renaming of bound
variables is called α-renaming. Typically, program analyses for functional languages
are compatible with α-renaming in that they behave equivalently for fragments
that differ only in their choice of bound variables, and program transformations
α-rename bound variables whenever necessary.
   A consequence of referential transparency, and thus a property typically enjoyed
by functional languages, is compositional equational reasoning: the meaning of
a piece of code e is only dependent on its free variables and can be calculated
from the meaning of its subexpressions. For example, the meaning of a phrase
let x = e1 in e2 end only depends on the free variables of e1 and on the free
variables of e2 other than x. Hence, languages with referential transparency allow
one to replace a subexpression by some semantically equivalent phrase without
altering the meaning of the surrounding code. Since semantic preservation is a core
requirement of program transformations, the suitability of SSA for formulating and
implementing such transformations can be explained by the proximity of SSA to
functional languages.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                  67

6.1.2 Control Flow: Continuations

The correspondence between let-bindings and points of variable definition in
assignments extends to other aspects of program structure, in particular to code
in continuation-passing-style (CPS), a program representation routinely used in
compilers for functional languages [9].
   Satisfying a roughly similar purpose as return addresses or function pointers in
imperative languages, a continuation specifies how the execution should proceed
once the evaluation of the current code fragment has terminated. Syntactically,
continuations are expressions that may occur in functional position (i.e., are
typically applied to argument expressions), as is the case for the variable k in the
following modification from code (6.2):

                         let v = 3 in
                            let y = (let v = 2 × v in 4 × v end)
                                                                                   (6.4)
                            in k(y × v) end
                         end

In effect, k represents any function that may be applied to the result of expres-
sion (6.2).
    Surrounding code may specify the concrete continuation by binding k to a
suitable expression. It is common practice to write these continuation-defining
expressions in λ-notation, i.e., in the form λ x.e where x typically occurs free in
e. The effect of the expression is to act as the (unnamed) function that sends x to
e(x), i.e., formal parameter x represents the place-holder for the argument to which
the continuation is applied. Note that x is α-renameable, as λ acts as a binder. For
example, a client of the above code fragment wishing to multiply the result by 2
may insert code (6.4) in the e2 position of a let-binding for k that contains λ x. 2 × x
in its e1 -position, as in the following code:

                        let k = λ x. 2 × x
                        in let v = 3 in
                              let y = (let z = 2 × v in 4 × z end)
                                                                                   (6.5)
                              in k(y × v) end
                            end
                        end

   When the continuation k is applied to the argument y × v, the (dynamic) value
y × v (i.e., 72) is substituted for x in the expression 2 × x, just like in an ordinary
function application.
68                                                                             L. Beringer

   Alternatively, the client may wrap fragment (6.4) in a function definition with
formal argument k and construct the continuation in the calling code, where he
would be free to choose a different name for the continuation-representing variable:

                         function f (k) =
                            let v = 3 in
                               let y = (let z = 2 × v in 4 × z end)
                               in k(y × v) end                                       (6.6)
                            end
                         in let k = λ x. 2 × x in f (k) end
                         end

   This makes CPS form a discipline of programming using higher-order functions,
as continuations are constructed “on the fly” and communicated as arguments of
other function calls. Typically, the caller of f is itself parametric in its continuation,
as in
                           function g(k) =
                                                                                     (6.7)
                              let k = λ x. k(x + 7) in f (k ) end

where f is invoked with a newly constructed continuation k that applies the addition
of 7 to its formal argument x (which at runtime will hold the result of f ) before
passing the resulting value on as an argument to the outer continuation k. In a similar
way, the function

                         function h(y, k) =
                            let x = 4 in
                               let k = λ z. k(z × x)
                               in if y > 0
                                                                                     (6.8)
                                   then let z = y × 2 in k (z) end
                                   else let z = 3 in k (z) end
                               end
                            end

constructs from k a continuation k that is invoked (with different arguments) in each
branch of the conditional. In effect, the sharing of k amounts to the definition of a
control-flow merge point, as indicated by the CFG corresponding to h in Fig. 6.1a.
Contrary to the functional representation, the top-level continuation parameter k is
not explicitly visible in the CFG—it roughly corresponds to the frame slot that holds
the return address in an imperative procedure call.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                  69

Fig. 6.1 Control-flow graph for code (6.8) (a), and SSA representation (b)

   The SSA form of this CFG is shown in Fig. 6.1b. If we apply similar renamings
of z to z1 and z2 in the two branches of (6.8), we obtain the following fragment:

                          function h(y, k) =
                             let x = 4 in
                                let k = λ z. k(z × x)
                                in if y > 0
                                                                                   (6.9)
                                   then let z1 = y × 2 in k (z1 ) end
                                   else let z2 = 3 in k (z2 ) end
                                end
                             end

We observe that the role of the formal parameter z of continuation k is exactly that
of a φ-function: to unify the arguments stemming from various calls sites by binding
them to a common name for the duration of the ensuing code fragment—in this case
just the return expression. As expected from the above understanding of scope and
dominance, the scopes of the bindings for z1 and z2 coincide with the dominance
regions of the identically named imperative variables: both terminate at the point of
function invocation/jump to the control-flow merge point.
   The fact that transforming (6.8) into (6.9) only involves the referentially transpar-
ent process of α-renaming indicates that program (6.8) already contains the essential
structural properties that SSA distills from an imperative program.
70                                                                                               L. Beringer

   Programs in CPS equip all function declarations with continuation arguments. By
interspersing ordinary code with continuation-forming expressions as shown above,
they model the flow of control exclusively by communicating, constructing, and
invoking continuations.

6.1.3 Control Flow: Direct Style

An alternative to the explicit passing of continuation terms via additional function
arguments is the direct style, in which we represent code as a set of locally
named tail-recursive functions, for which the last operation is a call to a function,
eliminating the need to save the return address.
   In direct style, no continuation terms are constructed dynamically and then
passed as function arguments, and we hence exclusively employ λ-free function
definitions in our representation. For example, code (6.8) may be represented as

       function h(y) =
          let x = 4 in
                function h (z) = z × x
                                           x,y,z,h,h
                in if y > 0
                      then let z = y × 2 in h (z)                  end                                (6.10)
                                                       x,y,z,h,h
                      else let z = 3 in h (z)               end
                                                x,y,z,h,h
                                                                         x,y,h,h
                end
                                                                                   x,y,h
          end
                                                                                           y,h

where the local function h plays a similar role to the continuation k and is jointly
called from both branches. In contrast to the CPS representation, however, the body
of h returns its result directly rather than by passing it on as an argument to some
continuation. Also note that neither the declaration of h nor that of h contains
additional continuation parameters. Thus, rather than handing its result directly over
to some caller-specified receiver (as communicated by the continuation argument k),
h simply returns control back to the caller, who is then responsible for any further
execution. Roughly speaking, the effect is similar to the imperative compilation
discipline of always setting the return address of a procedure call to the instruction
pointer immediately following the call instruction.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                  71

   A stricter format is obtained if the granularity of local functions is required to be
that of basic blocks:
                 function h(y) =
                    let x = 4 in
                       function h (z) = z × x
                       in if y > 0
                          then function h1 () = let z = y × 2 in h (z) end
                                                                                  (6.11)
                                in h1 () end
                          else function h2 () = let z = 3 in h (z) end
                               in h2 () end
                       end
                    end

Now, function invocations correspond precisely to jumps, reflecting more directly
the CFG from Fig. 6.1.
   The choice between CPS and direct style is orthogonal to the granularity level of
functions: both CPS and direct style are compatible with the strict notion of basic
blocks but also with more relaxed formats such as extended basic blocks. In the
extreme case, all control-flow points are explicitly named, i.e., one local function or
continuation is introduced per instruction. The exploration of the resulting design
space is ongoing and has so far not yet led to a clear consensus in the literature.
In our discussion below, we employ the arguably easier-to-read direct style, but the
gist of the discussion applies equally well to CPS.
   Independent of the granularity level of local functions, the process of moving
from the CFG to the SSA form is again captured by suitably α-renaming the
bindings of z in h1 and h2 :

                function h(y) =
                   let x = 4 in
                      function h (z) = z × x
                      in if y > 0
                         then function h1 () = let z1 = y × 2 in h (z1 ) end
                                                                                  (6.12)
                               in h1 () end
                         else function h2 () = let z2 = 3 in h (z2 ) end
                              in h2 () end
                      end
                   end

Again, the role of the formal parameter z of the control-flow merge point function
h is identical to that of a φ-function. In accordance with the fact that the basic
blocks representing the arms of the conditional do not contain φ-functions, the local
functions h1 and h2 have empty parameter lists—the free occurrence of y in the
body of h1 is bound at the top level by the formal argument of h.
72                                                                                       L. Beringer

6.1.4 Let-Normal Form

For both direct style and CPS the correspondence to SSA is most pronounced for
code in let-normal form: Each intermediate result must be explicitly named by a
variable, and function arguments must be names or constants. Syntactically, let-
normal form isolates basic instructions in a separate category of primitive terms a
and then requires let-bindings to be of the form let x = a in e end. In particular,
neither jumps (conditional or unconditional) nor let-bindings are primitive. Let-
normalized form is obtained by repeatedly rewriting code as follows:

                                                            let y = e
      let x = let y = e in e y end
                                                into        in let x = e in e           end
      in e   x
                                                                                  x,y
                                                                                              y
      end                                                   end,

subject to the side condition that y is not free in e . For example, let-normalizing
code (6.3) pulls the let-binding for z to the outside of the binding for y, yielding

                       let v = 3 in
                             let z = 2 × v in
                                let y = 4 × z in y × v            end                             (6.13)
                                                          v,y,z
                                                                        v,z
                             end
                                                                              v
                       end

   Programs in let-normal form thus do not contain let-bindings in the e1 -position
of outer let-expressions. The stack discipline in which let-bindings are managed is
simplified as scopes are nested inside each other. While still enjoying referential
transparency, let-normal code is in closer correspondence to imperative code
than non-normalized code as the chain of nested let-bindings directly reflects
the sequence of statements in a basic block, interspersed occasionally by the
definition of continuations or local functions. Exploiting this correspondence, we
apply a simplified notation in the rest of this chapter where the scope-identifying
boxes (including their indices) are omitted and chains of let-normal bindings
are abbreviated by single comma-separated (and ordered) let-blocks. Using this
convention, code (6.13) becomes

                                         let v = 3,
                                             z = 2 × v,
                                                                                                  (6.14)
                                             y =4×z
                                         in y × v end

   Summarizing our discussion up to this point, Table 6.1 collects some correspon-
dences between functional and imperative/SSA concepts.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                                73

 Table 6.1 Correspondence pairs between functional form and SSA (part I)
                                 Functional concept · · · · Imperative/SSA concept
                              Variable binding in let · · · · Assignment (point of definition)
                                        α-renaming · · · · Variable renaming
   Unique association of binding occurrences to uses · · · · Unique association of defs to uses
    Formal parameter of continuation/local function · · · · φ-function (point of definition)
                    Lexical scope of bound variable · · · · Dominance region

Table 6.2 Correspondence pairs between functional form and SSA: program structure
                   Functional concept · · · · Imperative/SSA concept
     Immediate subterm relationship · · · · Direct control-flow successor relationship
                  Arity of function fi · · · · Number of φ-functions at beginning of bi
  Distinctness of formal param. of fi · · · · Distinctness of LHS-variables in the φ-block of bi
  Number of call sites of function fi · · · · Arity of φ-functions in block bi
           Parameter lifting/dropping · · · · Addition/removal of φ-function
               Block floating/sinking · · · · Reordering according to dominator tree structure
           Potential nesting structure · · · · Dominator tree

Fig. 6.2 Functional construction of SSA: running example

6.2 Functional Construction and Destruction of SSA

The relationship between SSA and functional languages is extended by the corre-
spondences shown in Table 6.2. We discuss some of these aspects by considering
the translation into SSA, using the program in Fig. 6.2 as a running example.

6.2.1 Initial Construction Using Liveness Analysis

A simple way to represent this program in let-normalized direct style is to introduce
one function fi for each basic block bi . The body of each fi arises by introducing
74                                                                                             L. Beringer

one let-binding for each assignment and converting jumps into function calls. In
order to determine the formal parameters of these functions we perform a liveness
analysis. For each basic block bi , we choose an arbitrary enumeration of its live-
in variables. We then use this enumeration as the list of formal parameters in the
declaration of the function fi , and also as the list of actual arguments in calls to fi .
We collect all function definitions in a block of mutually tail-recursive functions at
the top level:

             function f1 () = let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
                               in f2 (v, z, y) end
             and f2 (v, z, y) = let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                                                                                                    (6.15)
                                 in if x = 0 then f3 (y, v) else f2 (v, z, y) end
             and f3 (y, v) = let w = y + v in w end
             in f1 () end

The resulting program has the following properties:
• All function declarations are closed: The free variables of their bodies are
  contained in their formal parameter lists;1
• Variable names are not unique, but the unique association of definitions to uses
  is satisfied;
• Each subterm e2 of a let-binding let x = e1 in e2 end corresponds to the direct
  control-flow successor of the assignment to x.
If desired, we may α-rename to make names globally unique. As the function
declarations in code (6.15) are closed, all variable renamings are independent from
each other. The resulting code (6.16) corresponds precisely to the SSA program
shown in Fig. 6.3 (see also Table 6.2): Each formal parameter of a function fi is
the target of one φ-function for the corresponding block bi . The arguments of these
φ-functions are the arguments in the corresponding positions in the calls to fi . As
the number of arguments in each call to fi coincides with the number of formal
parameters of fi , the φ-functions in bi are all of the same arity, namely the number
of call sites to fi . In order to coordinate the relative positioning of the arguments of
the φ-functions, we choose an arbitrary enumeration of these call sites.

        function f1 () = let v1 = 1, z1 = 8, y1 = 4
                             in f2 (v1 , z1 , y1 ) end
        and f2 (v2 , z2 , y2 ) = let x1 = 5 + y2 , y3 = x1 × z2 , x2 = x1 − 1
                                                                                                    (6.16)
                                 in if x2 = 0 then f3 (y3 , v2 ) else f2 (v2 , z2 , y3 ) end
        and f3 (y4 , v3 ) = let w1 = y4 + v3 in w1 end
        in f1 () end

1 Apart from the function identifiers f , which can always be chosen distinct from the variables.
                                       i
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                  75

                                                                            b1

                                                                            b2

                                                                            b3

                                CFG                                   Dominance tree

Fig. 6.3 Pruned (non-minimal) SSA form

    Under this perspective, the above construction of parameter lists amounts to
equipping each bi with φ-functions for all its live-in variables, with subsequent
renaming of the variables. Thus, the above method corresponds to the construction
of pruned (but not minimal) SSA—see Chap. 2.
    While resulting in a legal SSA program, the construction clearly introduces
more φ-functions than necessary. Each superfluous φ-function corresponds to the
situation where all call sites to some function fi pass identical arguments. The
technique for eliminating such arguments is called λ-dropping and is the inverse
of the more widely known transformation λ-lifting.

6.2.2 λ-Dropping

λ-dropping may be performed before or after variable names are made distinct, but
for our purpose, the former option is more instructive. The transformation consists
of two phases, block sinking and parameter dropping.

6.2.2.1   Block Sinking

Block sinking analyses the static call structure to identify which function definitions
may be moved inside each other. For example, whenever our set of function
declarations contains definitions f (x1 , . . . , xn ) = ef and g(y1 , . . . , ym ) = eg
where f = g and such that all calls to f occur in ef or eg , we can move the
declaration for f into that of g—note the similarity to the notion of dominance. If
applied aggressively, block sinking indeed amounts to making the entire dominance
tree structure explicit in the program representation. In particular, algorithms for
computing the dominator tree from a CFG discussed elsewhere in this book can be
applied to identify block sinking opportunities, where the CFG is given by the call
graph of functions.
76                                                                                  L. Beringer

    In our example (6.15), f3 is only invoked from within f2 , and f2 is only called
in the bodies of f2 and f1 (see the dominator tree in Fig. 6.3 (right)). We may thus
move the definition of f3 into that of f2 , and the latter one into f1 .
    Several options exist as to where f should be placed in its host function. The first
option is to place f at the beginning of g, by rewriting to

                function g(y1 , . . . , ym ) = function f (x1 , . . . , xn ) = ef
                                               in eg end

This transformation does not alter the semantic of the code, as the declaration of f
is closed: moving f into the scope of the formal parameters y1 , . . . , ym (and also
into the scope of g itself) does not alter the bindings to which variable uses inside
ef refer.
   Applying this transformation to example (6.15) yields the following code:

                   function f1 () =
                      function f2 (v, z, y) =
                          function f3 (y, v) = let w = y + v in w end
                          in let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                             in if x = 0 then f3 (y, v) else f2 (v, z, y) end            (6.17)
                         end
                      in let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4 in f2 (v, z, y) end
                      end
                   in f1 () end

   An alternative strategy is to insert f near the end of its host function g, in the
vicinity of the calls to f. This brings the declaration of f additionally into the
scope of all let-bindings in eg . Again, referential transparency and preservation of
semantics are respected as the declaration on f is closed. In our case, the alternative
strategy yields the following code:

          function f1 () =
             let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
             in function f2 (v, z, y) =
                    let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                    in if x = 0
                        then function f3 (y, v) = let w = y + v in w end
                                                                                         (6.18)
                               in f3 (y, v) end
                        else f2 (v, z, y)
                    end
                 in f2 (v, z, y) end
             end
          in f1 () end

In general, one would insert f directly prior to its call if g contains only a single
call site for f. In the event that g contains multiple call sites for f, these are (due
to their tail-recursive positioning) in different arms of a conditional, and we would
insert f directly prior to this conditional.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                      77

   Both outlined placement strategies result in code whose nesting structure reflects
the dominance relationship of the imperative code. In our example, code (6.17)
and (6.18) both nest f3 inside f2 inside f1 , in accordance with the dominator tree
of the imperative program show on Fig. 6.3.

6.2.2.2   Parameter Dropping

The second phase of λ-dropping, parameter dropping, removes superfluous param-
eters based on the syntactic scope structure. Removing a parameter x from the
declaration of some function f has the effect that any use of x inside the body
of f will not be bound by the declaration of f any longer, but by the (innermost)
binding for x that contains the declaration of f . In order to ensure that removing
the parameter does not alter the meaning of the program, we thus have to ensure
that this f-containing binding for x also contains any call to f , since the binding
applicable at the call site determines the value that is passed as the actual argument
(before x is deleted from the parameter list).
    For example, the two parameters of f3 in (6.18) can be removed without altering
the meaning of the code, as we can statically predict the values they will be
instantiated with: Parameter y will be instantiated with the result of x × z (which
is bound to y in the first line in the body of f2 ), and v will always be bound to the
value passed via the parameter v of f2 . In particular, the bindings for y and v at the
declaration site of f3 are identical to those applicable at the call to f3 .
    In general, we may drop a parameter x from the declaration of a possibly
recursive function f if the following two conditions are met:
1. The tightest scope for x enclosing the declaration of f coincides with the tightest
   scope for x surrounding each call site to f outside of its declaration.
2. The tightest scope for x enclosing any recursive call to f (i.e., a call to f in the
   body of f ) is the one associated with the formal parameter x in the declaration
   of f.
The rationale for these clauses is that removing x from f ’s parameter list means
that any free occurrence of x in f ’s body is now bound outside of f ’s declaration.
Therefore, for each call to f to be correct, one needs to ensure that this outside
binding coincides with the one containing the call.
    Similarly, we may simultaneously drop a parameter x occurring in all declara-
tions of a block of mutually recursive functions f1 , . . . , fn , if the scope for x at the
point of declaration of the block coincides with the tightest scope in force at any call
site to some fi outside the block, and if in each call to some fi inside some fj , the
tightest scope for x is the one associated with the formal parameter x of fj . In both
cases, dropping a parameter means removing it from the list of formal parameter
lists of the function declarations concerned, and also from the argument lists of the
corresponding function calls.
    In code (6.18), these conditions sanction the removal of both parameters from
the non-recursive function f3 . The scope applicable for v at the site of declaration
78                                                                           L. Beringer

of f3 and also at its call site is the one rooted at the formal parameter v of f2 . In
case of y, the common scope is the one rooted at the let-binding for y in the body
of f2 . We thus obtain the following code:

                function f1 () =
                   let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
                   in function f2 (v, z, y) =
                          let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                           in if x = 0
                              then function f3 () = let w = y + v in w end
                                                                                  (6.19)
                                     in f3 () end
                              else f2 (v, z, y)
                          end
                       in f2 (v, z, y) end
                   end
                in f1 () end

Considering the recursive function f2 next we observe that the recursive call is in
the scope of the let-binding for y in the body of f2 , preventing us from removing y.
In contrast, neither v nor z has binding occurrences in the body of f2 . The scopes
applicable at the external call site to f2 coincide with those applicable at its site of
declaration and are given by the scopes rooted in the let-bindings for v and z. Thus,
parameters v and z may be removed from f2 :

                function f1 () =
                   let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
                   in function f2 (y) =
                          let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                          in if x = 0
                              then function f3 () = let w = y + v in w end
                                                                                  (6.20)
                                    in f3 () end
                              else f2 (y)
                          end
                       in f2 (y) end
                   end
                in f1 () end

Interpreting the uniquely renamed variant of (6.20) back in SSA yields the desired
code with a single φ-function, for variable y at the beginning of block b2 , see
Fig. 6.4. The reason that this φ-function cannot be eliminated (the redefinition of
y in the loop) is precisely the reason why y survives parameter dropping.
   Given this understanding of parameter dropping we can also see why inserting
functions near the end of their hosts during block sinking (as in code (6.18))
is in general preferable to inserting them at the beginning of their hosts (as in
code (6.17)): The placement of function declarations in the vicinity of their calls
potentially enables the dropping of more parameters, namely those that are let-
bound in the body of the host function.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                     79

                                                                              b1

                                                                              b2

                                                                              b3

Fig. 6.4 SSA code after λ-dropping

   An immediate consequence of this strategy is that blocks with a single direct
predecessor indeed do not contain φ-functions. Such a block bf is necessarily
dominated by its direct predecessor bg , hence we can always nest f inside g.
Inserting f in eg directly prior to its call site implies that condition (1) is necessarily
satisfied for all parameters x of f. Thus, all parameters of f can be dropped and no
φ-function is generated.

6.2.3 Nesting, Dominance, Loop-Closure

As we observed above, analysing whether function definitions may be nested inside
one another is tantamount to analysing the imperative dominance structure: function
fi may be moved inside fj exactly if all non-recursive calls to fi come from within
fj , i.e., exactly if all paths from the initial program point to block bi traverse bj ,
i.e., exactly if bj dominates bi . This observation is merely the extension to function
identifiers of our earlier remark that lexical scope coincides with the dominance
region, and that points of definition/binding occurrences should dominate the uses.
Indeed, functional languages do not distinguish between code and data when aspects
of binding and use of variables are concerned, as witnessed by our use of the let-
binding construct for binding code-representing expressions to the variables k in our
syntax for CPS.
    Thus, the dominator tree immediately suggests a function nesting scheme, where
all children of a node are represented as a single block of mutually recursive function
declarations.2

2 Refinements of this representation will be sketched in Sect. 6.3.
80                                                                                L. Beringer

    The choice as to where functions are placed corresponds to variants of SSA.
For example, in loop-closed SSA form (see Chaps. 14 and 10), SSA names that are
defined in a loop must not be used outside the loop. To this end, special-purpose
unary φ-nodes are inserted for these variables at the loop exit points. As the loop is
unrolled, the arity of these trivial φ-nodes grows with the number of unrollings, and
the program continuation is always supplied with the value the variable obtained in
the final iteration of the loop. In our example, the only loop-defined variable used in
f3 is y—and we already observed in code (6.17) how we can prevent the dropping
of y from the parameter list of f3 : we insert f3 at the beginning of f2 , preceding the
let-binding for y. Of course, we would still like to drop as many parameters from f2
as possible, hence we apply the following placement policy during block sinking:
Functions that are targets of loop-exiting function calls and have live-in variables
that are defined in the loop are placed at the beginning of the loop headers. Other
functions are placed at the end of their hosts. Applying this policy to our original
program (6.15) yields (6.21).

                 function f1 () =
                    let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
                    in function f2 (v, z, y) =
                           function f3 (y, v) = let w = y + v in w end
                           in let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                                                                                       (6.21)
                               in if x = 0 then f3 (y, v) else f2 (v, z, y) end
                           end
                        in f2 (v, z, y) end
                    end
                 in f1 () end

We may now drop v (but not y) from the parameter list of f3 , and v and z from f2 ,
to obtain code (6.22).

                    function f1 () =
                       let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
                       in function f2 (y) =
                              function f3 (y) = let w = y + v in w end
                              in let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                                                                                       (6.22)
                                  in if x = 0 then f3 (y) else f2 (y) end
                              end
                           in f2 (y) end
                       end
                    in f1 () end

The SSA form corresponding to (6.22) contains the desired loop-closing φ-node for
y at the beginning of b3 , as shown in Fig. 6.5a. The nesting structure of both (6.21)
and (6.22) coincides with the dominance structure of the original imperative code
and its loop-closed SSA form.
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                              81

                                                                                       b1

                                                                                       b2

                                                                                       b3

                                           Loop-closed

                                                                                       b1

                                                                                       b2

                                                                                  b3        b3

                                           Loop-unrolled

Fig. 6.5 Loop-closed (a) and loop-unrolled (b) forms of running example program, corresponding
to codes (6.22) and (6.23), respectively

   We unroll the loop by duplicating the body of f2 , without duplicating the
declaration of f3 :

                 function f1 () =
                    let v = 1, z = 8, y = 4
                    in function f2 (y) =
                           function f3 (y) = let w = y + v in w end
                           in let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                               in if x = 0 then f3 (y)
                               else function f2 (y) =
                                                                                             (6.23)
                                        let x = 5 + y, y = x × z, x = x − 1
                                        in if x = 0 then f3 (y) else f2 (y) end
                                     in f2 (y) end
                               end
                        in f2 (y) end
                    end
                 in f1 () end
82                                                                          L. Beringer

Both calls to f3 are in the scope of the declaration of f3 and contain the appropriate
loop-closing arguments. In the SSA reading of this code—shown in Fig. 6.5b—
the first instruction in b3 has turned into a non-trivial φ-node. As expected, the
parameters of this φ-node correspond to the two control-flow arcs leading into b3 ,
one for each call site to f3 in code (6.23). Moreover, the call and nesting structure
of (6.23) is indeed in agreement with the control flow and dominance structure of
the loop-unrolled SSA representation.

6.2.4 Destruction of SSA

The above example code excerpts where variables are not made distinct exhibit
a further pattern: The argument list of any call coincides with the list of formal
parameters of the invoked function. This discipline is not enjoyed by functional
programs in general, and is often destroyed by optimizing program transformations.
However, programs that do obey this discipline can be immediately converted to
imperative non-SSA form. Thus, the task of SSA destruction amounts to converting
a functional program with arbitrary argument lists into one where argument lists
and formal parameter lists coincide for each function. This can be achieved by
introducing additional let-bindings of the form let x = y in e end. For example,
a call f (v, z, y) where f is declared as function f (x, y, z) = e may be converted
to

                    let x = v, a = z, z = y, y = a in f (x, y, z)

in correspondence to the move instructions introduced in imperative formulations
of SSA destruction (see Chaps. 3 and 21). Appropriate transformations can be
formulated as manipulations of the functional representation, although the target
format is not immune to α-renaming and thus only syntactically a functional
language. For example, we can give a local algorithm that considers each call site
individually and avoids the “lost-copy” and “swap” problems (cf. Chap. 21): Instead
of introducing let-bindings for all parameter positions of a call, the algorithm scales
with the number and size of cycles that span identically named arguments and
parameters (like the cycle between y and z above), and employs a single additional
variable (called a in the above code) to break all these cycles one by one.

6.3 Refined Block Sinking and Loop Nesting Forests

As discussed when outlining λ-dropping, block sinking is governed by the domi-
nance relation between basic blocks. Thus, a typical dominance tree with root b and
subtrees rooted at b1 , . . . , bn is most naturally represented as a block of function
declarations for the fi , nested inside the declaration of f :
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                               83

           function f (. . .) = let . . . < body of b > . . . in
              function f1 (. . .) = e1         body of b1 , with calls to b, bi
                                ..
                                 .                                                             (6.24)
                      and fn (. . .) = en     body of bn , with calls to b, bi
              in . . . < calls to b, bi from b > . . . end

By exploiting additional control-flow structure between the bi , it is possible to
obtain refined placements, namely placements that correspond to notions of loop
nesting forests that have been identified in the SSA literature.
    These refinements arise if we enrich the above dominance tree by adding arrows
bi → bj whenever the CFG contains a directed edge from one of the dominance
successors of bi (i.e., the descendants of bi in the dominance tree) to bj .
    In the case of a reducible CFG, the resulting graph contains only trivial loops.
Ignoring these self-loops, we perform a post-order DFS (or more generally a reverse
topological ordering) among the bi and stagger the function declarations according
to the resulting order. As an example, consider the CFG in Fig. 6.6a and its enriched
dominance tree shown in Fig. 6.6b. A possible (but not unique) ordering of the
children of b is [b5 , b1 , b3 , b2 , b4 ], resulting in the nesting shown in code (6.25).

        function f (. . .) = let . . . < body of f > . . . in
           function f5 (. . .) = e5
           in function f1 (. . .) = e1                      contains calls to f and f5
              in function f3 (. . .) = e3
                 in function f2 (. . .) =
                                                                                               (6.25)
                            let . . . < body of f2 > . . .
                            in function g(. . .) = eg              contains call to f3
                                 in . . . < calls to f5 and g > . . . end
                    in function f4 (. . .) = e4  contains calls to f3 and f4
                         in . . . < calls to f1 , f2 , f4 , f5 > . . . end

                    b

         b1         b2         b4                                     b

                    g                          b1         b2          b3         b4       b5

         b5                    b3                          g

                   (a)                                                 (b)

Fig. 6.6 Example placement for reducible flow graphs. (a) Control-flow graph; (b) Overlay of
CFG (dashed edges) arcs between dominated blocks onto dominance graph (solid edges)
84                                                                                       L. Beringer

The code respects the dominance relationship in much the same way as the naive
placement, but additionally makes f1 inaccessible from within e5 , and makes f3
inaccessible from within f1 or f5 . As the reordering does not move function
declarations inside each other (in particular: no function declaration is brought
into or moved out of the scope of the formal parameters of any other function)
the reordering does not affect the potential to subsequently perform parameter
dropping.
   Declaring functions using λ-abstraction brings further improvements. This
enables us not only to syntactically distinguish between loops and non-recursive
control-flow structures using the distinction between let and letrec present in many
functional languages, but also to further restrict the visibility of function names.
Indeed, while b3 is immediately dominated by b in the above example, its only
control-flow predecessors are b2 /g and b4 . We would hence like to make the
declaration of f3 local to the tuple (f2 , f4 ), i.e., invisible to f. This can be achieved
by combining let/letrec bindings with pattern matching, if we insert the shared
declaration of f3 between the declaration of the names f2 and f4 and the λ-bindings
of their formal parameters pi :

        letrec f = λ p. let . . . < body of f > . . . in
           let f5 = λ p5 . e5
           in let f1 = λ p1 . e1                        contains calls to f and f5
               in letrec (f2 , f4 ) =
                      let f3 = λ p3 . e3
                      in (λ p2 . let . . . < body of f2 > . . . in                            (6.26)
                                        let g = λ pg . eg         contains call to f3
                                        in . . . < calls to f5 and g > . . . end
                           , λ p 4 . e4 )               contains calls to f3 and f4
                      end               declaration of tuple (f2 , f4 ) ends here
                  in . . . < calls to f1 , f2 , f4 , f5 > . . . end

The recursiveness of f4 is inherited by the function pair (f2 , f4 ) but f3 remains
non-recursive. In general, the role of f3 is played by any merge point bi that is not
directly called from the dominator node b.
   In the case of irreducible CFGs, the enriched dominance tree is no longer acyclic
(even when ignoring self-loops). In this case, the functional representation not
only depends on the chosen DFS order but additionally on the partitioning of the
enriched graph into loops. As each loop forms a strongly connected component
(SCC), different partitionings are possible, corresponding to different notions of
loop nesting forests. Of the various loop nesting forest strategies proposed in the
SSA literature [236], the scheme introduced by Steensgaard [271] is particularly
appealing from a functional perspective.
   In Steensgaard’s notion of loops, the headers H of a loop L = (B, H ) are
precisely the entry nodes of its body B, i.e., those nodes in B that have a direct
predecessor outside of B. For example, G0 shown in Fig. 6.7 contains the outer loop
L0 = ({u, v, w, x}, {u, v}), whose constituents B0 are determined as the maximal
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                       85

Fig. 6.7 Illustration of Steensgaard’s construction of loop nesting forests

                                                                       u, v
                               entry

                                                              u                 v
                                exit                                   w, x

             u        w                     x        v       w                  x

                                (a)                                       (b)

Fig. 6.8 Illustration of Steensgaard’s construction of loop nesting forests: (a) CFG-enriched
dominance tree; (b) resulting loop nesting forest

SCC of G0 . Removing the back edges of L0 from G0 (i.e., edges from B0 to H0 )
yields G1 , whose (only) SCC determines a further inner loop L1 = ({w, x}, {w, x}).
Removing the back edges of L1 from G1 results in the acyclic G2 , terminating the
process.
    Figure 6.8a shows the CFG-enriched dominance tree of G0 . The body of loop L0
is easily identified as the maximal SCC, and likewise the body of L1 once the cycles
(u, w) and (x, v) are broken by the removal of the back edges w → u and x → v.
    The loop nesting forest resulting from Steensgaard’s construction is shown in
Fig. 6.8b. Loops are drawn as ellipses decorated with the appropriate header nodes
and nested in accordance with the containment relation B1 ⊂ B0 between the
bodies.
    In the functional representation, a loop L = (B, {h1 , . . . , hn }) yields a function
declaration block for functions h1 , . . . , hn , with private declarations for the non-
headers from B \ H. In our example, loop L0 provides entry points for the headers
u and v but not for its non-headers w and x. Instead, the loop comprised of the latter
nodes, L1 , is nested inside the definition of L0 , in accordance with the loop nesting
forest.
86                                                                                             L. Beringer

     function entry(. . .) =
       let . . . < body of entry > . . .
       in letrec (u, v) =                    define outer loop L0 , with headers u, v
                letrec (w, x) =              define inner loop L1 , with headers w, x
                      let exit = λpexit . . . . < body of exit >
                      in ( λpw . . . . < body of w, with calls to u, x, and exit > . . .
                                                                                                    (6.27)
                           , λpx . . . . < body of x, with calls to w, v, and exit > . . . )
                      end                              end of inner loop
                in ( λpu . . . . < body of u, with call to w > . . .
                    , λpv . . . . < body of v, with call to x > . . . )
                end                                   end of outer loop
           in . . . < calls from entry to u and v > . . .

   By placing L1 inside L0 according to the scheme from code (6.26) and making
exit private to L1 , we obtain the representation (6.27), which captures all the
essential information of Steensgaard’s construction. Effectively, the functional
reading of the loop nesting forest extends the earlier correspondence between
the nesting of individual functions and the dominance relationship to groups of
functions and basic blocks: loop L0 dominates L1 in the sense that any path from
entry to a node in L1 passes through L0 ; more specifically, any path from entry to
a header of L1 passes through a header of L0 .
   In general, each step of Steensgaard’s construction may identify several loops,
as a CFG may contain several maximal SCCs. As the bodies of these SCCs are
necessarily non-overlapping, the construction yields a forest comprised of trees
shaped like the loop nesting forest in Fig. 6.8b. As the relationship between the
trees is necessarily acyclic, the declarations of the function declaration tuples
corresponding to the trees can be placed according to the loop-extended notion of
dominance.

6.4 Further Reading and Concluding Remarks

Further Reading
Shortly after the introduction of SSA, O’Donnell [213] and Kelsey [160] noted
the correspondence between let-bindings and points of variable declaration and its
extension to other aspects of program structure using continuation-passing style.
Appel [10, 11] popularized the correspondence using a direct-style representation,
building on his earlier experience with continuation-based compilation [9].
   Continuations and low-level functional languages have been an object of inten-
sive study since their inception about four decades ago [174, 294]. For retrospective
accounts of the historical development, see Reynolds [246] and Wadsworth [299].
Early studies of CPS and direct style include work by Reynolds and Plotkin [229,
244, 245]. Two prominent examples of CPS-based compilers are those by Sussman
et al. [279] and Appel [9]. An active area of research concerns the relative merit
6 Functional Representations of SSA                                                87

of the various functional representations, algorithms for formal conversion between
these formats, and their efficient compilation to machine code, in particular with
respect to their integration with program analyses and optimizing transformations
[92, 161, 243]. A particularly appealing variant is that of Kennedy [161], where the
approach to explicitly name control-flow points such as merge points is taken to
its logical conclusion. By mandating all control-flow points to be explicitly named,
a uniform representation is obtained that allows optimizing transformations to be
implemented efficiently, avoiding the administrative overhead to which some of the
alternative approaches are susceptible.
    Occasionally, the term direct style refers to the combination of tail-recursive
functions and let-normal form, and the conditions on the latter notion are strength-
ened so that only variables may appear as branch conditions. Variations of this
discipline include administrative normal form (A-normal form, ANF) [121], B-
form [280], and SIL [285].
    Closely related to continuations and direct-style representation are monadic
intermediate languages as used by Benton et al. [24] and Peyton-Jones et al. [223].
These partition expressions into categories of values and computations, similar
to the isolation of primitive terms in let-normal form [229, 245]. This allows
one to treat side-effects (memory access, IO, exceptions, etc.) in a uniform way,
following Moggi [200], and thus simplifies reasoning about program analyses and
the associated transformations in the presence of impure language features.
    Lambda-lifting and dropping are well-known transformations in the functional
programming community, and are studied in-depth by Johnsson [155] and Danvy et
al. [91].
    Rideau et al. [247] present an in-depth study of SSA destruction, including a
verified implementation in the proof assistant Coq for the “windmills” problem, i.e.,
the task of correctly introducing φ-compensating assignments. The local algorithm
to avoid the lost-copy problem and swap problem identified by Briggs et al. [50]
was given by Beringer [25]. In this solution, the algorithm to break the cycles is in
line with the results of May [196].
    We are not aware of previous work that transfers the analysis of loop nesting
forests to the functional setting, or of loop analyses in the functional world that
correspond to loop nesting forests. Our discussion of Steensgaard’s construction
was based on a classification of loop nesting forests by Ramalingam [236], which
also served as the source of the example in Fig. 6.7. Two alternative construc-
tions discussed by Ramalingam are those by Sreedhar, Gao and Lee [266], and
Havlak [142]. To us, it appears that a functional reading of Sreedhar, Gao, and
Lee’s construction would essentially yield the nesting mentioned at the beginning
of Sect. 6.3. Regarding Havlak’s construction, the fact that entry points of loops are
not necessarily classified as headers appears to make an elegant representation in
functional form at least challenging.
    Extending the syntactic correspondences between SSA and functional lan-
guages, similarities may be identified between their characteristic program analysis
frameworks, data-flow analyses and type systems. Chakravarty et al. [62] prove
the correctness of a functional representation of Wegmann and Zadeck’s SSA-
88                                                                         L. Beringer

based sparse conditional constant propagation algorithm [303]. Beringer et al. [26]
consider data-flow equations for liveness and read-once variables, and formally
translate their solutions to properties of corresponding typing derivations. Laud
et al. [177] present a formal correspondence between data-flow analyses and type
systems but consider a simple imperative language rather than SSA.
   At present, intermediate languages in functional compilers do not provide
syntactic support for expressing nesting forest directly. Indeed, most functional
compilers do not perform advanced analyses of nested loops. As an exception to this
rule, the MLton compiler (http://mlton.org) implements Steensgaard’s algorithm for
detecting loop nesting forests, leading to a subsequent analysis of the loop unrolling
and loop switching transformations [278].
Concluding Remarks
In addition to low-level functional languages, alternative representations for SSA
have been proposed, but their discussion is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Glesner [129] employs an encoding in terms of abstract state machines [134] that
disregards the sequential control flow inside basic blocks but retains control flow
between basic blocks to prove the correctness of a code generation transformation.
Later work by the same author uses a more direct representation of SSA in the
theorem prover Isabelle/HOL for studying further SSA-based analyses.
   Matsuno and Ohori [195] present a formalism that captures core aspects of SSA
in a notion of (non-standard) types while leaving the program text in unstructured
non-SSA form. Instead of classifying values or computations, types represent the
definition points of variables. Contexts associate program variables at each program
point with types in the standard fashion, but the non-standard notion of types
means that this association models the reaching-definitions relationship rather than
characterizing the values held in the variables at runtime. Noting a correspondence
between the types associated with a variable and the sets of def-use paths, the
authors admit types to be formulated over type variables whose introduction and
use corresponds to the introduction of φ-nodes in SSA.
   Finally, Pop et al.’s model [233] dispenses with control flow entirely and instead
views programs as sets of equations that model the assignment of values to variables
in a style reminiscent of partial recursive functions. This model is discussed in more
detail in Chap. 10.
