Chapter 5
SSA Reconstruction

Sebastian Hack

Some optimizations break the single-assignment property of the SSA form by
inserting additional definitions for a single SSA value. A common example is live
range splitting by inserting copy operations or inserting spill and reload code during
register allocation. Other optimizations, such as loop unrolling or jump threading,
might duplicate code, thus adding additional variable definitions, and modify the
control flow of the program. We will first mention two examples before we present
algorithms to properly repair SSA.
    The first example is depicted in Fig. 5.1. Our spilling pass decided to spill a part
of the live range of variable x0 in the right block in (a), resulting in the code shown
in (b), where it inserted a store and a load instruction. This is indicated by assigning
to the memory location X. The load is now a second definition of x0 , violating the
SSA form that has to be reconstructed as shown in (c). This example shows that
maintaining SSA also involves placing new φ-functions.
    Many optimizations perform such program modifications, and maintaining SSA
is often one of the more complicated and error-prone parts in such optimizations,
owing to the insertion of additional φ-functions and the correct redirection of the
uses of the variable.
    Another example for such a transformation is path duplication which is discussed
in Chap. 20. Several popular compilers such as GCC and LLVM perform one or
another variant of path duplication, for example, when threading jumps.

S. Hack (?)
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
e-mail: hack@cs.uni-saarland.de

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022      55
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_5

     Original program               Spilling x0 , SSA broken       SSA reconstructed

Fig. 5.1 Adding a second definition as a side-effect of spilling

5.1 General Considerations

In this chapter, we will discuss two algorithms. The first is an adoption of the
classical dominance-frontier based algorithm. The second performs a search from
the uses of the variables to the definition and places φ-functions on demand at
appropriate places. In contrast to the first, the second algorithm might not construct
minimal SSA form in general; however, it does not need to update its internal data
structures when the CFG is modified.
    We consider the following scenario: The program is represented as a control-
flow graph (CFG) and is in SSA form with dominance property. For the sake of
simplicity, we assume that each instruction in the program only writes to a single
variable. An optimization or transformation violates SSA by inserting additional
definitions for an existing SSA variable, like in the examples above. The original
variable and the additional definitions can be seen as a single non-SSA variable that
has multiple definitions and uses. Let in the following v be such a non-SSA variable.
    When reconstructing SSA for v, we will first create fresh variables for every
definition of v to establish the single-assignment property. What remains is asso-
ciating every use of v with a suitable definition. In the algorithms, v.defs denotes
the set of all instructions that define v. A use of a variable is a pair consisting of a
program point (an instruction) and an integer denoting the index of the operand at
this instruction.
    Both algorithms presented in this chapter share the same driver routine described
in Algorithm 5.1. First, we scan all definitions of v so that for every basic block b we
have the list b.defs that contains all instructions in the block which define one of the
variables in v.defs. It is best to sort this according to the schedule of the instructions
in the block from back to front, making the latest definition the first in the list.
5 SSA Reconstruction                                                                         57

    Then, all uses of the variable v are traversed to associate them with the proper
definition. This can be done by using precomputed use-def chains if available or
scanning all instructions in the dominance subtree of v’s original SSA definition. For
each use, we have to differentiate whether the use is in a φ-function or not. If so, the
use occurs at the end of the direct predecessor block that corresponds to the position
of the variable in the φ’s argument list. In that case, we start looking for the reaching
definition from the end of that block. Otherwise, we scan the instructions of the
block backwards until we reach the first definition that is before the use (Line 14). If
there is no such definition, we have to find one that reaches this block from outside.
    We use two functions, FindDefFromTop and FindDefFromBottom that search
the reaching definition, respectively, from the beginning or the end of a block. Find-
DefFromBottom actually just returns the last definition in the block, or call Find-
DefFromTop if there is none.
    The two presented approaches to SSA repairing differ in the implementation
of the function FindDefFromTop. The differences are described in the next two
sections.

 Algorithm 5.1: SSA reconstruction driver
   Input: v, a variable that breaks SSA property
 1 foreach d ∈ v.defs do
 2     create fresh variable v
 3     rewrite def of v by v in d
 4     b ← d.block
 5     insert d in b.defs
 6 foreach use (inst, index) of v do
 7     if inst is a φ-function then
 8          b ← inst.block.directpred(index)
 9          d ← FindDefFromBottom(v, b)
10     else
11            d←⊥
12            b ← inst.block
13            foreach l ∈ b.defs from bottom to top do
14                if l is before inst in b then
15                      d←l
16                      break

17            if d = ⊥ then               ? no local def. found, searching in the direct preds
18                 d ← FindDefFromTop(v, b)

19     v ← version of v defined by d
20     rewrite use of v by v in inst

 Procedure FindDefFromBottom(v, b)
 1   if b.defs ?= ∅ then
 2        return latest instruction in b.defs
 3   else
 4          return FindDefFromTop(v, b)

5.2 Reconstruction Based on the Dominance Frontier

This algorithm follows the same principles as the classical SSA construction
algorithm by Cytron at al. as described in Chap. 3. We first compute the iterated
dominance frontier (DF+ ) of v. This set is a sound approximation of the set where
φ-functions must be placed—it might contain blocks where a φ-function would be
dead. Then, we search for each use u the corresponding reaching definition. This
search starts at the block of u. If that block b is in the DF+ of v, a φ-function needs to
be placed at its entrance. This φ-function becomes a new definition of v and has to be
inserted in v.defs and in b.defs. The operands of the newly created φ-function will
query their reaching definitions by recursive calls to FindDefFromBottom on direct
predecessors of b. Because we inserted the φ-function into b.defs before searching
for the arguments, no infinite recursion can occur (otherwise, it could happen, for
instance, with a loop back edge).
   If the block is not in the DF+ , the search continues in the immediate dominator of
the block. This is because in SSA, every use of a variable must be dominated by its
definition.1 Therefore, the reaching definition is the same for all direct predecessors
of the block, and hence for the immediate dominator of this block.

 Procedure FindDefFromTop(v, b)
     SSA Reconstruction based on Dominance Frontiers
 1 if b ∈ DF+ (v.defs) then
 2      v ← fresh variable
 3      d ← new φ-function in b: v ← φ(. . . )
 4      append d to b.defs
 5      foreach p ∈ b.directpreds do
 6          o ← FindDefFromBottom(v, p)
 7          v ← version of v defined by o
 8          set corresponding operand of d to v

 9   else
10          d ← FindDefFromBottom(v, b.idom)                  ? search in immediate dominator
11   return d

1 The definition of an operand of a φ-function has to dominate the corresponding direct predecessor

block.
5 SSA Reconstruction                                                                 59

5.3 Search-Based Reconstruction

The second algorithm presented here is adapted from an algorithm designed to
construct SSA from the abstract syntax tree, but it also works well on control-
flow graphs. Its major advantage over the algorithm presented in the last section
is that it requires neither dominance information nor dominance frontiers. Thus
it is well suited to be used in transformations that change the control-flow graph.
Its disadvantage is that potentially more blocks have to be visited during the
reconstruction. The principal idea is to start a search from every use to find the
corresponding definition, inserting φ-functions on the fly while caching the SSA
variable alive at the beginning of basic blocks. As in the last section, we only
consider the reconstruction for a single variable called v in the following. If multiple
variables have to be reconstructed, the algorithm can be applied to each variable
separately.
Search on an Acyclic CFG
The algorithm performs a backward depth-first search in the CFG to collect the
reaching definitions of v in question at each block, recording the SSA variable that
is alive at the beginning of a block in the “beg” field of this block. If the CFG is
an acyclic graph (DAG), all predecessors of a block can be visited before the block
itself is processed, as we are using a post-order traversal following edges backwards.
Hence, we know all the definitions that reach a block b: if there is more than one
definition, we need to place a φ-function in b, otherwise it is not necessary.
Search on a General CFG
If the CFG has loops, there are blocks for which not all reaching definitions can be
computed before we can decide whether a φ-function has to be placed or not. In a
loop, recursively computing the reaching definitions for a block b will end up at b
itself. To avoid infinite recursion when we enter a block during the traversal, we first
create a φ-function without arguments, “pending_φ.” This creates a new definition
vφ for v which is the variable alive at the beginning of this block.
   When we return to b after traversing the rest of the CFG, we decide whether
a φ-function has to be placed in b by looking at the reaching definition for every
direct predecessor. These reaching definitions can be either vφ itself (loop in the
CFG without a definition of v), or some other definitions of v. If there is only
one such other definition, say w, then pending_φ is not necessary and we can
remove it, propagating w downwards instead of vφ . Note that in this case it will be
necessary to “rewrite” all uses that referred to pending_φ to w. Otherwise, we keep
pending_φ and fill its missing operands with the reaching definitions. In this version
of function FindDefFromTop, this check is done by the function Phi-Necessary.
Removing More Unnecessary φ-Functions
In programs with loops, it can be the case that the local optimization performed
when function FindDefFromTop calls Phi-Necessary does not remove all unnec-
essary φ-functions. This can happen in loops where φ-functions can become

 Procedure FindDefFromTop(b)
    Search-based SSA Reconstruction
  Input: b, a basic block
1 if b.top ?= ⊥ then
2       return b.top
3 pending_φ ← new φ-function in b
4 vφ ← result of pending_φ
5 b.top ← vφ
6 reaching_defs ← []
7 foreach p ∈ b.directpreds do
8     reaching_defs ← reaching_defs ∪ FindDefFromBottom(v, p)
9  vdef ← Phi-Necessary(vφ , reaching_defs)
10 if vdef = vφ then
11      set arguments of pending_φ to reaching_defs
12   else
13          rewire all uses of pending_φ to vdef
14          remove pending_φ
15          b.top ← vdef
16   return vdef

 Procedure Phi-Necessary(vφ , reaching_defs)
    Checks if the set reaching_defs makes pending_φ necessary. This is the case if it is a
     subset of {vφ , other}
  Input: vφ , the variable defined by pending_φ
  Input: reaching_defs, list of variables
  Output: vφ if pending_φ is necessary, the variable to use instead otherwise
1 other ← ⊥
2 foreach v ∈ reaching_defs do
3      if v = vφ then continue
4      if other = ⊥ then
5           other ← v
6           else if v ?= other then
7                return vφ

    this assertion is violated if reaching_defs contains only pending_φ which never can
     happen
8 assert (other ?= ⊥)
9 return other
5 SSA Reconstruction                                                                 61

Fig. 5.2 Removal of unnecessary φ-functions

Fig. 5.3 The irreducible
(∗)-graph

unnecessary because other φ-functions are optimized away. Consider the example
in Fig. 5.2. We look for a definition of x from block E. If Algorithm FindDef-
FromTop considers the blocks in a unfavourable order, e.g., E, D, C, B, A, D, C,
some unnecessary φ-functions cannot be removed by Phi-Necessary, as shown in
Fig. 5.2b. While the φ-function in block C can be eliminated by the local criterion
applied by Phi-Necessary, the φ-function in block B remains. This is because the
depth-first search carried out by FindDefFromTop will not visit block B a second
time. To remove the remaining φ-functions, the local criterion can be iteratively
applied to all placed φ-functions until a fixpoint is reached. For reducible control
flow, this then produces the minimal number of placed φ-functions. The classical
(∗)-graph in Fig. 5.3 illustrates that this does not hold for the irreducible case. This
is similar to the rules discussed in Sect. 3.3.1.

5.4 Further Reading

The algorithms presented in this chapter are independent of the transformation that
violated SSA and can be used as a black box: For every variable for which SSA was
violated, a routine is called that restores SSA. Both algorithms rely on computed
def-use chains because they traverse all uses from a SSA variable to find suitable
definitions; however, they differ in their prerequisites and their runtime behaviour:
   The first algorithm (Choi et al. [69]) is based on the iterated dominance frontiers
like the classical SSA construction algorithm by Cytron et al. [90]. Hence, it is
less suited for optimizations that also change the flow of control since that would
require recomputing the iterated dominance frontiers. On the other hand, by using
the iterated dominance frontiers, the algorithm can find the reaching definitions
quickly by scanning the dominance tree upwards. Furthermore, one could also
envision applying incremental algorithms to construct the dominance tree [238, 264]
and the dominance frontier [265] to account for changes in the control flow. This has
not yet been done and no practical experiences have been reported so far.
   The second algorithm is based on the algorithm by Braun et al. [47] which is
an extension of the construction algorithm that Click describes in his thesis [75] to
construct SSA from an abstract syntax tree. It does not depend on additional analysis
information such as iterated dominance frontiers or the dominance tree. Thus, it is
well suited for transformations that change the CFG because no information needs to
be recomputed. On the other hand, it might be slower to find the reaching definitions
because they are searched by a depth-first search in the CFG.
   Both approaches construct pruned SSA, i.e., they do not add dead φ-functions.
 The first approach produces minimal SSA by the very same arguments Cytron
et al. [90] give. The second only guarantees minimal SSA for reducible CFGs.
This follows from the iterative application of the function Phi-Necessary which
implements the two simplification rules presented by Aycock and Horspool [14],
who showed that their iterative application yields minimal SSA on reducible graphs.
These two local rules can be extended to a non-local one which has to find strongly
connected φ-components that all refer to the same exterior variable. Such a non-
local check also eliminates unnecessary φ-functions in the irreducible case [47].
