Chapter 7
Introduction

Markus Schordan and Fabrice Rastello

The objective of Part II is to describe several program analyses and optimizations
that benefit from SSA form.
   In particular, we illustrate how SSA form makes an analysis more convenient
because of its similarity to functional programs. Technically, the def-use chains
explicitly expressed through the SSA graph, but also the static-single information
property , are what make SSA so convenient.
   We also illustrate how SSA form can be used to design sparse analyses that are
faster and more efficient than their dense counterparts. This is especially important
for just-in-time compilation but also for complex inter-procedural ahead-of-time
analysis.
   Finally, as already mentioned in Chap. 2, SSA form can come in different
flavours. The vanilla flavour is strict SSA, or in equivalent terms, SSA form with
the dominance property. The most common SSA construction algorithm exploits
this dominance property by two means. First, it serves to compute join sets for φ-
placement in a very efficient way using the dominance frontier. Second, it allows
variable renaming using a folding scheme along the dominance tree. The notion
of dominance and dominance frontier are two structural properties that make SSA
form singular for compiler analysis and transformations.
   The following paragraphs provide a short overview of the chapters that constitute
this part.

M. Schordan
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, USA
e-mail: schordan1@llnl.gov
F. Rastello (?)
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   91
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_7
92                                                            M. Schordan and F. Rastello

Propagating Information Using SSA
There are several analyses that propagate information through the SSA graph.
Chapter 8 gives a general description of the mechanism. It shows how SSA form
facilitates the design and implementation of analyses equivalent to traditional data-
flow analyses and how the SSA property serves to reduce analysis time and memory
consumption. The presented Propagation Engine is an extension of the well-known
approach by Wegman and Zadeck [303] for sparse conditional constant propagation.
The basic algorithm is not limited to constant propagation and can be used to solve
a broad class of data-flow problems more efficiently than the iterative work list
algorithm for solving data-flow equations. The basic idea is to directly propagate
information computed at the unique definition of a variable to all its uses.
Liveness
A data-flow analysis potentially iterates up to as many times as the maximum loop
depth of a given program until it stabilizes and terminates. In contrast, the properties
of SSA form mean liveness analysis can be accelerated without the requirement of
any iteration to reach a fixed point: it only requires at most two passes over the CFG.
Also, an extremely simple liveness check is possible by providing a query system
to answer questions such as “is variable v live at location q?”. Chapter 9 shows
how the loop nesting forest and dominance property can be exploited to devise very
efficient liveness analyses.
Loop Tree and Induction Variables
Chapter 10 illustrates how capturing properties of the SSA graph itself (circuits)
can be used to determine a very specific subset of program variables: induction
variables. The induction variable analysis is based on the detection of self-
references in the SSA representation and the extraction of the loop tree, which
can be performed on the SSA graph as well. The presented algorithm translates
the SSA representation into a representation of polynomial functions, describing
the sequence of values that SSA variables hold during the execution of loops.
The number of iterations is computed as the minimum solution of a polynomial
inequality with integer solutions, also called Diophantine inequality.
Redundancy Elimination
The elimination of redundant computations is an important compiler optimization.
A computation is fully redundant if it has also occurred earlier regardless of control
flow, and a computation is partially redundant if it has occurred earlier only on
certain paths. Following the program flow, once we are past the dominance frontiers,
any further occurrence of a redundant expression is partially redundant, whereas
any occurrence before the dominance frontier is fully redundant. The difference
for the optimization is that fully redundant expressions can be deleted, whereas
for (strictly) partially redundant expressions insertions are required to eliminate the
redundancy. Thus, since partial redundancies start at dominance frontiers they are
related to SSA’s φ statements. Chapter 11 shows how the dominance frontier that
is used to insert a minimal number of φ-function for SSA construction can also
be used to minimize redundant computations. It presents the SSAPRE algorithm
7 Introduction                                                                     93

and its variant, the speculative PRE, which (possibly speculatively) perform partial
redundancy elimination (PRE). It also discusses a direct and very useful application
of the presented technique, register promotion via PRE. Unfortunately, the SSAPRE
algorithm is not capable of recognizing redundant computations among lexically
different expressions that yield the same value. Therefore, redundancy elimination
based on value analysis (GVN) is also discussed, although a description of the value-
based partial redundancy elimination (GVN-PRE) algorithm of VanDrunen [295],
which subsumes both PRE and GVN, is missing.
Alias Analysis
The book is lacking an extremely important compiler analysis, namely alias
analysis. Disambiguating pointers improves the precision and performance of
many other analyses and optimizations. To be effective, flow-sensitivity and inter-
procedurality are required but, with standard iterative data-flow analysis, lead to
serious scalability issues. The main difficulty with making alias analysis sparse is
that it is a chicken and egg problem. For each may-alias between two variables,
the associated information interferes. Assuming the extreme scenario where any
pair of variables is a pair of aliases, one necessarily needs to assume that the
modification of one potentially modifies the other. In other words, the def-use chains
are completely dense and there is no benefit in using any extended SSA form such as
HSSA form (see Chap. 16). The idea is thus to decompose the analysis into phases
where sophistication increases with sparsity. This is precisely what the staged flow-
sensitive analysis of Hardekopf and Lin [138] achieves with two “stages.” The first
stage, performing a not-so-precise auxiliary pointer analysis, creates def-use chains
used to enable sparsity in the second stage. The second stage, the primary analysis,
is then a flow-sensitive pointer analysis. An important aspect is that as long as
the auxiliary pointer analysis in the first stage is sound, the primary flow-sensitive
analysis in the second stage will also be sound and will be at least as precise as a
traditional “non-sparse” flow-sensitive analysis. The sparsity improves the runtime
of the analysis, but it does not reduce precision.
    Another way to deal with pointers in SSA form is to use a variant of SSA,
called partial SSA, which requires variables to be divided into two classes: one
class that contains only variables that are never referenced by pointers, and another
class containing all those variables that can be referenced by pointers (address-taken
variables). To avoid complications involving pointers in SSA form, only variables
in the first class are put into SSA form. This technique is used in modern compilers
such as GCC and LLVM.
