Chapter 9
Liveness

Benoît Boissinot and Fabrice Rastello

This chapter illustrates the use of strict SSA properties to simplify and accelerate
liveness analysis, which determines, for all variables, the set of program points
where these variables are live, i.e., their values are potentially used by subsequent
operations. Liveness information is essential to solve storage assignment problems,
eliminate redundancies, and perform code motion. For instance, optimizations like
software pipelining, trace scheduling, register-sensitive redundancy elimination (see
Chap. 11), if-conversion (see Chap. 20), as well as register allocation (see Chap. 22)
heavily rely on liveness information.
   Traditionally, liveness information is obtained by data-flow analysis: liveness sets
are computed for all basic blocks and variables simultaneously by solving a set of
data-flow equations. These equations are usually solved by an iterative algorithm,
propagating information backwards through the control-flow graph (CFG) until a
fixed point is reached and the liveness sets stabilize. The number of iterations
depends on the control-flow structure of the considered program, and more precisely
on the structure of its loops.
   In this chapter, we show that, for strict SSA form programs, the live range of a
variable has valuable properties that can be expressed in terms of the loop nesting
forest of the CFG and its corresponding directed acyclic graph, the forward-CFG.

B. Boissinot
ENS Lyon, Lyon, France
e-mail: benoit.boissinot@ens-lyon.org
F. Rastello (?)
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022    107
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_9
108                                                           B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

Informally speaking, and restricted to reducible CFGs, those properties for a
variable v are:
• v is live at a program point q if and only if v is live at the entry h of the largest
  loop/basic block (highest node in the loop nesting forest) that contains q but not
  the definition of v.
• v is live at h if and only if there is a path in the forward-CFG from h to a use of v
  that does not contain the definition.
   A direct consequence of this property is the possible design of a data-flow
algorithm that computes liveness sets without the requirement of any iteration to
reach a fixed point: at most, two passes over the CFG are necessary. The first
pass, very similar to traditional data-flow analysis, computes partial liveness sets by
traversing the forward-CFG backwards. The second pass refines the partial liveness
sets and computes the final solution by propagating forwards along the loop nesting
forest. For the sake of clarity, we first present the algorithm for reducible CFGs.
Irreducible CFGs can be handled with a slight variation of the algorithm, with no
need to modify the CFG itself.
   Another approach to liveness analysis more closely follows the classical defini-
tion of liveness: a variable is live at a program point q if q belongs to a path of
the CFG leading from a definition of that variable to one of its uses without passing
through another definition of the same variable. Therefore, the set of program points
where a variable is live, in other words its live range, can be computed using a
backward traversal starting on its uses and stopping when its definition is reached
(unique under SSA).
   One application of the properties of live ranges under strict SSA form is the
design of a simple liveness check algorithm. In contrast to classical data-flow
analyses, a liveness check does not provide the set of variables live at a block,
but its characteristic function. A liveness check provides a query system to answer
questions such as “Is variable v live at location q?” Its main features are:
1. The algorithm itself consists of two parts, a pre-computation part, and an
   online part executed at each liveness query. It is not based on setting up and
   subsequently solving data-flow equations.
2. The pre-computation is independent of variables, it only depends on the structure
   of the control-flow graph; Hence, pre-computed information remains valid when
   variables or their uses are added or removed.
3. An actual query uses the def-use chain of the variable in question and determines
   the answer essentially by testing membership in pre-computed sets of basic
   blocks.
   We will first need to repeat basic definitions relevant to our context and provide
the theoretical foundations in the next section, before presenting multiple algorithms
to compute liveness sets: The two-pass data-flow algorithm in Sect. 9.2 and the
algorithms based on path exploration in Sect. 9.4. We present the liveness check
algorithm last, in Sect. 9.3.
9 Liveness                                                                          109

9.1 Definitions

Liveness is a property that relates program points to sets of variables which are
considered to be live at these program points. Intuitively, a variable is considered
live at a given program point when its value will be used in the future of any dynamic
execution. Statically, liveness can be approximated by following paths backwards on
the control-flow graph, connecting the uses of a given variable to its definitions—or,
in the case of SSA forms, to its unique definition. The variable is said to be live at
all program points along these paths. For a CFG node q, representing an instruction
or a basic block, a variable v is live-in at q if there is a path, not containing the
definition of v, from q to a node where v is used (including q itself). It is live-out
at q if it is live-in at some direct successor of q.
    The computation of live-in and live-out sets at the entry and the exit of basic
blocks is usually termed liveness analysis. It is indeed sufficient to consider only
these sets at basic block boundaries, since liveness within a basic block is trivial to
recompute from its live-out set with a backward traversal of the block (whenever
the definition of a variable is encountered, it is pruned from the live-out set). Live-
ranges are closely related to liveness. Instead of associating program points with
sets of live variables, the live range of a variable specifies the set of program points
where that variable is live. Live ranges of programs under strict SSA form exhibit
certain useful properties (see Chap. 2), some of which can be exploited for register
allocation (see Chap. 22).
    The special behaviour of φ-functions often causes confusion about where exactly
its operands are actually used and defined. For a regular operation, variables are
used and defined where the operation takes place. However, the semantics of φ-
functions (and, in particular, the actual place of φ-uses) should be defined carefully,
especially when dealing with SSA destruction. In algorithms for SSA destruction
(see Chap. 21), a use in a φ-function is considered live somewhere inside the
corresponding direct predecessor block, but, depending on the algorithm and, in
particular, the way copies are inserted, it may or may not be considered as live-
out for that predecessor block. Similarly, the definition of a φ-function is always
considered to be at the beginning of the block, but, depending on the algorithm,
it may or may not be marked as live-in for the block. To make the description
of algorithms easier, we follow the same definition as the one used in Chap. 21,
Sect. 21.2:
Definition 9.1 (Liveness for φ-Function Operands—Multiplexing Mode) For a
φ-function a0 = φ(a1 , . . . , an ) in block B0 , where ai comes from block Bi :
• Its definition-operand is considered to be at the entry of B0 , in other words
  variable a0 is live-in of B0 .
• Its use operands are at the exit of the corresponding direct predecessor basic
  blocks, in other words, variable ai is live-out of basic block Bi .
110                                                             B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

  This corresponds to placing a copy a0 ← ai on each edge from Bi to B0 .
The data-flow equations given below and the algorithms presented follow the same
semantics. They require minor modifications when other φ-semantics are desired.

9.2 Data-Flow Approaches

A well-known and frequently used approach to compute the live-in and live-out sets
of basic blocks is backward data-flow analysis (see Chap. 8, Sect. 8.1). The liveness
sets are given by a set of equations that relate upward-exposed uses and definitions
to live-in and live-out sets. We say a use is upward-exposed in a block when there is
no local definition preceding it, i.e., the live range “escapes” the block at the top. The
sets of upward-exposed uses and definitions do not change during liveness analysis
and can thus, for each block B, be pre-computed:

             Defs(B) :               variables defined (φexcluded) in B
             Uses(B) :                 variables used in B (φ excluded)
UpwardExposed(B) : variables used in B without any preceding definition in B
         PhiDefs(B) :             variables defined by a φ at the entry of B
         PhiUses(B) : variables used in a φ at the entry of a direct successor of B

   With these pre-computed sets, the data-flow equations can be written as:

   LiveIn(B) = PhiDefs(B) ∪ UpwardExposed(B) ∪ (LiveOut(B) \ Defs(B))
               ?
  LiveOut(B) = S∈directsuccs(B) (LiveIn(S) \ PhiDefs(S)) ∪ PhiUses(B)

   Informally, the live-in of block B are the variables defined in the φ-functions
of B, those used in B (and not defined in B), and those which are just “passing
through.” On the other hand, the live-out are those that must be live for a direct
successor S, i.e., either live-in of S (but not defined in a φ-function of S) or used in
a φ-function of S.

9.2.1 Liveness Sets on Reducible Graphs

Instead of computing a fixed point, we show that liveness information can be derived
in two passes over the control-flow graph. The first version of the algorithm requires
the CFG to be reducible. We then show that arbitrary control-flow graphs can be
handled elegantly and with no additional cost, except for a cheap pre-processing
step on the loop nesting forest.
9 Liveness                                                                                  111

Fig. 9.1 An example of a
                                                                                    1
reducible CFG. Forward-CFG
is represented using full
edges; back edges are                                                               2
thickened. Backward pass on
forward-CFG sets v as live-in
of node 5, but not of node 2.                                             10        3 v ← ...
Forward pass on loop nesting
forest then sets v as live at
node 6 but not at node 7                                                        4       8

                                                                      ... ← v
                                                                                5       9

  The key properties of live ranges under strict SSA form on a reducible CFG that
we exploit for this purpose can be outlined as follow:
1. Let q be a CFG node that does not contain the definition d of a variable, and h be
   the header of the maximal loop containing q but not d. If such a maximal loop
   does not exist, then let h = q.
       The variable is live-in at q if and only if there exists a forward path from h to
   a use of the variable without going through the definition d.
2. If a variable is live-in at the header of a loop then it is live at all nodes inside the
   loop.
   As an example, consider the code of Fig. 9.1. For q = 6, the header of the largest
loop containing 6 but not the definition d in 3 is h = 5. As a forward path (down
edges) exists from 3 to 5, variable v is live-in at 5. It is thus also live in all nodes
inside the loop, in particular, in node 6. On the other hand, for q = 7, the largest
“loop” containing 7 but not 3 is 7 itself. As there is no forward path from 7 to any
use (node 5), v is not live-in of 7 (note that v is not live-in of 2 either).
   Those two properties pave the way for describing the two steps that make up our
liveness set algorithm:
1. A backward pass propagates partial liveness information upwards using a post-
   order traversal of the forward-CFG;
2. The partial liveness sets are then refined by traversing the loop nesting forest,
   propagating liveness from loop-headers down to all basic blocks within loops.
Algorithm 9.1 shows the necessary initialization and the high-level structure to
compute liveness in two passes.
112                                                                  B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

 Algorithm 9.1: Two-pass liveness analysis: reducible CFG
 1   foreach basic block B do
 2       mark B as unprocessed
 3 DAG_DFS(r)                                                         ? r is the CFG root node
 4 foreach root node L of the loop nesting forest do
 5     LoopTree_DFS(L)

    The post-order traversal is shown in Algorithm 9.2, which performs a simple
depth-first search and gives partial liveness sets to every basic block of the CFG.
The algorithm roughly corresponds to the pre-computation step of the traditional
iterative data-flow analysis; however, back edges are not considered during the
traversal. Recalling the definition of liveness for φ-functions, PhiUses(B) denotes
the set of live-out variables from basic block B due to uses by φ-functions in direct
successors of B. Similarly, PhiDefs(B) denotes the set of variables defined by a
φ-function in B.

 Algorithm 9.2: Partial liveness, with post-order traversal
 1 Function DAG_DFS(block B)
 2    foreach S ∈ directsuccs(B) such that (B, S) is not a back edge do
 3         if S is unprocessed then DAG_DFS(S)
 4       Live ← PhiUses(B)
 5       foreach S ∈ directsuccs(B) such that (B, S) is not a back edge do
 6           Live ← Live ∪ (LiveIn(S) \ PhiDefs(S))
 7       LiveOut(B) ← Live
 8       foreach program point p in B, backwards, do
 9           remove variables defined at p from Live
10           add uses at p to Live
11       LiveIn(B) ← Live ∪ PhiDefs(B)
12       mark B as processed

    The next phase, which traverses the loop nesting forest, is shown in Algo-
rithm 9.3. The live-in and live-out sets of all basic blocks within a loop are unified
with the liveness sets of its loop-header.

 Algorithm 9.3: Propagate live variables within loop bodies
 1 Function LoopTree_DFS(node N of the loop nesting forest)
 2    if N is a loop node then
 3         BN ← Block(N )                                              ? The loop-header of N
 4         LiveLoop ← LiveIn(BN ) \ PhiDefs(BN )
 5         foreach M ∈ Children(N ) do
 6              BM ← Block(M)                                          ? Loop-header or block
 7              LiveIn(BM ) ← LiveIn(BM ) ∪ LiveLoop
 8              LiveOut(BM ) ← LiveOut(BM ) ∪ LiveLoop
 9              LoopTree_DFS(M)
9 Liveness                                                                          113

Fig. 9.2 Bad case for              a ← ... 1                        Lr
iterative data-flow analysis

                                   ... ← a   2                 1         L2

                                             3                       2         L3

                                                                          3          4
                                             4

                                   Control-flow graph               Loop nesting forest

Example 9.1 The CFG of Fig. 9.2a is a pathological case for iterative data-flow
analysis. The pre-computation phase does not mark variable a as live throughout
the two loops. An iteration is required for every loop nesting level until the final
solution is computed. In our algorithm, after the CFG traversal, the traversal of the
loop nesting forest (Fig. 9.2b) propagates the missing liveness information from the
loop-header of loop L2 down to all blocks within the loop’s body and all inner loops,
i.e., blocks 3 and 4 of L3 .

9.2.1.1    Correctness

The first pass propagates the liveness sets using a post-order traversal of the forward-
CFG, Gfwd , obtained by removing all back edges from the CFG G. The first two
lemmas show that this pass correctly propagates liveness information to the loop-
headers of the original CFG.
Lemma 9.1 Let G be a reducible CFG, v an SSA variable, and d its definition. If L
is a maximal loop not containing d, then v is live-in at the loop-header h of L iff
there is a path in Gfwd (i.e., back edge free) from h to a use of v that does not go
through d.
Lemma 9.2 Let G be a reducible CFG, v an SSA variable, and d its definition.
Let p be a node of G such that all loops containing p also contain d. Then v is live-
in at p iff there is a path in Gfwd , from p to a use of v that does not go through d.
   Pointers to formal proofs are provided in the last section of this chapter. The
important property used in the proof is the dominance property that requires the full
live range of a variable to be dominated by its definition d. As a consequence, any
back edge part of the live range is dominated by d, and the associated loop cannot
contain d.
   Algorithm 9.2, which propagates liveness information along the DAG Gfwd , can
only mark variables as live-in if they are indeed live-in. Furthermore, if, after this
propagation, a variable v is missing in the live-in set of a CFG node p, Lemma 9.2
114                                                           B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

shows that p belongs to a loop that does not contain the definition of v. Let L be
such a maximal loop. According to Lemma 9.1, v is correctly marked as live-in
at the header of L. The next lemma shows that the second pass of the algorithm
(Algorithm 9.3) correctly adds variables to the live-in and live-out sets where they
are missing.
Lemma 9.3 Let G be a reducible CFG, L a loop, and v an SSA variable. If v is
live-in at the loop-header of L, it is live-in and live-out at every CFG node in L.
   The intuition is straightforward: a loop is a strongly connected component, and
because d is live-in of L, d cannot be part of L.

9.2.2 Liveness Sets on Irreducible Flow Graphs

The algorithms based on loops described above are only valid for reducible graphs.
We can also derive an algorithm that works for irreducible graphs, as follows:
transform the irreducible graph into a reducible graph, such that the liveness in both
graphs is equivalent. First of all we would like to stress two points:
1. We do not require the transformed graph to be semantically equivalent to the
   original one, only isomorphism of liveness is required.
2. We do not actually modify the graph in practice, but Algorithm 9.2 can be
   changed to simulate the modification of some edges on the fly.
    There are loop nesting forest representations with possibly multiple headers per
irreducible loop. For the sake of clarity (and simplicity of implementation), we
consider a representation where each loop has a unique entry node as header. In
this case, the transformation simply relies on redirecting any edge s → t arriving in
the middle of a loop to the header of the outermost loop (if it exists) that contains t
but not s. The example of Fig. 9.3 illustrates this transformation, with the modified
edge highlighted. Considering the associated loop nesting forest (with nodes 2, 5,
and 8 as loop-headers), edge 9 → 6 is redirected to node 5.
    Obviously the transformed code does not have the same semantics as the
original one. But, because a loop is a strongly connected component, the dominance
relationship is unchanged. As an example, the immediate dominator of node 5 is 3,
in both the original and the transformed CFG. For this reason, any variable live-in
of loop L5 —thus live everywhere in the loop—will be live on any path from 3 to
the loop. Redirecting an incoming edge to another node of the loop—in particular,
the header—does not change this behaviour.
    To avoid building this transformed graph explicitly, an elegant alternative is to
modify the CFG traversal in Algorithm 9.2. Whenever an entry-edge s → t is
encountered during the traversal, instead of visiting t, we visit the header of the
largest loop containing t and not s. This header node is nothing else than the highest
ancestor of t in the loop nesting forest that is not an ancestor of s. We represent
9 Liveness                                                                                            115

                1                            1

                2                            2
                                                                                Lr
                                                                    1                    10
       10       3                   10       3
                                                                                L2
            4       8                    4       8          2
                                                                                                      7
                                                                3
                                                                        4                    L8
                                                                                L5
            5       9                    5       9
                                                                                         8        9
                                                                            5        6
            6                            6

            7                            7

    Irreducible CFG                Reducible CFG                    Loop nesting forest

Fig. 9.3 A reducible CFG derived from an irreducible CFG, using the loop nesting forest. The
transformation redirects edges arriving inside a loop to the loop-header (here 9 → 6 into 9 → 5)

such as node as t.OLE (s) (for “Outermost Loop Excluding”). As an example in
Fig. 9.3, considering edge 9 → 6, the highest ancestor of 6 not an ancestor of 9 is
9.OLE (6) = L5 . Overall, the transformation amounts to replacing all occurrences
of S by S.OLE (B) at Lines 3 and 6 of Algorithm 9.2, which allows it to handle
irreducible control-flow graphs.

9.2.3 Computing the Outermost Excluding Loop (OLE)

Our approach potentially involves many outermost excluding loop queries, espe-
cially for the liveness check algorithm, as developed further. An efficient implemen-
tation of OLE is required. The technique proposed here and shown in Algorithm 9.5
is to pre-compute the set of ancestors from the loop-tree for every node. A simple set
operation can then find the node we are looking for: the ancestors of the definition
node are removed from the ancestors of the query point. From the remaining
ancestors, we pick the shallowest. Using bitsets for encoding the set of ancestors
of a given node, indexed with a topological order of the loop-tree, these operations
are easily implemented. The removal is a bit inversion followed by a bitwise “and”
operation, and the shallowest node is found by searching for the first set bit in the
bitset. Since the number of loops (and thus the number loop-headers) is rather small,
the bitsets are themselves small as well and this optimization does not result in much
wasted space.
116                                                                B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

   Consider a topological indexing of loop-headers: n.LTindex (n being a loop-
header) or reciprocally i.node (i being an index). For each node, we associate a
bitset (indexed by loop-headers) of all its ancestors in the loop-tree: n.ancestors.
This can be computed using any topological traversal of the loop-tree by a
call of DFS_COMPUTE_ANCESTORS(Lr ). Note that some compiler intermedi-
ate representations sometimes consider Lr as a loop-header. Considering so in
DFS_COMPUTE_ANCESTORS will not spoil the behaviour of OLE.

 Algorithm 9.4: Compute the loop nesting forest ancestors
 1 Function DFS_compute_ancestors(node n)
 2    if n ?= Lr then
 3          n.ancestors ← n.LTparent.ancestors
 4    else
 5          n.ancestors ← ∅                                                   ? empty bitset
 6     if n.isLoopHeader then
 7          n.ancestors.add(n.LTindex)
 8     foreach s in n.LTchildren do
 9         DFS_COMPUTE_ANCESTORS(s)

   Using this information, finding the outermost excluding loop can be done by
simple bitset operations as in Algorithm 9.5.

 Algorithm 9.5: Outermost excluding loop
 1 Function OLE(node self, node b)
 2    nCA ← bitset_and(self .ancestors, bitset_not(b.ancestors))
 3    if nCA.isempty then
 4         return self
 5    else
 6         return nCA.bitset_leading_set.node

Example 9.2 Consider the example of Fig. 9.3c again and suppose the loops L2 ,
L8 , and L5 are, respectively, indexed 0, 1, and 2. Using big-endian notations for
bitsets, Algorithm 9.4 would give binary labels 110 to node 9 and 101 to node 6. The
outermost loop containing 6 but not 9 is given by the leading bit of 101 ∧ ¬110 =
001, i.e., L5 .
9 Liveness                                                                            117

9.3 Liveness Check Using Loop Nesting Forest and Forward
    Reachability

In contrast to liveness sets, the liveness check does not provide the set of variables
live at a block, but provides a query system to answer questions such as “is
variable v live at location q?” Such a framework is well suited to tree scan based
register allocation (see Chap. 22), SSA destruction (see Chap. 21), or Hyperblock
scheduling (see Chap. 18). Most register-pressure aware algorithms such as code-
motion are not designed to take advantage of a liveness check query system and
still require sets. This query system can obviously be built on top of pre-computed
liveness sets. Queries in O(1) are possible, at least for basic block boundaries,
providing the use of sparsesets or bitsets to allow for efficient element-wise queries.
If sets are only stored at basic block boundaries, to allow a query system at
instruction granularity, it is possible to use the list of uses of variables or backward
scans. Constant time, worst-case complexity is lost in this scenario and liveness
sets that have to be incrementally updated at each (even minor) code transformation
can be avoided and replaced by less memory-consuming data structures that only
depend on the CFG.
    In the following, we consider the live-in query of variable a at node q. To
avoid notational overhead, let a be defined in the CFG node d = def (a) and let
u ∈ uses(a) be a node where a is used. Suppose that q is strictly dominated by
d (otherwise v cannot be live at q). Lemmas 9.1–9.3 given in Sect. 9.2.1.1 can be
rephrased as follows:
1. Let h be the header of the maximal loop containing q but not d. Let h be q if
   such maximal loop does not exist. Then v is live-in at h if and only if there exists
   a forward path that goes from h to u.
2. If v is live-in at the header of a loop then it is live at any node inside the loop.
    In other words, v is live-in at q if and only if there exists a forward path from h to
u where h, if it exists, is the header of the maximal loop containing q but not d, and
q itself otherwise. Given the forward control-flow graph and the loop nesting forest,
finding out if a variable is live at some program point can be done in two steps.
First, if there exists a loop containing the program point q and not the definition,
pick the header of the biggest such loop instead as the query point. Then check for
reachability from q to any use of the variable in the forward CFG. As explained
in Sect. 9.2.2, for irreducible CFG, the modified-forward CFG that redirects any
edge s → t to the loop-header of the outermost loop containing t but excluding s
(t.OLE (s)), has to be used instead. Correctness is proved from the theorems used
for liveness sets.
    Algorithm 9.6 puts a little bit more effort into providing a query system at
instruction granularity. If q is in the same basic block as d (lines 8–13), then v
is live at q if and only if there is a use outside the basic block, or inside but after
q. If h is a loop-header then v is live at q if and only if a use is forward reachable
from h (lines 19–20). Otherwise, if the use is in the same basic block as q it must be
118                                                            B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

after q to bring the variable live at q (lines 17–18). In this pseudo-code, upper case
is used for basic blocks while lower case is used for program points at instruction
granularity. “def(a)” is an operand. “uses(a)” is a set of operands. “basicBlock(u)”
returns the basic block containing the operand u. Given the semantics of the φ-
function instruction, the basic block returned by this function for a φ-function
operand can be different from the block where the instruction textually occurs. Also,
“u.order” provides the corresponding (increasing) ordering in the basic block. For
a φ-function operand, the ordering number might be greater than the maximum
ordering of the basic block if the semantics of the φ-function places the uses
on outgoing edges of the direct predecessor block. Q.OLE (D) corresponds to
Algorithm 9.5 given in Sect. 9.2.3. forwardReachable(H, U ), which tells whether
U is reachable in the modified-forward CFG, will be described later.

 Algorithm 9.6: Live-in check
 1 Function IsLiveIn(programPoint q, var a)
 2    d ← def (a)
 3    D ← basicBlock(d)
 4    Q ← basicBlock(q)
            ?                                           ?
 5    if not D sdom Q or (D = Q and order(d) < order(q)) then
 6         return false
 7     if Q = D then
 8         foreach u in uses(a) do
 9             U ← basicBlock(u)
10             if U ?= D or order(q) ≤ order(u) then
11                  return true

12         return false
13     H ← Q.OLE (D)
14     foreach u in uses(a) do
15         U ← basicBlock(u)
16         if (not isLoopHeader(H )) and U = Q and order(u) < order(q) then
17              continue
18         if forward Reachable(H, U ) then
19              return true

20     return false

   The live-out check algorithm, given by Algorithm 9.7, only differs from live-in
check in lines 5, 11, and 17, which involve ordering comparisons. In line 5, if q is
equal to d it cannot be live-in while it might be live-out; in lines 11 and 17 if q is at
a use point it makes it live-in but not necessarily live-out.
9 Liveness                                                                           119

 Algorithm 9.7: Live-out check
 1 Function IsLiveOut(programPoint q, var a)
 2    d ← def (a)
 3    D ← basicBlock(d)
 4    Q ← basicBlock(q)
            ?                                           ?
 5    if not D sdom Q or (D = Q and order(d) ≤ order(q)) then
 6         return false                         ? q must be dominated by the definition
 7     if Q = D then
 8         foreach u in uses(a) do
 9             U ← basicBlock(u)
10             if U ?= D or order(q) < order(u) then
11                  return true

12           return false
13     H ← Q.OLE (D)
14     foreach u in uses(a) do
15         U ← basicBlock(u)
16         if (not isLoopHeader(H )) and U = Q and order(u) ≤ order(q) then
17              continue
18           if forwardReachable(H, U ) then
19                return true

20     return false

9.3.1 Computing Modified-Forward Reachability

The liveness check query system relies on pre-computations for efficient OLE and
forwardReachable queries. The outermost excluding loop is identical to the one
used for liveness sets. We explain how to compute modified-forward reachability
here (i.e., forward reachability on transformed CFG to handle irreducibility). In
practice we do not explicitly build the modified-forward graph. To efficiently
compute modified-forward reachability we simply need to traverse the modified-
forward graph in reverse topological order. A post-order initiated by a call to the
recursive function DFS_Compute_forwardReachable(r) (Algorithm 9.8) will do the
job. Bitsets can be used to efficiently implement sets of basic blocks. Once forward
reachability has been pre-computed this way, forwardReachable(H, U ) returns true
if and only if U ∈ H.forwardReachable.

9.4 Liveness Sets Using Path Exploration

Another, maybe more intuitive, way of calculating liveness sets is closely related to
the definition of the live range of a given variable. As recalled earlier, a variable is
live at a program point p, if p belongs to a path of the CFG leading from a definition
120                                                                 B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

 Algorithm 9.8: Computation of modified-forward reachability using a traversal
 along a reverse topological order
 1 Function DFS_Compute_forwardReachable(block N )
 2    N.forwardReachable ← ∅
 3    N.forwardReachable.add(N )
 4    foreach S ∈ directsuccs(N ) if (N, S) is not a back edge do
 5         H ← S.OLE (N )
 6         if H.forwardReachable = ⊥ then
 7             DFS_Compute_forwardReachable(H )
 8          N.forwardReachable ← N.forwardReachable ∪ H.forwardReachable

of that variable to one of its uses without passing through the definition. Therefore,
the live range of a variable can be computed using a backward traversal starting at
its uses and stopping when its (unique) definition is reached.
    Actual implementation of this idea could be done in several ways. In particular,
the order along which use operands are processed, in addition to the way liveness
sets are represented, can substantially impact the performance. The one we choose
to develop here allows the use of a simple stack-like set representation which avoids
any expensive set-insertion operations and set-membership tests. The idea is to
process use operands variable by variable. In other words, the processing of different
variables is not intermixed, i.e., the processing of one variable is completed before
the processing of another variable begins.
    Depending on the particular compiler framework, a pre-processing step that
performs a full traversal of the program (i.e., the instructions) might be required
in order to derive the def-use chains for all variables, i.e., a list of all uses for each
SSA variable. The traversal of the variable list and processing of its uses thanks to
def-use chains is depicted in Algorithm 9.9.
    Note that, in strict SSA form, in a given block, no use can appear before a
definition. Thus, if v is live-out or used in a block B, it is live-in iff it is not
defined in B. This leads to the code of Algorithm 9.10 for path exploration. Here,
the liveness sets are implemented using a stack-like data structure.

 Algorithm 9.9: Compute liveness sets by variable using def-use chains
 1 Function Compute_LiveSets_SSA_ByVar(CFG)
 2    foreach variable v do
 3         foreach block B such that v ∈ Uses(B) ∪ PhiUses(B) do
 4             if v ∈ PhiUses(B) then           ? Used in the φ of a direct successor block
 5                  LiveOut(B) = LiveOut(B) ∪ {v}
 6              Up_and_Mark_Stack(B, v)
9 Liveness                                                                          121

 Algorithm 9.10: Optimized path exploration using a stack-like data structure
 1 Function Up_and_Mark_Stack(B, v)
 2    if v ∈ Defs(B) then return                           ? Killed in the block, stop
 3    if top(LiveIn(B)) = v then return              ? Propagation already done, stop
 4    push(LiveIn(B), v)
 5    if v ∈ PhiDefs(B) then return                   ? Do not propagate φ definitions
 6    foreach P ∈ CFG_directpreds(B) do                        ? Propagate backwards
 7         if top(LiveOut(P )) ?= v then
 8              push(LiveOut(P ), v)
 9           Up_and_Mark_Stack(P , v)

9.5 Further Reading

Liveness information is usually computed with iterative data-flow analysis, which
goes back to Kildall [166]. The algorithms are, however, not specialized to the
computation of liveness sets and overhead may incur. Several strategies are possible,
leading to different worst-case complexities and performances in practice. Round-
robin algorithms propagate information according to a fixed block ordering derived
from a depth-first spanning tree, and iterate until it stabilizes. The complexity of
this scheme was analysed by Kam et al. [157]. Node listing algorithms specify, a
priori, the overall sequence of nodes, where repetitions are allowed, along which
data-flow equations are applied. Kennedy [162] devises for structured flow graphs,
node listings of size 2|V |, with |V | the number of control-flow nodes, and mentions
the existence of node listings of size O (|V | log(|V |)) for reducible flow graphs.
Worklist algorithms focus on blocks that may need to be updated because the
liveness sets of their successors (for backward problems) changed. Empirical results
by Cooper et al. [85] indicate that the order in which basic blocks are processed is
critical and directly impacts the number of iterations. They showed that, in practice,
a mixed solution called “single stack worklist” based on a worklist initialized with
a round-robin order is the most efficient for liveness analysis.
    Alternative ways to solve data-flow problems belong to the family of elimination-
based algorithms [251]. Through recursive reductions of the CFG, variables of the
data-flow system are successively eliminated and equations are reduced until the
CFG reduces to a single node. The best, but unpractical, worst-case complexity
elimination algorithm has an almost-linear complexity O(|E|α(|E|)). It requires the
CFG (resp. the reverse CFG) to be reducible for a forward (resp. backward) analysis.
For non-reducible flow graphs, none of the existing approaches can guarantee a
worst-case complexity better than O(|E|3 ). In practice, irreducible CFGs are rare,
but liveness analysis is a backward data-flow problem, which frequently leads to
irreducible reverse CFGs.
    Gerlek et al. [126] use the so-called λ-operators to collect upward-exposed uses
at control-flow split points. More specifically, the λ-operators are placed at the
iterated dominance frontiers, computed on the reverse CFG, of the set of uses of
122                                                           B. Boissinot and F. Rastello

a variable. These λ-operators and the other uses of variables are chained together
and liveness is efficiently computed on this graph representation. The technique
of Gerlek et al. can be considered as a precursor of the live variable analysis
based on the Static Single Information (SSI) form conjectured by Singer [261] and
revisited by Boissinot et al. [37]. In both cases, the insertion of pseudo-instructions
guarantees that any definition is post-dominated by a use.
    Another approach to computing liveness was proposed by Appel [10]. Instead
of computing the liveness information for all variables at the same time, variables
are handled individually by exploring paths in the CFG starting from variable uses.
Using logic programming, McAllester [197] presented an equivalent approach to
show that liveness analysis can be performed in time proportional to the number
of instructions and variables. However, his theoretical analysis is limited to a
restricted input language with simple conditional branches and instructions. A more
generalized analysis is given in Chapter 2 of the habilitation thesis of Rastello [239],
in terms of both theoretical complexity and practical evaluation (Sect. 9.4 describes
a path-exploration technique restricted to SSA programs).
    The loop nesting forest considered in this chapter corresponds to the one
obtained using Havlak’s algorithm [142]. A more generalized definition exists and
corresponds to the minimal loop nesting forest as defined by Ramalingam [236]. The
handling of any minimal loop nesting forest is also detailed in Chapter 2 of [239].
    Handling of irreducible CFG can be done through CFG transformations such as
node splitting [2, 149]. Such a transformation can lead to an exponential growth in
the number of nodes. Ramalingam [236] proposed a transformation (different from
the one presented here but also without any exponential growth) that only maintains
the dominance property (not the full semantic).
    Finding the maximal loop not containing a node s but containing a node t (OLE)
is a problem similar to finding the least common ancestor (LCA) of the two nodes s
and t in the rooted loop-nested forest: the loop in question is the only direct child
of LCA(s, t), ancestor of t. As described in [23], an LCA query can be reduced to a
Range Minimum Query (RMQ) problem that can itself be answered in O(1), with a
pre-computation of O(n). The adaptation of LCA to provide an efficient algorithm
for OLE queries is detailed in Chapter 2 of [239].
    This chapter is a short version of Chapter 2 of [239] which, among other details,
contains formal proofs and handling of different φ-function semantics. Sparsesets
are described by Cooper and Torczon [83].
