Chapter 10
Loop Tree and Induction Variables

Sebastian Pop and Albert Cohen

This chapter presents an extension of SSA whereby the extraction of the reducible
loop tree can be done only on the SSA graph itself. This extension also captures
reducible loops in the CFG. This chapter first illustrates this property and then shows
its usefulness through the problem of induction variable recognition.

10.1 Part of the CFG and Loop Tree Can Be Exposed
     Through the SSA

During the construction of the SSA representation based on a CFG representation, a
large part of the CFG information is translated into the SSA representation. As the
construction of the SSA has precise rules to place the φ-nodes in special points of
the CFG (i.e., at the merge of control-flow branches), by identifying patterns of uses
and definitions, it is possible to expose a part of the CFG structure through the SSA
representation.
    Furthermore, it is possible to identify higher-level constructs inherent to the CFG
representation, such as strongly connected components of basic blocks (or reducible
loops), based only on the patterns of the SSA definitions and uses. The induction
variable analysis presented in this chapter is based on the detection of self-references
in the SSA representation and on its characterization.

S. Pop
Amazon Web Services, Austin, Texas, USA
e-mail: spop@amazon.com
A. Cohen ()
Google, Paris, France
e-mail: albertcohen@google.com

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022     123
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_10
124                                                                             S. Pop and A. Cohen

   This first section shows that the classical SSA representation is not sufficient to
represent the semantics of the original program. We will see the minimal amount
of information that has to be added to the classical SSA representation in order to
represent the loop information: similar to the φexit -function used in the gated SSA
presented in Chap. 14, the loop-closed SSA form adds an extra variable at the end
of a loop for each variable defined in a loop and used after the loop.

10.1.1 An SSA Representation Without the CFG

In the classical definition of SSA, the CFG provides the skeleton of the program:
basic blocks contain assignment statements defining SSA variable names, and the
basic blocks with multiple direct predecessors contain φ-nodes. Let us look at what
happens when, starting from a classical SSA representation, we remove the CFG.
   In order to remove the CFG, imagine a pretty printer function that dumps only
the arithmetic instructions of each basic block and skips the control instructions
of an imperative program by traversing the CFG structure in any order. Does
the representation obtained from this pretty printer contain enough information to
enable us to compute the same thing as the original program?1 Let us see what
happens with an example in its CFG-based SSA representation:

After removing the CFG structure, listing the definitions in an arbitrary order, we
could obtain this:

1 To simplify the discussion, we consider the original program to be free of side effect instructions.
10 Loop Tree and Induction Variables                                                125

   return c
   b ← ...                                          some computation independent of a
   c ←a+b
   a ← ...                                          some computation independent of b

And this SSA code is sufficient, in the absence of side effects, to recover an order of
computation that leads to the same result as in the original program. For example,
the evaluation of this sequence of statements would produce the same result:

   b ← ...                                          some computation independent of a
   a ← ...                                          some computation independent of b
   c ←a+b
   return c

10.1.2 Natural Loop Structures on the SSA

We will now see how to represent the natural loops in the SSA form by systemati-
cally adding extra φ-nodes at the end of loops, together with extra information about
the loop-exit predicate. Supposing that the original program contains a loop:
126                                                                  S. Pop and A. Cohen

By pretty printing with a random order traversal, we could obtain this SSA code:

   x←3
   return k
   i ← φ(x, j )
   k ← φ(i)
   j ←i+1

   Note that some information is lost in this pretty printing: the exit condition of
the loop has been lost. We will have to record this information in the extension of
the SSA representation. However, the loop structure still appears through the cyclic
definition of the induction variable i. To expose it, we can rewrite this SSA code
using simple substitutions, such as:

   i ← φ(3, i + 1)
   k ← φ(i)
   return k

Thus, we have the definition of the SSA name i defined as a function of itself. This
pattern is characteristic of the existence of a loop. We remark that there are two
kinds of φ-nodes used in this example:
• Loop-φ nodes “i = φ(x, j )” (also denoted i = φentry (x, j ) as in Chap. 14) have
  an argument that contains a self-reference j and an invariant argument x: here the
  defining expression “j = i+1” contains a reference to the same loop-φ definition
  i, while x (here 3) is not part of the circuit of dependencies that involves i and j .
  Note that it is possible to define a canonical SSA form by limiting the number of
  arguments of loop-φ nodes to two.
• Close-φ nodes “k = φexit (i)” (also denoted k = φexit (i) as in Chap. 14) capture
  the last value of a name defined in a loop. Names defined in a loop can only be
  used within that loop or in the arguments of a close-φ node (which is “closing”
  the set of uses of the names defined in that loop). In a canonical SSA form, it is
  possible to limit the number of arguments of close-φ nodes to one.

10.1.3 Improving the SSA Pretty Printer for Loops

As we have seen in the example above, the exit condition of the loop disappeared
during the basic pretty printing of the SSA. To capture the semantics of the
computation of the loop, we have to specify this condition in the close-φ-node when
we exit the loop, so as to be able to derive which value will be available at the end
10 Loop Tree and Induction Variables                                                    127

of the loop. With our extension, which adds the loop-exit condition to the syntax of
the close-φ, the SSA pretty printing of the above example would be:

   x←3
   i ← φentry (x, j )
   j ←i+1
   k ← φexit (i ≥ N, i)
   return k

   So k is defined as the “first value” of i satisfying the loop- exit condition, “i ≥
N .” In the case of finite loops, this is well defined as being the first element satisfying
the loop-exit condition of the sequence defined by the corresponding loop-φ node.
   Below we will look at an algorithm that translates the SSA representation into a
representation of polynomial functions, describing the sequence of values that SSA
names take during the execution of a loop. The algorithm is restricted to the loops
that are reducible. All such loops are labeled. Note that irreducible control flow is
not forbidden: only the loops carrying self-definitions must be reducible.

10.2 Analysis of Induction Variables

The purpose of the induction variable analysis is to provide a characterization
of the sequences of values taken by a variable during the execution of a loop.
This characterization can be an exact function of the canonical induction variable
of the loop (i.e., a loop counter that starts at zero with a step of one for each
iteration of the loop) or an approximation of the values taken during the execution
of the loop represented by values in an abstract domain. In this section, we will
see a possible characterization of induction variables in terms of sequences. The
domain of sequences will be represented by chains of recurrences: as an example, a
canonical induction variable with an initial value 0 and a stride 1 that would occur
in the loop with label x will be represented by the chain of recurrences {0, +, 1}x .

10.2.1 Stride Detection

The first phase of the induction variable analysis is the detection of the strongly
connected components of the SSA. This can be performed by traversing the use-def
SSA chains and detecting that some definitions are visited twice. For a self-referring
use-def chain, it is possible to derive the step of the corresponding induction variable
as the overall effect of one iteration of the loop on the value of the loop-φ node.
When the step of an induction variable depends on another cyclic definition, one
has to further analyse the inner cycle. The analysis of the induction variable ends
when all the inner cyclic definitions used for the computation of the step have been
analysed. Note that it is possible to construct SSA graphs with strongly connected
128                                                                        S. Pop and A. Cohen

Fig. 10.1 Detection of the cyclic definition using a depth-first search traversal of the use-def
chains

components that are impossible to characterize with the chains of recurrences. This
is precisely the case of the following example which shows two inter-dependent
circuits, the first involving a and b with step c + 2, and the second involving c and
d with step a + 2. This leads to an endless loop, which must be detected.

   a ← φentry (0, b)
   c ← φentry (1, d)
   b ←c+2
   d ←a+3

   Let us now look at an example, presented in Fig. 10.1, to see how the stride
detection works. The arguments of a φ-node are analysed to determine whether
they contain self-references or are pointing towards the initial value of the induction
variable. In this example, (a) represents the use-def edge that points towards the
invariant definition. When the argument to be analysed points towards a longer use-
def chain, the full chain is traversed, as shown in (b), until a φ-node is reached.
In this example, the φ-node that is reached in (b) is different to the φ-node from
which the analysis started, and so in (c) a search starts on the uses that have not
yet been analysed. When the original φ-node is found, as in (c), the cyclic def-use
chain provides the step of the induction variable: the step is “+e” in this example.
Knowing the symbolic expression for the step of the induction variable may not
be enough, as we will see next; one has to instantiate all the symbols (“e” in the
current example) defined in the varying loop to precisely characterize the induction
variable.

10.2.2 Translation to Chains of Recurrences

Once the def-use circuit and its corresponding overall loop update expression
have been identified, it is possible to translate the sequence of values of the
induction variable to a chain of recurrences. The syntax of a polynomial chain of
10 Loop Tree and Induction Variables                                                   129

recurrence is {base, +, step}x , where base and step may be arbitrary expressions
or constants, and x is the loop with which the sequence is associated. As a chain
of recurrences represents the sequence of values taken by a variable during the
execution of a loop, the associated expression of a chain of recurrences is given
by {base, +, step}x ( x ) = base + step × x , which is a function of x , the number
of times the body of loop x has been executed.
   When base or step translates to sequences varying in outer loops, the resulting
sequence is represented by a multivariate chain of recurrences. For example,
{{0, +, 1}x , +, 2}y defines a multivariate chain of recurrences with a step of 1 in
loop x and a step of 2 in loop y, where loop y is enclosed in loop x. When
step translates into a sequence varying in the same loop, the chain of recurrences
represents a polynomial of a higher degree. For example, {3, +, {8, +, 5}x }x
represents a polynomial evolution of degree 2 in loop x. In this case, the chain of
recurrences is also written omitting the extra braces: {3, +, 8, +, 5}x. The
                                                                           semantics
of a chain of recurrences is defined using the binomial coefficient pn = p!(n−p)!
                                                                               n!
                                                                                    ,
by the equation:

                                                                    
                                                                    n
               {c0 , +, c1 , +, c2 , +, . . . , +, cn }x ( x ) =
                                                                               x
                                                                          cp       ,
                                                                               p
                                                                    p=0

with  the iteration domain vector (the iteration loop counters of all the loops in
which the chain of recurrences variates), and x the iteration counter of loop x.
This semantics is very useful in the analysis of induction variables, as it makes it
possible to split the analysis into two phases, with a symbolic representation as a
partial intermediate result:
1. First, the analysis leads to an expression where the step part “s” is left in a
   symbolic form, i.e., {c0 , +, s}x .
2. Then, by instantiating the step, i.e., s = {c1 , +, c2 }x , the chain of recur-
   rences is that of a higher-degree polynomial, i.e., {c0 , +, {c1 , +, c2 }x }x =
   {c0 , +, c1 , +, c2 }x .

10.2.3 Instantiation of Symbols and Region Parameters

The last phase of the induction variable analysis consists in the instantiation (or
further analysis) of symbolic expressions left from the previous phase. This includes
the analysis of induction variables in outer loops, computing the last value of the
counter of a preceding loop, and the propagation of closed-form expressions for
loop invariants defined earlier. In some cases, it becomes necessary to leave in a
symbolic form every definition outside a given region, and these symbols are then
called parameters of the region.
130                                                                    S. Pop and A. Cohen

   Let us look again at the example of Fig. 10.1 to see how the sequence of
values of the induction variable c is characterized with the notation of the chains
of recurrences. The first step, after the cyclic definition is detected, is the translation
of this information into a chain of recurrences: in this example, the initial value (or
base of the induction variable) is a and the step is e, and so c is represented by a
chain of recurrences {a, +, e}1 that is varying in loop number 1. The symbols are
then instantiated: a is trivially replaced by its definition, leading to {3, +, e}1 . The
analysis of e leads to the chain of recurrences {8, +, 5}1 , which is then used in the
chain of recurrences of c, {3, +, {8, +, 5}1 }1 , and is equivalent to {3, +, 8, +, 5}1 , a
polynomial of degree two:

                           F( ) = 3         +8        +5
                                        0         1        2
                                      5 2 11
                                  =      +   + 3.
                                      2    2

10.2.4 Number of Iterations and Computation
       of the End-of-Loop Value

One of the important static analyses for loops is to evaluate their trip count, i.e.,
the number of times the loop body is executed before the exit condition becomes
true. In common cases, the loop-exit condition is a comparison of an induction
variable against some constant, parameter, or other induction variables. The number
of iterations is then computed as the minimum solution of a polynomial inequality
with integer solutions, also called a Diophantine inequality. When one or more
coefficients of the Diophantine inequality are parameters, the solution is left in
parametric form. The number of iterations can also be an expression varying in
an outer loop, in which case it can be characterized using a chain of recurrences.
    Consider a scalar variable varying in an outer loop with strides dependent on
the value computed in an inner loop. The expression representing the number of
iterations in the inner loop can then be used to express the evolution function of the
scalar variable varying in the outer loop.
    For example, the following code:

   x←0
   for i = 0; i < N ; i + + do                                                    loop1
        for j = 0; j < M; j + + do                                                loop2
             x ←x+1
10 Loop Tree and Induction Variables                                                    131

would be written in loop-closed SSA form as

   x0 ← 0
   i ← φentry
        1     (0, i + 1)
   x1 ← φentry
           1   (x0 , x2 )
   x4 ← φexit
           1 (i < N, x )
   j ← φentry
         2    (0, j + 1)
   x3 ← φentry
           2   (x1 , x3 + 1)
   x2 ← φexit
           2 (j < M, x )

x3 represents the value of variable x at the end of the original imperative program.
The analysis of scalar evolutions for variable x4 would trigger the analysis of
scalar evolutions for all the other variables defined in the loop-closed SSA form,
as follows:
• First, the analysis of variable x4 would trigger the analysis of i, N, and x1 .
   – The analysis of i leads to i = {0, +, 1}1 , i.e., the canonical loop counter l1 of
     loop1 .
   – N is a parameter and is left in its symbolic form.
   – The analysis of x1 triggers the analysis of x0 and x2 :
          The analysis of x0 leads to x0 = 0.
          Analysing x2 triggers the analysis of j , M, and x3 :
               · j = {0, +, 1}2 , i.e., the canonical loop counter l2 of loop2 .
               · M is a parameter.
               · x3 = φentry
                        2    (x1 , x3 + 1) = {x1 , +, 1}2 .

          x2 = φentry
                    2    (j < M, x3 ) is then computed as the last value of x3 after loop2 ,
          i.e., it is the chain of recurrences of x3 applied to the first iteration of loop2
          that does not satisfy j < M or equivalently l2 < M. The corresponding
          Diophantine inequality l2 ≥ M has a minimum solution l2 = M. So, to
          finish the computation of the scalar evolution of x2 , we apply M to the
          scalar evolution of x3 , leading to x2 = {x1 , +, 1}2 (M) = x1 + M.
   – The scalar evolution analysis of x1 then leads to x1 = φentry
                                                             1     (x0 , x2 ) =
     φentry (x0 , x1 + M) = {x0 , +, M}1 = {0, +, M}1 .

• Finally, the analysis of x4 ends with x4 = φexit
                                              1 (i < N, x ) = {0, +, M} (N ) =
                                                         1             1
  M × N.
132                                                                       S. Pop and A. Cohen

10.3 Further Reading

Induction variable detection has been studied extensively in the past because of
its central role in loop optimizations. Wolfe [306] designed the first SSA-based
induction variable recognition technique. It abstracts the SSA graph and classifies
inductions according to a wide spectrum of patterns.
    When operating on a low-level intermediate representation with arbitrary gotos,
detecting the natural loops is the first step in the analysis of induction variables.
In general, and when operating on low-level code in particular, it is preferable to
use analyses that are more robust to complex control flows that do not resort to an
early classification into predefined patterns. Chains of recurrences [15, 167, 318]
have been proposed to characterize the sequence of values taken by a variable
during the execution of a loop [293], and it has proven to be more robust to the
presence of complex, unstructured control flows, to the characterization of induction
variables over modulo-arithmetic such as unsigned wrap-around types in C, and to
implementation in a production compiler [232].
    The formalism and presentation of this chapter are derived from the thesis work
of Sebastian Pop. The manuscript [231] contains pseudo-code and links to the
implementation of scalar evolutions in GCC since version 4.0. The same approach
has also influenced the design of LLVM’s scalar evolution, but the implementation
is different.
    Induction variable analysis is used in dependence tests for scheduling and
parallelization [308] and more recently, the extraction of short vector to SIMD
instructions [212].2 The Omega test [235] and parametric integer linear program-
ming [115] have typically been used to reason about system parametric affine
Diophantine inequalities. But in many cases, simplications and approximations
can lead to polynomial decision procedures [16]. Modern parallelizing compilers
tend to implement both kinds, depending on the context and aggressiveness of the
optimization.
    Substituting an induction variable with a closed-form expression is also useful
for the removal of the cyclic dependencies associated with the computation of
the induction variable itself [127]. Other applications include enhancements to
strength reduction and loop-invariant code motion [127], and induction variable
canonicalization (reducing induction variables to a single one in a given loop) [185].
    The number of iterations of loops can also be computed based on the charac-
terization of induction variables. This information is essential to advanced loop
analyses, such as value-range propagation [210], and enhanced dependence tests
for scheduling and parallelization [16, 235]. It also enables more opportunities for
scalar optimization when the induction variable is used after its defining loop. Loop

2 Note, however, that the computation of closed-form expressions is not required for dependence

testing itself [309].
10 Loop Tree and Induction Variables                                          133

transformations also benefit from the replacement of the end-of-loop value as this
removes scalar dependencies between consecutive loops. Another interesting use of
the end-of-loop value is the estimation of the worst-case execution time (WCET)
where an attempt is made to obtain an upper bound approximation of the time
necessary for a program to terminate.
