Chapter 12
Introduction

Vivek Sarkar and Fabrice Rastello

So far, we have introduced the foundations of SSA form and its use in different
program analyses. We now explain the need for extensions to SSA form to enable
a larger class of program analyses. The extensions arise from the fact that many
analyses need to make finer-grained distinctions between program points and data
accesses than what can be achieved by vanilla SSA form. However, these richer
flavours of extended SSA-based analyses still retain many of the benefits of SSA
form (e.g., sparse data-flow propagation) which distinguish them from classical
data-flow frameworks for the same analysis problems.

12.1 Static Single Information Form

The sparseness in vanilla SSA form arises from the observation that information for
an unaliased scalar variable can be safely propagated from its (unique) definition
to all its reaching uses without examining any intervening program points. As
an example, SSA-based constant propagation aims to compute for each single
assignment variable, the (usually over-approximated) set of possible values carried
by the definition of that variable. For instance, consider an instruction that defines a
variable a and uses two variables, b and c. An example is a = b+c. In an SSA-form
program, constant propagation will determine if a is a constant by looking directly
at the definition point of b and at the definition point of c. We say that information

V. Sarkar (?)
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
e-mail: vsarkar@gatech.edu
F. Rastello
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022     157
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_12
158                                                              V. Sarkar and F. Rastello

is propagated from these two definition points directly to the instruction a = b + c.
However, there are many analyses for which definition points are not the only source
of new information. For example, consider an if-then-else statement that uses a in
both the then and else parts. If the branch condition involves a, say a == 0, we now
have additional information that can distinguish the value of a in the then and else
parts, even though both uses have the same reaching definition. Likewise, the use of
a reference variable p in certain contexts can be the source of new information for
subsequent uses, e.g., the fact that p is non-null because no exception was thrown
at the first use.
    The goal of Chap. 13 is to present a systematic approach to deal with these
additional sources of information while still retaining the space and time benefits of
vanilla SSA form. This approach is called static single information (SSI) form, and
it involves additional renaming of variables to capture new sources of information.
For example, SSI form can provide distinct names for the two uses of a in the
then and else parts of the if-then-else statement mentioned above. This additional
renaming is also referred to as live range splitting, akin to the idea behind splitting
live ranges in optimized register allocation. The sparseness of SSI form follows
from formalization of the Partitioned Variable Lattice (PVL) problem and the
Partitioned Variable Problem (PVP), both of which establish orthogonality among
transfer functions for renamed variables. The φ-functions inserted at join nodes in
vanilla SSA form are complemented by σ -functions in SSI form that can perform
additional renaming at branch nodes and interior (instruction) nodes. Information
can be propagated in the forward and backward directions using SSI form, enabling
analyses such as range analysis (leveraging information from branch conditions)
and null-pointer analysis (leveraging information from prior uses) to be performed
more precisely than with vanilla SSA form.

12.2 Control Dependencies

So as to expose parallelism and locality, one needs to get rid of the CFG at
some points. For loop transformations, software pipelining, there is a need to
manipulate a higher degree of abstraction to represent the iteration space of nested
loops and to extend data-flow information to this abstraction. One can expose even
more parallelism (at the level of instructions) by replacing control flow by control
dependencies: the goal is either to express a predicate expression under which a
given basic block is to be executed or to select afterwards (using similar predicate
expressions) the correct value among a set of eagerly computed ones.
1. Technically, we say that SSA provides data flow (data dependencies). The goal
   is to enrich it with control dependencies. The program dependence graph (PDG)
   constitutes the basis of such IR extensions. Gated single assignment (gated SSA,
   GSA) mentioned below provides an interpretable (data- or demand-driven) IR
12 Introduction                                                                        159

   that uses this concept. Psi-SSA (ψ-SSA) also mentioned below is a very similar
   IR but more appropriate to code generation for architectures with predication.
2. Note that such extensions sometimes face difficulties handling loops correctly
   (need to avoid deadlock between the loop predicate and the computation of the
   loop body, replicate the behaviour of infinite loops, etc.). However, we believe
   that, as we will illustrate further, loop carried control dependencies complicate
   the recognition of possible loop transformations: it is usually better to represent
   loops and their corresponding iteration space using a dedicated abstraction.

12.3 Gated SSA Forms

As already mentioned, one of the strengths of SSA form is its associated data-flow
graph (DFG), the SSA graph that is used to propagate directly the information along
the def-use chains. This is what makes data-flow analysis sparse. By combining
the SSA graph with the control-flow graph, static analysis can be made context-
sensitive. This can be done in a more natural and powerful way by incorporating in
a unified representation both the data-flow and control-flow information.
    The program dependence graph (PDG) adds to the data dependence edges (SSA
graph as the data dependence graph—DDG) the control dependence edges (control
dependence graph—CDG). As already mentioned, one of the main motivations for
the development of the PDG was to aid automatic parallelization of instructions
across multiple basic blocks. However, in practice, it also exposes the relationship
between the control predicates and their related control-dependent instructions, thus
allowing us to propagate the associated information. A natural way to represent this
relationship is through the use of gating functions that are used in some extensions
such as the gated SSA (GSA) or the value state dependence graph (VSDG) .
Gating functions are directly interpretable versions of φ-nodes. As an example,
φif (P , v1 , v2 ) can be interpreted as a function that selects the value v1 if predicated
P evaluates to true and the value v2 otherwise. PDG, GSA, and VSDG are described
in Chap. 14.

12.4 Psi-SSA Form

ψ-SSA form (Chap. 15) addresses the need for modelling Static Single Assignment
form in predicated operations. A predicated operation is an alternate representation
of a fine-grained control-flow structure, often obtained by using the well-known
if-conversion transformation (see Chap. 20). A key advantage of using predicated
operations in a compiler’s intermediate representation is that it can often enable
more optimizations by creating larger basic blocks compared to approaches in
which predicated operations are modelled as explicit control-flow graphs. From
an SSA-form perspective, the challenge is that a predicated operation may or may
160                                                              V. Sarkar and F. Rastello

not update its definition operand, depending on the value of the predicate guarding
that assignment. This challenge is addressed in ψ-SSA form by introducing ψ-
functions that perform merge functions for predicated operations, analogous to the
merge performed by φ-functions at join points in vanilla SSA form.
   In general, a ψ-function has the form, a0 = ψ (p1 ?a1 , ..., pi ?ai , ..., pn ?an ),
where each input argument ai is associated with a predicate pi as in a nested if-
then-else expression for which the value returned is the rightmost argument whose
predicate is true. Observe that the semantic of a ψ-function imposes the logical dis-
junction of its predicates to evaluate to true. A number of algebraic transformations
can be performed on ψ-functions, including ψ-inlining, ψ-reduction, ψ-projection,
ψ-permutation, and ψ-promotion. Chapter 15 also includes an algorithm for
transforming a program out of Psi-SSA form that extends the standard algorithm
for destruction of vanilla SSA form.

12.5 Hashed SSA Form

The motivation for SSI form arose from the need to perform additional renaming
to distinguish among different uses of an SSA variable. Hashed SSA (HSSA) form
introduced in Chap. 16 addresses another important requirement, viz., the need to
model aliasing among variables. For example, a static use or definition of indirect
memory access ∗p in the C language could represent the use or definition of multiple
local variables whose addresses can be taken and may potentially be assigned
to p along different control-flow paths. To represent aliasing of local variables,
HSSA form extends vanilla SSA form with MayUse (μ) and MayDef (χ ) functions
to capture the fact that a single static use or definition could potentially impact
multiple variables. Note that MayDef functions can result in the creation of new
names (versions) of variables, compared to vanilla SSA form. HSSA form does
not take a position on the accuracy of alias analysis that it represents. It is capable
of representing the output of any alias analysis performed as a pre-pass to HSSA
construction. As summarized above, a major concern with HSSA form is that its size
could be quadratic in the size of the vanilla SSA form, since each use or definition
can now be augmented by a set of MayUse’s and MayDef’s, respectively. A heuristic
approach to dealing with this problem is to group together all variable versions that
have no “real” occurrence in the program, i.e., do not appear in a real instruction
outside of a φ, μ, or χ function. These versions are grouped together into a single
version called the zero version of the variable.
   In addition to aliasing of locals, it is important to handle the possibility of
aliasing among heap-allocated variables. For example, ∗p and ∗q may refer to the
same location in the heap, even if no aliasing occurs among local variables. HSSA
form addresses this possibility by introducing a virtual variable for each address
expression used in an indirect memory operation and renaming virtual variables
with φ-functions as in SSA form. Further, the alias analysis pre-pass is expected to
provide information on which virtual variables may potentially be aliased, thereby
12 Introduction                                                                      161

leading to the insertion of μ or χ functions for virtual variables as well. Global value
numbering is used to increase the effectiveness of the virtual variable approach,
since all indirect memory accesses with the same address expression can be merged
into a single virtual variable (with SSA renaming as usual). In fact, the Hashed
SSA name in HSSA form comes from the use of hashing in most value-numbering
algorithms.

12.6 Array SSA Form

In contrast to HSSA form, Array SSA form (Chap. 17) takes an alternate approach
to modelling aliasing of indirect memory operations by focusing on aliasing in
arrays as its foundation. The aliasing problem for arrays is manifest in the fact that
accesses to elements A[i] and A[j ] of array A refer to the same location when
i = j . This aliasing can occur with just local array variables, even in the absence
of pointers and heap-allocated data structures. Consider a program with a definition
of A[i] followed by a definition of A[j ]. The vanilla SSA approach can be used to
rename these two definitions to (say) A1 [i] and A2 [j ]. The challenge with arrays
arises when there is a subsequent use of A[k]. For scalar variables, the reaching
definition for this use can be uniquely identified in vanilla SSA form. However,
for array variables, the reaching definition depends on the subscript values. In this
example, the reaching definition for A[k] will be A2 or A1 if k == j or k == i
(or a prior definition A0 if k ?= j and k ?= i). To provide A[k] with a single
reaching definition, Array SSA form introduces a definition- (d ) operator that
represents the merge of A2 [j ] with the prevailing value of array A prior to A2 .
The result of this d operator is given a new name, A3 (say), which serves as the
single definition that reaches use A[k] (which can then be renamed to A3 [k]). This
extension enables sparse data-flow propagation algorithms developed for vanilla
SSA form to be applied to array variables, as illustrated by the algorithm for sparse
constant propagation of array elements presented in this chapter. The accuracy of
analyses for Array SSA form depends on the accuracy with which pairs of array
subscripts can be recognized as being definitely same (DS ) or definitely different
(DD).
    To model heap-allocated objects, Array SSA form builds on the observation that
all indirect memory operations can be modelled as accesses to elements of abstract
arrays that represent disjoint subsets of the heap. For modern object-oriented
languages such as Java, type information can be used to obtain a partitioning of the
heap into disjoint subsets, e.g., instances of field x are guaranteed to be disjoint from
instances of field y. In such cases, the set of instances of field x can be modelled as
a logical array (map) H x that is indexed by the object reference (key). The problem
of resolving aliases among field accesses p.x and q.x then becomes equivalent to
the problem of resolving aliases among array accesses H x [p] and H x [q], thereby
enabling Array SSA form to be used for analysis of objects as in the algorithm
for redundant load elimination among object fields presented in this chapter. For
162                                                                      V. Sarkar and F. Rastello

weakly typed languages such as C, the entire heap can be modelled as a single heap
array. As in HSSA form, an alias analysis pre-pass can be performed to improve the
accuracy of definitely same and definitely different information. In particular, global
value numbering is used to establish definitely same relationships, analogous to its
use in establishing equality of address expressions in HSSA form. In contrast to
HSSA form, the size of Array SSA form is guaranteed to be linearly proportional
to the size of a comparable scalar SSA form for the original program (if all array
variables were treated as scalars for the purpose of the size comparison).

12.7 Memory-Based Data Flow

SSA provides data flow/dependencies between scalar variables. Execution order
of side effect instructions must also be respected. Indirect memory access can
be considered very conservatively as such and lead to (sometimes called state,
see Chap. 14) dependence edges. Too conservative dependencies annihilate the
potential of optimizations. Alias analysis is the first step towards more precise
dependence information. Representing this information efficiently in the IR is
important. One could simply add a dependence (or a flow arc) between two
“consecutive” instructions that may or must alias. Then, in the same spirit as SSA φ-
nodes aim at combining the information as early as possible (as opposed to standard
def-use chains, see the discussion in Chap. 2), similar nodes can be used for memory
dependencies. Consider the following sequential C-like code involving pointers,
where p and q may alias:
   ∗p ← . . .;   ∗q ← . . .;   . . . ← ∗p;   . . . ← ∗q;

Without the use of φ-nodes, the amount of def-use chains required to link the
assignments to their uses would be quadratic (4 here). Hence, the usefulness of
generalizing SSA and its φ-node for scalars to handle memory access for sparse
analyses. HSSA (see Chap. 16) and Array-SSA (see the Chap. 17) are two different
implementations of this idea. One has to admit that if this early combination is well
suited for analysis or interpretation, the introduction of a φ-function might add a
control dependence to an instruction that would not exist otherwise. In other words,
only simple loop carried dependencies can be expressed this way. Let us illustrate
this point using a simple example:
   for i do
        A[i] ← f (A[i − 2])

Here, the computation at iteration indexed by i + 2 accesses the value computed at
iteration indexed by i. Suppose we know that f (x) > x and that prior to entering
the loop A[∗] ≥ 0. Consider the following SSA-like representation:
   for i do
        A2 ← φ(A0 , A1 )
        A2 ← φ(j = i : A1 [j ] ← f (A2 [j − 2]), j ?= i : A1 [j ] ← A2 [j ])
12 Introduction                                                                   163

This would easily allow for the propagation of information that A2 ≥ 0. On the
other hand, by adding this φ-node, it becomes difficult to devise that iteration i and
i + 1 can be executed in parallel: the φ-node adds a loop carried dependence. If
you are interested in performing loop transformations that are more sophisticated
than just exposing fully parallel loops (such as loop interchange, loop tiling, or
multidimensional software pipelining), then (dynamic) single assignment forms
should be your friend. There exist many formalisms including Kahn process
networks (KPN) or Fuzzy Data-flow Analysis (FADA) that implement this idea.
But each time restrictions apply. This is part of the huge research area of automatic
parallelization outside of the scope of this book. For further details, we refer the
reader to the corresponding Encyclopedia of Parallel Computing [216].
