Chapter 14
Graphs and Gating Functions

James Stanier and Fabrice Rastello

Many compilers represent the input program as some form of graph in order to
support analysis and transformation. Over time a cornucopia of program graphs have
been presented in the literature and subsequentially implemented in real compilers.
Many of these graphs use SSA concepts as the core principle of their representation,
ranging from literal translations of SSA into graph form to more abstract graphs
which are implicitly in SSA form. We aim to introduce a selection of program graphs
that use these SSA concepts, and examine how they may be useful to a compiler
writer.
   A well-known graph representation is the control-flow graph (CFG) which we
encountered at the beginning of the book while being introduced to the core concept
of SSA. The CFG models control flow in a program, but the graphs that we
will study instead model data flow. This is useful as a large number of compiler
optimizations are based on data-flow analysis. In fact, all graphs that we consider in
this chapter are all data-flow graphs.
   In this chapter, we will look at a number of SSA-based graph representations.
An introduction to each graph will be given, along with diagrams to show how
sample programs look when translated into that particular graph. Additionally, we
will describe the techniques that each graph was created to solve, with references to
the literature for further research.
   For this chapter, we assume that the reader already has familiarity with SSA (see
Chap. 1) and the applications that it is used for.

J. Stanier ()
Brandwatch, Cumbria, UK
F. Rastello
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   185
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_14
186                                                             J. Stanier and F. Rastello

14.1 Data-Flow Graphs

Since all of the graphs in this chapter are data-flow graphs, let us define them.
A data-flow graph (DFG) is a directed graph G = (V , E) where the edges E
represent the flow of data from the result of one instruction to the input of another.
An instruction executes once all of its input data values have been computed. When
an instruction executes, it produces a new data value which is propagated to other
connected instructions.
    Whereas the CFG imposes a total ordering on instructions—the same ordering
that the programmer wrote them in—the DFG has no such concept of ordering;
it just models the flow of data. This means that it typically needs a companion
representation such as the CFG to ensure that optimized programs are still correct.
However, with access to both the CFG and DFG, optimizations such as dead
code elimination, constant folding, and common subexpression elimination can be
performed effectively. But this comes at a price: keeping both graphs updated during
optimization can be costly and complicated.

14.2 The SSA Graph

We begin our exploration with a graph that is a literal representation of SSA: the
SSA graph. The SSA graph can be constructed from a program in SSA form by
explicitly adding use-def chains. To demonstrate what the graph looks like, we
present some sample code in Fig. 14.1 which is then translated into an SSA graph.
    An SSA graph consists of vertices that represent instructions (such as + and
print) or φ-functions, and directed edges that connect uses to definitions of values.
The outgoing edges of a vertex represent the arguments required for that instruction,
and the ingoing edge(s) to a vertex represent the propagation of the instruction’s
result(s) after they have been computed. We call these types of graphs demand-
based representations. This is because in order to compute an instruction, we must
first demand the results of the operands.
    Although the textual representation of SSA is much easier for a human to read,
the primary benefit of representing the input program in graph form is that the
compiler writer is able to apply a wide array of graph-based optimizations by using
standard graph traversal and transformation techniques.
    In the literature, the SSA graph has been used to detect induction variables in
loops, for performing instruction selection (see Chap. 19), operator strength reduc-
tion, rematerialization, and has been combined with an extended SSA language to
support compilation in a parallelizing compiler. The reader should note that the
exact specification of what constitutes an SSA graph changes from paper to paper.
The essence of the intermediate representation (IR) has been presented here, as each
author tends to make small modifications for their particular implementation.
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                          187

                SSA code                                      SSA graph

Fig. 14.1 Some SSA code translated into an SSA graph. Note how edges demand the input values
for a node

14.2.1 Finding Induction Variables with the SSA Graph

We illustrate the usefulness of the SSA graph through a basic induction variable (IV)
recognition technique. A more sophisticated technique is developed in Chap. 10.
Given that a program is represented as an SSA graph, the task of finding induction
variables is simplified. A basic linear induction variable i is a variable that appears
only in the form:

 1 i = 10
 2 while <cond> do
 3     ...
 4     i =i+k
 5     ...

   where k is a constant or loop-invariant. A simple IV recognition algorithm is
based on the observation that each basic linear induction variable will belong to a
non-trivial strongly connected component (SCC) in the SSA graph. SCCs can be
188                                                             J. Stanier and F. Rastello

easily discovered in linear time using any depth-first search traversal. Each such
SCC must conform to the following constraints:
• The SCC contains only one φ-function at the header of the loop.
• Every component is either i = φ(i0 , ..., in ) or i = ik ⊕ n, where ⊕ is addition or
  subtraction, and n is loop-invariant.
   This technique can be expanded to detect a variety of other classes of induction
variables, such as wraparound variables, non-linear induction variables, and nested
induction variables. Scans and reductions also show a similar SSA graph pattern
and can be detected using the same approach.

14.3 Program Dependence Graph

The program dependence graph (PDG) represents both control and data depen-
dencies together in one graph. The PDG was developed to support optimizations
requiring reordering of instructions and graph rewriting for parallelism, as the
strict ordering of the CFG is relaxed and complemented by the presence of data
dependence information. The PDG is a directed graph G = (V , E) where nodes V
are statements, predicate expressions, or region nodes, and edges E represent either
control or data dependencies. Thus, the set of all edges E has two distinct subsets:
the control dependence subgraph EC and the data dependence subgraph ED .
    Statement nodes represent instructions in the program. Predicate nodes test a
conditional statement and have true and false edges to represent the choice taken on
evaluation of the predicate. Region nodes group control dependencies with identical
source and label together. If the control dependence for a region node is satisfied,
then it follows that all of its children can be executed. Thus, if a region node has
three different control-independent statements as immediate children, then those
statements could potentially be executed in parallel. Diagrammatically, rectangular
nodes represent statements, diamond nodes predicates, and circular nodes are region
nodes. Dashed edges represent control dependence, and solid edges represent data
dependence. Loops in the PDG are represented by back edges in the control
dependence subgraph. We show example code translated into a PDG in Fig. 14.2.
    Building a PDG is a multi-stage process involving:
•   Construction of the post-dominator tree
•   Use of the post-dominator tree to generate the control dependence subgraph
•   Insertion of region nodes
•   Construction of DAGs for each basic block which are then joined to create the
    data dependence subgraph
  Let us explore this construction process in more detail.
  An ENTRY node is added with one edge labeled true pointing to the CFG entry
node, and another labeled false going to the CFG exit node.
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                           189

                 code                                         PDG

Fig. 14.2 Example code translated into a PDG. Dashed/full edges, respectively, represent con-
trol/data dependencies

    Before constructing the rest of the control dependence subgraph EC , let us define
control dependence. A node w is said to be control dependent on edge (u, v) if
w post-dominates v and w does not strictly post-dominate u. Control dependence
between nodes is equivalent to the post-dominance frontier on the reversed CFG. To
compute the control dependence subgraph, the post-dominator tree is constructed
for the CFG. Then, the control dependence edges from u to w are labeled with the
boolean value taken by the predicate computed in u when branching on edge (u, v).
Then, let S consist of the set of all edges (A, B) in the CFG such that B is not
an ancestor of A in the post-dominator tree. Each of these edges has an associated
label true or false. Then, each edge in S is considered in turn. Given (A, B), the post-
dominator tree is traversed backwards from B until we reach A’s parent, marking
all nodes visited (including B) as control dependent on A with the label of S.
    Next, region nodes are added to the PDG. Each region node summarizes a
set of control conditions and “groups” all nodes with the same set of control
conditions together. Region nodes are also inserted so that predicate nodes will
only have two direct successors. To begin with, an unpruned PDG is created by
checking, for each node of the CFG, which control region it depends on. This
is done by traversing the post-dominator tree in post-order and mapping sets of
190                                                             J. Stanier and F. Rastello

control dependencies to region nodes. For each node N visited in the post-dominator
tree, the map is checked for an existing region node with the same set CD of
control dependencies. If none exists, a new region node R is created with these
control dependencies and entered into the map. R is made to be the only control
dependence direct predecessor of N. Next, the intersection INT of CD is computed
for each immediate child of N in the post-dominator tree. If INT = CD, then the
corresponding dependencies are removed from the child and replaced with a single
dependence on the child’s control direct predecessor. Then, a pass over the graph is
made to make sure that each predicate node has a unique direct successor for each
boolean value. If more than one exists, the corresponding edges are replaced by a
single edge to a freshly created region node that itself points to the direct successor
nodes.
    Finally, the data dependence subgraph is generated. This begins with the
construction of DAGs for each basic block where each upwards reaching leaf is
called a merge node. Data-flow analysis is used to compute reaching definitions.
All individual DAGs are then connected together: edges are added from definition
nodes to the corresponding merge nodes that may be reached. The resulting graph
is the data dependence subgraph, and PDG construction is complete.
    The PDG has been used for generating code for parallel architectures and has
also been used in order to perform accurate program slicing and testing.

14.3.1 Detecting Parallelism with the PDG

An instruction scheduling algorithm running on a CFG lacks the necessary data-
flow information to make decisions about parallelization. It requires additional code
transformations such as loop unrolling or if-conversion (see Chap. 20) in order to
expose any instruction-level parallelism.
   However, the structure of the PDG can give the instruction scheduler this
information for free. Any node of a CFG loop that is not contained in a strongly
connected component of the PDG (using both control and data dependence edges)
can be parallelized.
   In the example in Fig. 14.2, since the instruction A[i]=a in the loop does not
form a strongly connected component in the PDG, it can be vectorized provided that
variable a has a private scope. On the other hand, because of the circuit involving
the test on a, the instruction a=2*B[i] cannot.

14.4 Gating Functions and GSA

In SSA form, φ-functions are used to identify points where variable definitions
converge. However, they cannot be directly interpreted, as they do not specify the
condition that determines which of the variable definitions to choose. By this logic,
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                             191

we cannot directly interpret the SSA graph. Being able to interpret our IR is a
useful property as it gives the compiler writer more information when implementing
optimizations and also reduces the complexity of performing code generation. Gated
single assignment form (GSA—sometimes called gated SSA) is an extension of
SSA with gating functions. These gating functions are directly interpretable versions
of φ-nodes and replace φ-nodes in the representation. We usually distinguish the
three following forms of gating functions:
• The φif function explicitly represents the condition that determines which φ
  value to select. A φif function of the form φif (p, v1 , v2 ) has p as a predicate,
  and v1 and v2 as the values to be selected if the predicate evaluates to true or
  false, respectively. This can be read simply as if-then-else.
• The φentry function is inserted at loop headers to select the initial and loop carried
  values. A φentry function of the form φentry (vinit , viter ), has vinit as the initial input
  value for the loop, and viter as the iterative input. We replace φ-functions at loop
  headers with φentry functions.
• The φexit function determines the value of a variable when a loop terminates.
  A φexit function of the form φexit (p, vexit ) has P as predicate and vexit as the
  definition reaching beyond the loop.
   It is easiest to understand these gating functions by means of an example.
Figure 14.3 shows how our earlier code in Fig. 14.2 translates into GSA form. Here,

               code                                        GSA

Fig. 14.3 A graph representation of our sample code in (demand-based) GSA form
192                                                                  J. Stanier and F. Rastello

Fig. 14.4 (a) A structured code; (b) the PDG (with region nodes omitted); (c) the DAG
representation of the nested gated φif

we can see the use of both φentry and φexit gating functions. At the header of our
sample loop, the φ-function has been replaced by a φentry function which determines
between the initial and iterative value of i. After the loop has finished executing, the
nested φexit function selects the correct live-out version of a.
    This example shows several interesting points. First, the semantics of both the
φexit and φif are strict in their gate: here a1 or φexit (q, a2 ) is not evaluated before
p is known.1 Similarly, a φif function that results from the nested if-then-else code
of Fig. 14.4 would be itself nested as a = φif (p, φif (q, a2 , a3 ), a1 ). Second, this
representation of the program does not allow for an interpreter to decide whether
an instruction with a side effect (such as A[i1 ] = a2 in our running example) has
to be executed or not. Finally, computing the values of gates is highly related to the
simplification of path expressions: in our running example, a2 should be selected
when the path ¬p followed by q (denoted ¬p.q) is taken, while a1 should be
selected when the path p is taken; for our nested if-then-else example, a1 should
be selected either when the path ¬p.r is taken or when the path ¬p.¬r is taken,
which simplifies to ¬p. Diverse approaches can be used to generate the correct
nested φif or φexit gating functions.
    The most natural way uses a data-flow analysis that computes, for each program
point and each variable, its unique reaching definition and the associated set of
reaching paths. This set of paths is abstracted using a path expression. If the code
is not already under SSA, and if at a merge point of the CFG, its direct predecessor
basic blocks are reached by different variables, a φ-function is inserted. The gate of
each operand is set to the path expression of its corresponding incoming edge. If a
unique variable reaches all the direct predecessor basic blocks, the corresponding

1 As opposed to the ψ-function described in Chap. 15 that would use syntax such as a = φ((p ∧
¬q)?a1 , (¬p ∧ q)?a2 ) instead.
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                   193

path expressions are merged. Of course, a classical path compression technique can
be used to minimize the number of visited edges. One can observe the similarities
with the φ-function placement algorithm described in Sect. 4.4.
    There also exists a relationship between the control dependencies and the gates:
from a code already under strict and conventional SSA form, one can derive
the gates of a φif function from the control dependencies of its operands. This
relationship is illustrated by Fig. 14.4 in the simple case of a structured code.
    These gating functions are important as the concept will form components of
the value state dependence graph later. GSA has seen a number of uses in the
literature including analysis and transformations based on data flow. With the
diversity of applications (see Chaps. 10 and 23), many variants of GSA have been
proposed. Those variations concern the correct handling of loops in addition to the
computation and representation of gates.
    By using gating functions, it becomes possible to construct IRs based solely on
data dependencies. These IRs are sparse in nature compared to the CFG, making
them good for analysis and transformation. This is also a more attractive proposition
than generating and maintaining both a CFG and DFG, which can be complex and
prone to human error. One approach has been to combine both of these into one
representation, as is done in the PDG. Alternatively, we can utilize gating functions
along with a data-flow graph for an effective way of representing whole program
information using data-flow information.

14.4.1 Backward Symbolic Analysis with GSA

GSA is useful for performing symbolic analysis. Traditionally, symbolic analysis
is performed by forward propagation of expressions through a program. However,
complete forward substitution is expensive and can result in a large quantity
of unused information and complicated expressions. Instead, backward, demand-
driven substitutions can be performed using GSA which only substitutes needed
information. Consider the following program:

 1 JMAX ← EXPR
 2 if p then
 3      J ← JMAX − 1
 4 else
 5      J ← JMAX
 6   assert (J ≤ JMAX)
   If forward substitutions were to be used in order to determine whether the
assertion is correct, then the symbolic value of J must be discovered, starting at
the top of the program in statement at line 1. Forward propagation through this
program results in statement at line 6 being

                  assert ((if p then EXPR − 1 else EXPR) ≤ EXPR)
194                                                              J. Stanier and F. Rastello

and thus the assert () statement evaluates to true. In real, non-trivial programs, these
expressions can get unnecessarily long and complicated.
   Using GSA instead allows for backwards, demand-driven substitutions. The
program above has the following GSA form:

 1 JMAX 1 ← EXPR
 2 if p then
 3      J1 ← JMAX 1 − 1
 4 else
 5      J2 ← JMAX 1
 6   J3 ← φif (p, J1 , J2 )
 7   assert (J3 ≤ JMAX 1 )

   Using this backward substitution technique, we start at statement on line 7 and
follow the SSA links of the variables from J3 . This allows for skipping of any
intermediate statements that do not affect variables in this statement. Thus, the
substitution steps are

J3 = φif (p, J1 , J2 )
   = φif (p, JMAX 1 − 1, JMAX 1 )

   The backward substitution then stops because enough information has been
found, avoiding the redundant substitution of JMAX 1 by EXPR. In non-trivial
programs, this can greatly reduce the number of redundant substitutions, making
symbolic analysis significantly cheaper.

14.5 Value State Dependence Graph

The gating functions defined in the previous section were used in the development of
a sparse data-flow graph IR called the value state dependence graph (VSDG). The
VSDG is a directed graph consisting of operation nodes, loop, and merge nodes
together with value and state dependency edges. Cycles are permitted but must
satisfy various restrictions. A VSDG represents a single procedure: this matches
the classical CFG. An example VSDG is shown in Fig. 14.5.

14.5.1 Definition of the VSDG

A VSDG is a labeled directed graph G = (N, EV , ES , , N0 , N∞ ) consisting of
nodes N (with unique entry node N0 and exit node N∞ ), value dependency edges
EV ⊆ N × N, and state dependency edges ES ⊆ N × N . The labelling function
associates each node with an operator.
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                          195

                        code                                       VSDG

Fig. 14.5 A recursive factorial function, whose VSDG illustrates the key graph components—
value dependency edges (solid lines), state dependency edges (dashed lines), a const node, a
call node, a γ -node, a conditional node, and the function entry and exit nodes

   The VSDG corresponds to a reducible program, e.g., there are no cycles in the
VSDG except those mediated by θ -nodes (loop).
   Value dependency (EV ) indicates the flow of values between nodes. State depen-
dency (ES ) represents two things; the first is essentially a sequential dependency
required by the original program, e.g., a given load instruction may be required
to follow a given store instruction without being re-ordered, and a return
node in general must wait for an earlier loop to terminate even though there might
be no value dependency between the loop and the return node. The second
purpose is that state dependency edges can be added incrementally until the VSDG
corresponds to a unique CFG. Such state dependency edges are called serializing
edges .
   The VSDG is implicitly represented in SSA form: a given operator node, n, will
have zero or more EV -consumers using its value. Note that, in implementation
196                                                                      J. Stanier and F. Rastello

terms, a single register can hold the produced value for consumption at all
consumers; it is therefore useful to talk about the idea of an output port for n being
allocated a specific register, r, to abbreviate the idea of r being used for each edge
(n1 , n2 ), where n2 ∈ directsucc(n1 ).
    There are four main classes of VSDG nodes: value nodes (representing pure
arithmetic) ,γ -nodes (conditionals), θ -nodes (loops) , and state nodes (side effects).
The majority of nodes in a VSDG generates a value based on some computation
(add, subtract, etc.) applied to their dependent values (constant nodes, which have
no dependent nodes, are a special case).
γ -Nodes
The γ -node is similar to the φif gating function in being dependent on a control
predicate, rather than the control-independent nature of SSA φ-functions. A γ -node
γ (C : p, T : vtrue , F : vfalse ) evaluates the condition dependency p and returns
the value of vtrue if p is true, otherwise vfalse . We generally treat γ -nodes as single-
valued nodes (contrast θ -nodes, which are treated as tuples), with the effect that two
separate γ -nodes with the same condition can be later combined into a tuple using
a single test. Figure 14.6 illustrates two γ -nodes that can be combined in this way.
Here, we use a pair of values (2-tuple) for prots T and F . We also see how two
syntactically different programs can map to the same structure in the VSDG.
θ -Nodes
The θ -node models the iterative behaviour of loops, modelling loop state with the
notion of an internal value which may be updated on each iteration of the loop. It has
five specific elements that represent dependencies at various stages of computation.

Fig. 14.6 Two different code schemes map to the same γ -node structure
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                                   197

               code                                              VSDG

Fig. 14.7 An example showing a for loop. Evaluating X triggers it to evaluate the I value
(outputting the value L). While C evaluates to true, it evaluates the R value (which in this case
also uses the θ-node’s L value). When C is false, it returns the final internal value through X. As i
is not used after the loop, there is no dependency on i at X

The θ -node corresponds to a merge of the φentry and φexit nodes in gated SSA. A
θ -node θ (C : p, I : vinit , R : vreturn , L : viter , X : vexit ) sets its internal value to
initial value vinit and then, while condition value p holds true, sets viter to the current
internal value and updates the internal value with the repeat value vreturn . When p
evaluates to false, computation ceases, and the last internal value is returned through
vexit .
    A loop that updates k variables will have: a single condition p, initial values
  1 , . . . , v k , loop iterations v 1 , . . . , v k , loop returns v                   k
vinit          init                     iter       iter               return1 , . . . , vreturn , and
                 1          k
loop exits vexit , . . . , vexit . The example in Fig. 14.7 also shows a pair (2-tuple) of
values being used on ports I, R, L, X, one for each loop-variant value.
    The θ -node directly implements pre-test loops (while, for); post-test loops
(do...while, repeat...until) are synthesized from a pre-test loop pre-
ceded by a duplicate of the loop body. At first, this may seem to cause unnecessary
duplication of code, but it has two important benefits: (1) it exposes the first loop
body iteration to optimization in post-test loops (cf. loop-peeling) and (2) it normal-
izes all loops to one loop structure, which both reduces the cost of optimization and
increases the likelihood of two schematically dissimilar loops being isomorphic in
the VSDG.

State Nodes
Loads and stores compute a value and state. The call node takes both the name of
the function to call and a list of arguments and returns a list of results; it is treated
as a state node as the function body may read or update state.
   We maintain the simplicity of the VSDG by imposing the restriction that all
functions have one return node (the exit node N∞ ), which returns at least one result
198                                                                 J. Stanier and F. Rastello

(which will be a state value in the case of void functions). To ensure that function
calls and definitions are able to be allocated registers easily, we suppose that the
number of arguments to, and results from, a function is smaller than the number of
physical registers—further arguments can be passed via a stack as usual.
   Note also that the VSDG does not force loop-invariant code into or out of loop
bodies, but rather allows later phases to determine, by adding serializing edges, such
placement of loop-invariant nodes for later phases.

14.5.2 Dead Node Elimination with the VSDG

By representing a program as a VSDG, many optimizations become trivial. For
example, consider dead node elimination (Fig. 14.1). This combines both dead code
elimination and unreachable code elimination. Dead code generates VSDG nodes
for which there is no value or state dependency path from the return node, i.e.,
the result of the function does not in any way depend on the results of the dead nodes.
Unreachable code generates VSDG nodes that are either dead or become dead after
some other optimization. Thus, a dead node is a node that is not post-dominated by
the exit node N∞ . To perform dead node elimination, only two passes are required
over the VSDG resulting in linear runtime complexity: one pass to identify all of
the live nodes, and a second pass to delete the unmarked (i.e., dead) nodes. It is safe
because all nodes that are deleted are guaranteed never to be reachable from the
return node.

 Algorithm 14.1: Dead node elimination on the VSDG
 1 Input: A VSDG G(N, EV , ES , N∞ ) with zero or more dead nodes
 2 Output: A VSDG with no dead nodes
 3 WalkAndMark(N∞ , G)
 4 DeleteMarked(G)

 5 Function WalkAndMark(n, G)
 6    if n is marked then return
 7    mark n
 8    foreach node m ∈ N ∧ (n, m) ∈ (EV ∪ ES ) do
 9          WalkAndMark(m)

10 Function DeleteMarked(G)
11    foreach node n ∈ N do
12         if n is unmarked then delete(n)
14 Graphs and Gating Functions                                                        199

14.6 Further Reading

A compiler’s intermediate representation can be a graph, and many different graphs
exist in the literature. We can represent the control flow of a program as a control-
flow graph (CFG) [3], where straight-line instructions are contained within basic
blocks and edges show where the flow of control may be transferred to once leaving
that block. A CFG is traditionally used to convert a program into SSA form [90]. We
can also represent programs as a type of data-flow graph (DFG) [96, 97], and SSA
can be represented in this way as an SSA graph [84]. An example was given that
used the SSA graph to detect a variety of induction variables in loops [127, 306].
It has also been used for performing instruction selection techniques [108, 254],
operator strength reduction [84], and rematerialization [48] and has been combined
with an extended SSA language to aid compilation in a parallelizing compiler [274].
   The program dependence graph (PDG) as defined by Ferrante et al. [118]
represents control and data dependencies in one graph. We choose to report the
definition of Bilardi and Pingali [29]. Section 14.3 mentions possible abstractions
to represent data dependencies for dynamically allocated objects. Among others,
the book of Darte et al. [93] provides a good overview of such representations.
The PDG has been used for program slicing [214], testing [20] and widely for
parallelization [21, 117, 119, 259].
   Gating functions can be used to create directly interpretable φ-functions. These
are used in gated single assignment form. Alpern et al. [6] presented a precursor of
GSA for structured code, to detect equality of variables. This chapter adopts their
notations, i.e., a φif for an if-then-else construction, a φentry for the entry of a loop,
and a φexit for its exit. The original usage of GSA was by Ballance et al. [215] as an
intermediate stage in the construction of the Program Dependence Web IR. Further,
GSA papers replaced φif by γ , φentry by μ, and φexit by η. Havlak [141] presented
an algorithm for construction of a simpler version of GSA—Thinned GSA—which
is constructed from a CFG in SSA form. The construction technique sketched in
this chapter is developed in more detail in [289]. GSA has been used for a number
of analyses and transformations based on data flow. The example given of how to
perform backward demand-driven symbolic analysis using GSA has been borrowed
from [290]. If-conversion (see Chap. 20) converts control dependencies into data
dependencies. To avoid the potential loss of information related to the lowering of
φ-functions into conditional moves or select instructions, gating ψ-functions (see
Chap. 15) can be used.
   We then described the value state dependence graph (VSDG) [151], which
is an improvement on a previous, unmentioned graph, the Value Dependence
Graph [304]. It uses the concept of gating functions, data dependencies, and state to
model a program. We gave an example of how to perform dead node elimination
on the VSDG. Detailed semantics of the VSDG are available [151], as well as
semantics of a related IR: the gated data dependence graph [292]. Further study
has taken place on the problem of generating code from the VSDG [178, 269, 291],
and it has also been used to perform a combined register allocation and code motion
algorithm [152].
