Chapter 16
Hashed SSA Form: HSSA

Massimiliano Mantione and Fred Chow

Hashed SSA (or in short, HSSA) is an SSA extension that can effectively represent
how aliasing relations affect a program in SSA form. It works equally well
for aliasing among scalar variables and, more generally, for indirect load and
store operations on arbitrary memory locations. Thus, all common SSA-based
optimizations can be applied uniformly to any storage area no matter how they are
represented in the program.
    It should be noted that only the representation of aliasing is discussed here. HSSA
relies on a separate alias analysis pass that runs before its creation. Depending on
the actual alias analysis algorithm used, the HSSA representation will reflect the
accuracy produced by the alias analysis pass.
    This chapter starts by defining notations to model the effects of aliasing for scalar
variables in SSA form. We then introduce a technique that can reduce the overhead
linked to the SSA representation by avoiding an explosion in the number of SSA
versions for aliased variables. Next, we introduce the concept of virtual variables
to model indirect memory operations as if they were scalar variables, effectively
allowing indirect memory operations to be put into SSA form together with scalar
variables. Finally, we apply global value numbering (GVN) to the program to derive
Hashed SSA form1 as the effective SSA representation of all storage entities in the
program.

1 The name Hashed SSA comes from the use of hashing in value numbering.

M. Mantione ()
WorkWave, Gorgonzola, Milan, Italy
e-mail: massimiliano.mantione@gmail.com
F. Chow
Huawei, Fremont, CA, USA
e-mail: fchow99@comcast.net

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022      213
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_16
214                                                                 M. Mantione and F. Chow

16.1 SSA and Aliasing: μ- and χ-Functions

Aliasing occurs in a program when a storage location (that contains a value) referred
to in the program code can potentially be accessed through a different means; this
can occur under one of the following four conditions:
• Two or more storage locations partially overlap. For example, in the C union
  construct, a storage location can be accessed via different field names.
• A variable is pointed to by a pointer. In this case, the variable can be accessed in
  two ways: directly, through the variable name, and indirectly, through the pointer
  that holds its address.
• The address of a variable is passed in a procedure call. This enables the called
  procedure to access the variable indirectly.
• The variable is declared in the global scope. This allows the variable to
  potentially be accessed in any function call.
    We seek to model the effects of aliasing on a program in SSA form based on the
results of the alias analysis performed. To characterize the effects of aliasing, we
distinguish between two types of definitions of a variable: MustDef and MayDef. A
MustDef must redefine the variable and thus blocks the references to its previous
definitions from that point on. A MayDef only potentially redefines the variable and
so does not prevent previous definitions of the same variable from being referenced
later in the program.2 We represent MayDef through the use of χ -functions. On
the use side, in addition to real uses of the variable, which are MustUses, there are
MayUses that arise in places in the program where there are potential references to
the variable. We represent MayUse through the use of μ-functions. The semantics of
μ and χ operators can be illustrated through the C-like example in Fig. 16.1, where
∗p represents an indirect access through pointer p. The argument of the μ-operator
is the potentially used variable. The argument of the χ -operator is the potentially
assigned variable itself, to express the fact that the variable’s original value will flow
through if the MayDef does not modify the variable.
    The use of μ- and χ -functions does not alter the complexity of transforming a
program into SSA form. All that is necessary is a pre-pass that inserts them in the
program. Ideally, μ- and χ -functions should be placed parallel to the instruction
that led to their insertion. Parallel instructions are represented in Fig. 16.1 using
the notation introduced in Sect. 13.1.4. Nonetheless, practical implementations may
choose to insert μ- and χ -functions before or after the instructions that involve
aliasing. In particular, μ-functions can be inserted immediately before the involved
statement or expression and χ -operators immediately after the statement. This
distinction allows us to model call effects correctly: the called function appears to
potentially use the values of variables before the call, and the potentially modified
values appear after the call.

2 MustDefs are often referred to as Killing Defs and MayDefs as Preserving or Non-killing Defs

in the literature.
16 Hashed SSA Form: HSSA                                                                   215

Fig. 16.1 Program example where ∗p might alias i, and function f might indirectly use i but not
alter it

   Thanks to the systematic insertion of μ-functions and χ -functions, an assignment
to any scalar variable can be safely considered dead if it is not marked live by a
standard SSA-based dead-code elimination. In our running example of Fig. 16.1c,
the potential use of the assigned value of i outside the function, represented through
the μ-function at the return, allows us to conclude that the assignment to i4 is not
dead.

16.2 Introducing “Zero Versions” to Limit Version Explosion

While it is true that μ and χ insertion does not alter the complexity of SSA
construction, applying it to a production compiler as described in the previous
section may make working with code in SSA form inefficient in programs that
exhibit a lot of aliasing. Each χ -function introduces a new version, and it may in
turn cause new φ-functions to be inserted. This can make the number of distinct
variable versions needlessly large.
    The major issue is that the SSA versions introduced by χ -operators are useless
for most optimizations that deal with variable values. χ definitions add uncertainty
to the analysis of variable values: the actual value of a variable after a χ definition
could be its original value, or it could be the one indirectly assigned by the χ .
    Our solution to this problem is to factor all variable versions that are considered
useless together, so that SSA versions are not wasted. We assign number 0 to this
special variable version and call it zero version.
    Our notion of useless versions relies on the concept of real occurrence of a
variable, which is an actual definition or use of a variable in the original program.
From this point of view, in the SSA form, variable occurrences in μ-, χ -, and φ-
functions are not regarded as real occurrences. In our example in Fig. 16.1, i2 has
no real occurrence, while i1 , i3 , and i4 do have. The idea is that variable versions
that have no real occurrence do not play important roles in the optimization of
the program. Once the program is converted back from SSA form, these variables
216                                                               M. Mantione and F. Chow

will no longer show up. Since they do not directly appear in the code and their
values are usually unknown, we can dispense with the cost of distinguishing among
them.
    For these reasons, we assign the zero version to versions of variables that have
no real occurrence and whose values are derived from at least one χ -function
through zero or more intervening φ-functions. An equivalent recursive definition
is as follows:
• The result of a χ has zero version if it has no real occurrence.
• If the operand of a φ is zero version, then the result of the φ is zero version if it
  has no real occurrence.
    For a program in full SSA form, Algorithm 16.1 determines which variable ver-
sions are to be made zero version under the above definition. The algorithm assumes
that only use-def edges (and not def-use edges) are available. A HasRealOcc flag is
associated with each original SSA version, being set to true whenever it has a real
occurrence in the program. This can be done during the initial SSA construction. A
list NonZeroPhiList, initially empty, is also associated with each original program
variable.

 Algorithm 16.1: Zero-version detection based on SSA use-def chains
 1 foreach variable v do
 2     foreach version vi of v do
 3         if ¬vi .HasRealOcc ∧ vi .def.operator = χ then
 4              vi .version ← 0
 5         if ¬vi .HasRealOcc ∧ vi .def.operator = φ then
 6              let V ← vi .def.operands
 7              if ∀vj ∈ V , vj .HasRealOcc then vi .HasRealOcc ← true
 8              else if ∃vj ∈ V , vj .version = 0 then vi .version ← 0
 9              else v.NonZeroPhiList.add(vi )

10     changes ← true
11     while changes do
12         changes ← false
13         foreach vi ∈ v.NonZeroPhiList do
14             let V = vi .def.operands
15             if ∀vj ∈ V , vj .HasRealOcc then
16                  vi .HasRealOcc ← true
17                  v.NonZeroPhiList.remove(vi )
18                  changes ← true
19             else if ∃vj ∈ V , vj .version = 0 then
20                  vi .version ← 0
21                  v.NonZeroPhiList.remove(vi )
22                  changes ← true
16 Hashed SSA Form: HSSA                                                          217

   The loop from lines 2 to 12 of Algorithm 16.1 can be regarded as the initialization
pass, processing each variable version once. The while loop from lines 14 to 25
is the propagation pass, with time bound by the length of the longest chain of
contiguous φ assignments. This bound can easily be reduced to the deepest loop
nesting depth of the program by traversing the versions based on a topological
order of the forward control flow graph. All in all, zero-version detection in the
presence of μ- and χ -functions does not significantly change the complexity of SSA
construction, while the corresponding reduction in the number of variable versions
can reduce the overhead in the subsequent SSA-based optimization phases.
   Because zero versions can have multiple static assignments, they do not have
fixed or known values. Thus, two zero versions of the same variable cannot be
assumed to have identical values. The occurrence of a zero version breaks use-def
chains. But since the results of χ -functions have unknown values, zero versioning
does not affect the performance of optimizations that propagate known values,
such as constant propagation, because they cannot be propagated across points
of MayDefs in any case. Optimizations that operate on real occurrences, such
as equivalencing and redundancy detection, are also unaffected. In performing
dead store elimination, zero versions have to be assumed live. Since zero versions
can only have uses represented by μ-functions, the chances of the deletion of
stores associated with χ -functions with zero versions are small. But if some later
optimizations delete the code that contains a μ-function, zero versioning could
prevent its defining χ -function from being recognized as dead. Overall, zero
versioning should only cause a small loss of effectiveness in the subsequent SSA-
based optimization phases.

16.3 SSA for Indirect Memory Operations: Virtual Variables

The techniques described in the previous sections only apply to scalar variables
in the program and not to arbitrary memory locations accessed indirectly. As an
example, in Fig. 16.1, μ-, χ -, and φ-functions have been introduced to keep track
of i’s use-defs, but ∗p is not considered as an SSA variable. Thus, even though we
can apply SSA-based optimizations to scalar variables when they are affected by
aliasing, indirect memory access operations are not targeted in our optimizations.
   This situation is far from ideal, because code written in current mainstream
imperative languages (like C++, Java, or C#) typically contains many operations on
data stored in unfixed memory locations. For instance, in C, a two-dimensional vec-
tor could be represented as a struct declared as “typedef struct {double
x; double y;} point;.” Then, we can have a piece of code that computes
the modulus of the vector p written as “m = (p->x * p->x) + (p->y *
p->y);.” As x is accessed twice with both accesses yielding the same value, the
second access could be optimized away, and the same goes for y. The problem is that
x and y are not scalar variables: p is a pointer variable, while “p->x” and “p->y”
218                                                                  M. Mantione and F. Chow

are indirect memory operations. Representing this code snippet in SSA form tells
us that the value of p never changes, but it reveals nothing about the values stored
in the locations “p->x” and “p->y.” It is worth noting that operations on array
elements suffer from the same problem.
   The purpose of HSSA is to put indirect memory operations in SSA form just like
scalar variables, so we can apply all SSA-based optimizations to them uniformly.
In our discussion, we use the C dereferencing operator dereference to denote
indirection from a pointer. This operator can be placed on either the left- or the right-
hand side of the assignment operator. Appearances on the right-hand side represent
indirect loads, while those on the left-hand side represent indirect stores. Examples
include:
• *p: read memory at address p
• *(p+4): read memory at address p + 4 (as in reading the field of an object at
  offset 4)
• **p: double indirection
• *p=: indirect store
    As noted above, indirect memory operations cannot be handled by the regular
SSA construction algorithm because they are operations, while SSA construction
works on variables only. In HSSA, we represent the target locations of indirect
memory operations using virtual variables. A virtual variable is an abstraction of
a memory area and appears under HSSA thanks to the insertion of μ-, χ -, and φ-
functions. Indeed, like any other variable, they can also have aliases. For the same
initial C code shown in Fig. 16.2a, we show two different scenarios after μ-function
and χ -function insertion. In Fig. 16.2b, the two virtual variables introduced, v ∗ and
w ∗ , are associated with the memory locations pointed to by ∗p and ∗q, respectively.
As a result, v ∗ and w ∗ both alias with all the indirect memory operations (of lines
3, 5, 7, and 8). In Fig. 16.2c, x ∗ is associated with the memory location pointed to
by b and y ∗ is associated with the memory location pointed to by b + 1. Assuming
alias analysis determines that there is no alias between b and b + 1, only x ∗ aliases
with the indirect memory operations of line 3, and only y ∗ aliases with the indirect
memory operations of lines 5, 7, and 8.

Fig. 16.2 Some virtual variables and their insertion depending on how they alias with operands
16 Hashed SSA Form: HSSA                                                            219

    It can be seen that the behaviour of a virtual variable in annotating the SSA
representation is dictated by its definition. The only discipline imposed by HSSA
is that each indirect memory operand must be associated with at least one virtual
variable. At one extreme, there could be one virtual variable for each indirect
memory operation. On the other hand, it may be desirable to cut down the number
of virtual variables by making each virtual variable represent more forms of indirect
memory operations. Called assignment factoring, this has the effect of replacing
multiple use-def chains belonging to different virtual variables with one use-def
chain that encompasses more nodes and thus more versions. At the other extreme,
the most factored HSSA form would define only one single virtual variable that
represents all indirect memory operations in the program.
    In practice, it is best not to use assignment factoring among memory operations
that do not alias among themselves. This provides high accuracy in the SSA
representation without incurring additional representation overhead, because the
total number of SSA versions is unaffected. On the other hand, among memory
operations that alias among themselves, using multiple virtual variables would result
in greater representation overhead. Zero versioning can also be applied to virtual
variables to help reduce the number of versions. Appearances of virtual variables in
the μ- and χ -functions next to their defined memory operations are regarded as real
occurrences in the algorithm that determines zero versions for them.
    Virtual variables can be instrumented into the program during μ-function and χ -
function insertion, in the same pass as for scalar variables. During SSA construction,
virtual variables are handled just like scalar variables. In the resulting SSA form, the
use-def relationships of the virtual variables will represent the use-def relationships
among the memory access operations in the program. At this point, we are ready to
complete the construction of the HSSA form by applying global value numbering
(GVN).

16.4 Using GVN to Form HSSA

In the previous sections, we have laid the foundations for dealing with aliasing
and indirect memory operations in SSA form: we introduced μ- and χ -operators
to model aliases, applied zero versioning to keep the number of SSA versions
acceptable, and defined virtual variables as a way to apply SSA to storage locations
accessed indirectly. However, HSSA is incomplete unless global value numbering
is applied to handle scalar variables and indirect storage locations uniformly (see
Chap. 11).
   Value numbering works by assigning a unique number to every expression in the
program with the idea that expressions identified by the same number are guaranteed
to compute to the same value. The value number is obtained using a hash function
applied to each node in an expression tree. For an internal node in the tree, the value
number is a hash function of the operator and the value numbers of all its immediate
operands. The SSA form enables value numbering to be applied on the global scope,
220                                                                      M. Mantione and F. Chow

taking advantage of the property that the same SSA version of a variable must store
the same value regardless of where it appears.
    GVN enables us to easily determine when two address expressions compute the
same address when building HSSA. We can then construct the SSA form among
indirect memory operations whose address expressions have the same value number.
Because a memory location accessed indirectly may be assigned different values
at different points in the program, having the same value number for address
expressions is not a sufficient condition for the read of the memory location to
have the same value number. This is where we make use of virtual variables. In
HSSA, for two reads of indirect memory locations to have the same value number,
apart from their address expressions having identical value numbers, an additional
condition is that they must have the same SSA version for their virtual variable.
If they are associated with different versions of their virtual variable, they will be
assigned different value numbers, because their reads may return different values.
This enables the GVN in HSSA to maintain the consistency whereby nodes with the
same value number must yield the same value. Thus, in HSSA, indirect memory
operations can be handled in the same rank as scalar variables, and they can
benefit transparently from any SSA-based optimizations applied to the program. For
instance, in the vector modulus computation described above, every occurrence of
the expression “p->x” will always have the same GVN and is therefore guaranteed
to return the same value, allowing the compiler to emit code that avoids redundant
memory reads (the same holds for “p->y”).
    Using the same code example from Fig. 16.2, we can see in Fig. 16.3 that p2 and
q2 have the same value number h7 , while p1 ’s value number is h1 and is different.
The loads at lines 5 and 8 cannot be considered redundant between each other
because the versions for v (v1∗ then v2∗ ) are different. On the other hand, the load
at line 8 can be safely avoided by reusing the value computed in line 7, as both
their versions for v (v2∗ ) and their address expressions’ value numbers are identical.
As a last example, if all the associated virtual variable versions for an indirect
memory store (defined in parallel by χ -functions) are found to be dead, then it can
be safely eliminated.3 In other words, HSSA transparently extends SSA’s dead store
elimination algorithm to indirect memory stores.
    Another advantage of HSSA in this context is that it enables uniform treatment of
indirect memory operations regardless of the levels of indirections (as in the “**p”
expression in C which represents a double indirection). This happens naturally
because each node of the expression is identified by its value number, and the fact
that it is used as an address in another expression does not cause any additional
complications.
    Having explained why HSSA uses GVN, we are ready to explain how the
HSSA intermediate representation is structured. A program in HSSA keeps its CFG

3 Note that any virtual variable that aliases with a memory region live out of the compiled procedure

is considered to alias with the return instruction of the procedure and as a consequence will lead to
a live μ-function.
16 Hashed SSA Form: HSSA                                                                           221

    Initial C code             with one virtual variable                     HSSA statements

                                                     Hash Table

Fig. 16.3 Some code after variable versioning, its corresponding HSSA form along with its hash
table entries. q1 + 1 that simplifies into +(h0 , h6 ) will be hashed to h7 , and ivar(∗q2 , v2∗ ) that
simplifies into ivar(∗h7 , v2∗ ) will be hashed to h14

structure, with basic blocks made up of a sequence of statements (assignments,
procedure calls, etc.), but the expression operands of each statement and the left-
hand side of assignments are replaced by their corresponding entries in the hash
table. Constants, variables (both scalar and virtual), and expressions all find their
entries in the hash table. As the variables are in SSA form, each SSA version is
assigned one and only one value number. An expression is hashed using its operator
and the value numbers of its operands. An indirect memory operation is regarded
as both expression and variable. Because it is not a leaf, it is hashed based on its
operator and the value number of its address operand. Because it has the property of
a variable, the value number of its associated virtual variable version is also included
in the hashing. This is illustrated in lines 3, 5, 7, and 8 of the example code in
Fig. 16.3. Such entries are referred to as ivar nodes, for indirect variables, to denote
their operational semantics and to distinguish them from the regular scalar variables.
   From the code generation point of view, ivar nodes are operations and not
variables. The compiler back end, when processing them, will emit indirect memory
222                                                                   M. Mantione and F. Chow

accesses to the addresses specified as their operand. On the other hand, the virtual
variables have no real counterpart in the program’s code generation. In this sense,
virtual variables can be regarded as a tool to associate aliasing effects with indirect
memory operations and construct use-def relationships in the program that involves
the indirect memory operations. Using virtual variables, indirect memory operations
are no longer relegated to second-class citizens in SSA-based optimization phases.
   As a supplementary note, in HSSA, because values and variables in particular
can be uniquely identified using value numbers, the reference to SSA versions has
been rendered redundant. In fact, to further ensure uniform treatment among scalar
and indirect variables in the implementation, the use of SSA version numbers should
be omitted in the representation.

16.5 Building HSSA

We now put together all the topics discussed in this chapter by detailing the steps
to build HSSA starting from some non-SSA representations of the program. The
first task is to construct the SSA form for the scalar and virtual variables, and this is
displayed in Algorithm 16.2.
 Algorithm 16.2: SSA form construction
   1. Perform alias analysis and assign a virtual variable to all indirect memory operations.
   2. Insert μ-functions and χ-functions for scalar and virtual variables.
   3. Insert φ-functions as in standard SSA construction, including the χ’s as additional
      assignment statements.
   4. Perform SSA renaming on all scalar and virtual variables as in standard SSA construction.

   At the end of Algorithm 16.2, all scalar and virtual variables have SSA
information, but the indirect memory operations are only “annotated” with virtual
variables and cannot be regarded as being in SSA form.
   Next, we perform a round of dead store elimination based on the constructed SSA
form and then run our zero-version detection algorithm to detect zero versions in the
scalar and virtual variables. These correspond to Steps 5 and 6 in Algorithm 16.3,
respectively.
 Algorithm 16.3: Detecting zero versions
   5. Perform dead store elimination on the scalar and virtual variables based on their SSA form.
   6. Initialize HasRealOcc and NonZeroPhiList as for Algorithm 16.1, then run Algorithm 16.1
      (Zero-version detection).

   At this point, however, the number of unique SSA versions have diminished
because of the application of zero versioning. The final task is to build the
HSSA representation of the program by applying GVN. The steps are displayed
in Algorithm 16.4.
16 Hashed SSA Form: HSSA                                                                       223

 Algorithm 16.4: Applying GVN
   7. Hash a unique value number and create the hash table var node for each scalar and virtual
      variable version that is live. Only one node needs to be created for the zero version of each
      variable.
   8. Conduct a preorder traversal of the dominator tree of the control flow graph, applying
      GVN to code in each basic block:
      a. Hash expressions bottom up into the hash table, reusing existing hash table nodes
         that have identical value numbers; for var nodes, use corresponding nodes created in
         step 7 according to their SSA versions.
      b. Two ivar nodes have the same value number if the following two conditions are both
         satisfied:
         • their address expressions have the same value number, and
         • their virtual variables have the same versions.
      c. For each assignment statement (φ and χ included), represent its left-hand side by
         creating a link from the statement to the var or ivar node in the hash table; at the same
         time, make the var or ivar node point back to its defining statement.
      d. Update all φ, μ and χ operands and results to refer to entries in the hash table.

    At the end of Algorithm 16.4, HSSA form is complete, and every value in the
program code is represented by a reference to a node in the hash table.
    The purpose of the preorder traversal processing order in Algorithm 16.4 is not
strictly required to ensure the correctness of the HSSA, because we already have
SSA version information for the scalar and virtual variables. Because this processing
order ensures that we always visit definitions before their uses, it streamlines the
implementation and also makes it easier to perform additional optimizations like
copy propagation during the program traversal. It is also possible to go up the
use-def chains for virtual variables and analyse the address expressions of their
associated indirect memory operations to determine more accurate alias relations
among ivar nodes that share the same virtual variable.
    In HSSA form, expression trees are converted to directed acyclic graphs (DAGs),
which is more memory efficient than ordinary program representation because of
node sharing. Many optimizations can run faster on HSSA because they only need
to be applied once on the shared use nodes. Optimization implementations can also
take advantage of the fact that it is trivial to check if two expressions compute the
same value in HSSA.

16.6 Further Reading

The earliest attempts at accommodating may-alias information into SSA form are
represented by the work of Cytron and Gershbein [88], where they defined may-
alias sets of the form MayAlias(p, S), which gives the variable names aliased with
∗p at statement S in the program. Calls to an IsAlias(p, v) function are then inserted
224                                                          M. Mantione and F. Chow

into the program at points in the program where modifications due to aliasing
occur. The IsAlias(p, v) function contains code that models runtime logic and
returns appropriate values based on the pointer values. To address the high cost
of this representation, Cytron and Gershbein proposed an incremental approach for
including may-alias information into SSA form in their work.
   The use of assignment factoring to represent MayDefs was first proposed by
Choi et al. [68]. The same factoring was referred to as location factored SSA form
by Steensgaard [272]. He also used assignment factoring to reduce the number of
SSA variables in his SSA form.
   The idea of value numbering can be traced to Cocke and Schwartz [77]. While the
application of global value numbering (GVN) in this chapter is more for the purpose
of representation than optimization, GVN has mostly been discussed in the context
of redundancy elimination [76, 249]. Chapter 11 covers redundancy elimination in
depth and also contains a discussion of GVN.
   HSSA was first proposed by Chow et al. [72] and first implemented in the
Open64 compiler [7, 64, 65]. All the SSA-based optimizations in the Open64
compiler were implemented based on HSSA. Their copy propagation and dead
store elimination work uniformly on both direct and indirect memory operations.
Their redundancy elimination covers indirect memory references as well as other
expressions. Other SSA-based optimizations in the Open64 compiler include loop
induction variable canonicalization [185], strength reduction [163], and register
promotion [187]. Induction variable recognition is discussed in Chap. 10. Strength
reduction and register promotion are also discussed in Chap. 11.
   The most effective way to optimize indirect memory operations is to promote
them to scalars when possible. This optimization is called indirection removal.
In the Open64 compiler, it depends on the ability of copy propagation to convert
the address expressions of indirect memory operations to address constants. The
indirect memory operations can then be folded to direct loads and stores. Subsequent
register promotion will promote the scalars to registers. If the scalars are free of
aliasing, they will not be allocated storage in memory.
   Lapkowski and Hendren proposed the use of Extended SSA Numbering to
capture the semantics of aliases and pointer accesses [175]. Their SSA number
idea borrows from SSA’s version numbering, in the sense that a new number is
used to annotate the variable whenever it could assume a new value. φ-nodes are
not represented, and not all SSA numbers need to have explicit definitions. SSA
numbers for pointer references are “extended” to two numbers, the primary one
for the pointer variable and the secondary one for the pointed-to memory location.
But because it is not SSA form, it does not exhibit many of the nice properties of
SSA, like single definitions and built-in use-defs. It cannot benefit from the many
SSA-based optimization algorithms either.
   The GCC compiler originally uses different representation schemes between
unaliased scalar variables and aliased memory-residing objects. To avoid compro-
mising the compiler’s optimization when dealing with memory operations, Novillo
proposed a unified approach for representing both scalars and arbitrary memory
expressions in their SSA form [211]. They do not use Hashed SSA, but their
16 Hashed SSA Form: HSSA                                                         225

approach to representing aliasing in its SSA form is very similar to ours. They
define the virtual operators VDEF and VUSE, which correspond to our χ - and
μ-functions. They started out by creating symbol names for any memory-residing
program entities. This resulted in an explosion in the number of VDEFs and VUSEs
inserted. They then used assignment factoring to cut down the number of these
virtual operators, in which memory symbols are partitioned into groups. The virtual
operators were then inserted on a per-group basis, thus reducing compilation time.
Since the reduced representation precision has a negative effect on optimizations,
they provided different partitioning schemes to reduce the impact on optimizations.
    One class of indirectly accessed memory objects is array, in which each element
is addressed via an index or subscript expression. HSSA distinguishes among
different elements of an array only to the extent of determining if the address
expressions compute to the same value or not. When two address expressions have
the same value, the two indirect memory references are definitely the same. But
when the two address expressions cannot be determined to be the same, they may
still be the same. Thus, HSSA cannot provide definitely different information. In
contrast, the array SSA form can enable more accurate program analysis among
accesses to array elements by incorporating the indices into the SSA representation.
The array SSA form can capture element-level use-defs, whereas HSSA cannot. In
addition, the heap memory storage area can be modelled using abstract arrays that
represent disjoint subsets of the heap, with pointers to the heap being treated like
indices. Array SSA is covered in detail in Chap. 17. When array references are affine
expressions of loop indices, the appropriate representation for dependencies is the
so-called dependence relations in the polyhedral model [116].
