Chapter 15
Psi-SSA Form

François de Ferrière

In the SSA representation, each definition of a variable is given a unique name, and
new pseudo-definitions are introduced on φ-functions to merge values coming from
different control-flow paths. An example is given in Fig. 15.1b. Each definition is an
unconditional definition, and the value of a variable is the value of the expression
on the unique assignment to this variable. This essential property of the SSA
representation no longer holds when definitions may be conditionally executed.
When a variable is defined by a predicated operation, the value of the variable will
or will not be modified depending on the value of a guard register. As a result,
the value of the variable after the predicated operation is either the value of the
expression on the assignment if the predicate is true, or the value the variable had
before this operation if the predicate is false. This is represented in Fig. 15.1c where
we use the notation p ? a = op to indicate that an operation a = op is executed
only if predicate p is true , and is ignored otherwise. We will also use the notation
p to refer to the complement of predicate p. The goal of the ψ-SSA form advocated
in this chapter is to express these conditional definitions while keeping the Static
Single Assignment property.

15.1 Definition and Construction

Predicated operations are used to convert control-flow regions into straight-line
code. Predicated operations may be used by the intermediate representation in an
early stage of the compilation process as a result of inlining intrinsic functions. Later

F. de Ferrière (?)
STMicroelectronics, Grenoble, France
e-mail: francois.de-ferriere@st.com

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022      201
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_15

Fig. 15.1 SSA representation

on, the compiler may also generate predicated operations through if-conversion
optimizations as described in Chap. 20.
    In Fig. 15.1c, the use of a on the last instruction refers to the variable a1 if
p is false, or to the variable a2 if p is true. These multiple reaching definitions
on the use of a cannot be represented by the standard SSA representation. One
possible representation would be to use the gated SSA form, presented in Chap. 14.
In such a representation, the φ-function would be augmented with the predicate p
to tell which value between a1 and a2 is to be considered. However, gated SSA is a
completely different intermediate representation where the control flow is no longer
represented. This representation is better suited to program interpretation than to
optimizations at code-generation level as addressed in this chapter. Another possible
representation would be to add a reference to a1 on the definition of a2 . In this case,
p ? a2 = op2 | a1 would have the following semantic: a2 takes the value computed
by op2 if p is true, or holds the value of a1 if p is false. The use of a on the last
instruction of Fig. 15.1c would now refer to the variable a2 , which holds the correct
value. The drawback of this representation is that it adds dependencies between
operations (here a flow dependence from op1 to op2), which would prevent code
reordering for scheduling.
    Our solution is presented in Fig. 15.1d. The φ-function of the SSA code with
control flow is “replaced” by a ψ-function on the corresponding predicated code,
with information on the predicate associated with each argument. This representa-
tion is adapted to code optimization and code generation on a low-level intermediate
representation. A ψ-function a0 = ψ(p1 ?a1 , . . . , pi ?ai , . . . , pn ?an ) defines one
variable, a0 , and takes a variable number of arguments ai ; each argument ai is
associated with a predicate pi . In the notation, the predicate pi will be omitted
if pi ≡ true.
    A ψ-function has the following properties:
• It is an operation: A ψ-function is a regular operation. It can occur at any location
  in a basic block where a regular operation is valid. Each argument ai , and each
  predicate pi , must be dominated by its definition.
• It
   nis predicated: A ψ-function is a predicated operation, under the predicate
     k=1 pk , although this predicate is not explicit in the representation.

Fig. 15.2 ψ-SSA with
non-disjoint predicates

                                 control-flow code                   Predicated code

• It has an ordered list of arguments: The order of the arguments in a ψ-function
  is significant. A ψ-function is evaluated from left to right. The value of a ψ-
  function is the value of the rightmost argument whose predicate evaluates to true.
• Rule on predicates: The predicate pi associated with the argument ai in a ψ-
  function must be included in or equal to the predicate on the definition of the
  variable ai . In other words, for the code q ? ai = op; a0 = ψ(. . . , pi ?ai , . . . ),
  we must have pi ⊆ q (or pi ⇒ q).
    A ψ-function can represent cases where variables are defined on arbitrary
independent predicates such as p and q in the example of Fig. 15.2: For this
example, during the SSA construction, a unique variable a was renamed into the
variables a1 , a2 , and a3 , and the variables x1 and x2 were introduced to merge
values coming from different control-flow paths. In the control-flow version of the
code, there is a control dependence between the basic block that defines x1 and the
operation that defines a3 , which means that the definition of a3 must be executed
after the value for x1 has been computed. In the predicated form of this example,
there are no longer any control dependencies between the definitions of a1 , a2 , and
a3 . A compiler transformation can now freely move these definitions independently
of each other, which may allow more optimizations to be performed on this code.
However, the semantics of the original code requires that the definition of a3 occurs
after the definitions of a1 and a2 . The order of the arguments in a ψ-function gives
information on the original order of the definitions. We take the convention that the
order of the arguments in a ψ-function is, from left to right, equal to the original
order of their definitions, from top to bottom, in the control-flow dominance tree of
the program in a non-SSA representation. This information is needed to maintain the
correct semantics of the code during transformations of the ψ-SSA representation
and to revert the code back to a non-ψ-SSA representation.
    The construction of the ψ-SSA representation is a small modification to the
standard algorithm to build an SSA representation (see Sect. 3.1). The insertion of
ψ-functions is performed during the SSA renaming phase. During this phase, basic
blocks are processed in their dominance order, and operations in each basic block
are scanned from top to bottom. On an operation, for each predicated definition
of a variable, a new ψ-function will be inserted just after the operation. Consider
the definition of a variable x under predicate p2 (p2 ? x = op); suppose that x1
is the current version of x before proceeding to op and that x1 is defined through

Fig. 15.3 Construction and renaming of ψ-SSA

predicate p1 (possibly true); after renaming x into a freshly created version, say
x2 , a ψ-function of the form x = ψ(p1 ?x1 , p2 ?x) is inserted right after op. Then
the renaming of this new operation proceeds. The first argument of the ψ-function
is already renamed and thus is not modified. The second argument is renamed
into the current version of x, that is, x2 . On the definition of the ψ-function, the
variable x is given a new name, x3 , which becomes the current version for further
references to the x variable. This insertion and renaming of a ψ-function is shown
in Fig. 15.3.
    ψ-functions can also be introduced into an SSA representation by applying
an if-conversion transformation, such as the one described in Chap. 20. Local
transformations of control-flow patterns can also require the replacement of φ-
functions by ψ-functions.

15.2 SSA Algorithms

With this definition of the ψ-SSA representation, implicit data-flow links to
predicated operations are now explicitly expressed through ψ-functions. The usual
algorithms that perform optimizations or transformations on the SSA representation
can now be easily adapted to the ψ-SSA representation, without compromising
the efficiency of the transformations performed. Actually, within the ψ-SSA
representation, predicated definitions behave exactly the same as non-predicated
ones for optimizations on the SSA representation. Only the ψ-functions have to
be treated in a specific way. As an example, the classical constant propagation
algorithm under SSA can be easily adapted to the ψ-SSA representation. In this
algorithm, the only modification concerns ψ-functions, which have to be handled
using the same rules as with the φ-functions. Other algorithms such as dead code
elimination (see Chap. 3), global value numbering, partial redundancy elimination
(see Chap. 11), and induction variable analysis (see Chap. 10) are examples of
algorithms that can easily be adapted to this representation with little effort.

15.3 Psi-SSA Algorithms

In addition to standard algorithms that can be applied to ψ-functions and predicated
code, a number of specific transformations can be performed on the ψ-functions,
namely ψ-inlining, ψ-reduction, ψ-projection, ψ-permutation, and ψ-promotion.

Fig. 15.4 ψ-Inlining of the definition of x1

Fig. 15.5 ψ-Reduction. The first argument a1 of the ψ-function can safely be removed

For a ψ-function a0 = ψ(p1 ?a1 , . . . , pi ?ai , . . . , pn ?an ), these transformations are
defined as follows:
    ψ-Inlining recursively replaces in a ψ- function an argument ai that is defined
on another ψ- function by the arguments of this other ψ-function. The predicate
pi associated with argument ai will be distributed with an and operation over the
predicates associated with the inlined arguments. This is shown in Fig. 15.4.
    ψ-Reduction removes from a ψ-function an argument ai whose value will
always be overridden by arguments on its right in the argument       ?      list. An argument
ai associated with predicate pi can be removed if pi ⊆ nk=i+1 pk . This can be
illustrated by the example of Fig. 15.5.
    ψ-Projection creates from a ψ-function a new ψ-function on a restricted
predicate, say p. In this new ψ-function, an argument ai initially guarded by pi
will be guarded by the conjunction pi ∧ p. If pi is known to be disjoint with p,
ai actually contributes no value to the ψ-function and thus can be removed. ψ-
projection on predicate p is usually performed when the result of a ψ-function is
used in an operation predicated by p. This is illustrated in Fig. 15.6.
    ψ-Permutation changes the order of the arguments in a ψ-function. In a ψ-
function, the order of the arguments is significant. Two arguments in a ψ-function
can be permuted if the intersection of their associated predicate in the ψ-function is
empty. An example of such a permutation is shown in Fig. 15.7.
    ψ-Promotion changes one of the predicates used in a ψ-function to a
larger predicate. The promotion must obey the following condition so that
the semantics of the ψ-function is not altered by the transformation: consider
an operation a0 = ψ(p1 ?x1 , . . . , pi ?xi , . . . , pn ?xn ) promoted into a0 =

Fig. 15.6 ψ-Projection of x2
on p2 . Second argument a3
can be removed

Fig. 15.7 ψ-Permutation of
arguments a2 and a3

Fig. 15.8 ψ-SSA for partial predication. ψ-Promotion of argument a1

ψ(p1 ?x1 , . . . , pi ?xi , . . . , pn ?xn ) with pi ⊆ pi , and then pi must fulfil

                                          n
                                                      i−1
                                  pi \         pk ∩         pk = ∅,                         (15.1)
                                         k=i          k=1
             
where pi \? nk=i pk corresponds to the possible increase of the predicate of the ψ-
function, nk=1 pk . This promotion must also satisfy the properties of ψ-functions,
and, in particular, that the predicate associated with a variable in a ψ-function must
be included in or equal to the predicate on the definition of that variable (which itself
can be a ψ-function). A simple ψ-promotion is illustrated in Fig. 15.8c.
    The ψ-SSA representation can be used on a partially predicated architecture,
where only a subset of the instructions supports a predicate operand. Figure 15.8
shows an example where some code with control-flow edges was transformed into
a linear sequence of instructions. Taking the example of an architecture where the
ADD operation cannot be predicated, the ADD operation must be speculated under
the true predicate. On an architecture where the ADD operation can be predicated,
it may also be profitable to perform speculation in order to reduce the number of
predicates on predicated code and to reduce the number of operations to compute
these predicates. Once speculation has been performed on the definition of a variable
used in a ψ-function, the predicate associated with this argument can be promoted,
provided that the semantics of the ψ-function is maintained (Eq. 15.1).
    Usually, the first argument of a ψ-function can be promoted under the true pred-
icate. Also, when disjoint conditions are computed, one of them can be promoted
to include the other conditions, usually reducing the number of predicates. A side
effect of this transformation is that it may increase the number of copy instructions
to be generated during the ψ-SSA destruction phase, as will be explained in the
following section.

15.4 Psi-SSA Destruction

The SSA destruction phase reverts an SSA representation into a non-SSA repre-
sentation. This phase must be adapted to the ψ-SSA representation. This algorithm
uses ψ-φ-webs to create a conventional ψ-SSA representation. The notion of φ-

webs is extended to φ and ψ operations so as to derive the notion of conventional
ψ-SSA (ψ-C-SSA) form . A ψ-φ-web is a non-empty, minimal set of variables such
that if two variables are referenced on the same φ or ψ-function, then they are in
the same ψ-φ-web. The property of the ψ-C-SSA form is that the renaming into a
single variable of all variables that belong to the same ψ-φ-web, and the removal of
the ψ and φ functions, results in a program with the same semantics as the original
program.
   Now, consider Fig. 15.9 to illustrate the transformations that must be performed
to convert a program from a ψ-SSA form into a program in ψ-C-SSA form.
   Looking at the first example (Fig. 15.9a), the dominance order of the definitions
for the variables a and b differs from their order from left to right in the ψ-function.
Such code may appear after a code motion algorithm has moved the definitions for
a and b relatively to each other. Here, the renaming of the variables a, b, and x into
a single variable will not restore the semantics of the original program. The order
in which the definitions of the variables a, b, and x occur must be corrected. This is
done through the introduction of the variable c that is defined as a predicated copy
of the variable b, after the definition of a. Now, the renaming of the variables a, c,
and x into a single variable will result in the correct behaviour.
   In Fig. 15.9d, the definition of the variable b has been speculated. However,
according to the semantics of the ψ-function, the variable x will only be assigned
the value of b when p is true. A new variable c must be defined as a predicated copy

Fig. 15.9 Non-conventional ψ-SSA (ψ-T-SSA) form, ψ-C-SSA forms, and non-SSA form after
destruction

of the variable b, after the definition of b and p; in the ψ-function, variable b is then
replaced by variable c. The renaming of variables a, c, and x into a single variable
will now follow the correct behaviour.
   In Fig. 15.9g, the renaming of the variables a, b, c, x, and y into a single variable
will not give the correct semantics. In fact, the value of a used in the second ψ-
function would be overridden by the definition of b before the definition of the
variable c. Such code will occur after copy folding has been applied on a ψ-SSA
representation. We see that the value of a has to be preserved before the definition
of b. This is done through the definition of a new variable (d here), resulting in
the code given in Fig. 15.9h. Now, the variables a, b, and x can be renamed into a
single variable, and the variables d, c, and y will be renamed into another variable,
resulting in a program in a non-SSA form with the correct behaviour.
   We will now present an algorithm that will transform a program from a ψ-SSA
form into its ψ-C-SSA form. This algorithm comprises three parts:
• Psi-normalize: This phase puts all ψ-functions in what we call a normalized
  form.
• Psi-web: This phase grows ψ-webs from ψ-functions and introduces repair code
  where needed such that each ψ-web is interference-free.
• Phi-web: This phase is the standard SSA destruction algorithm (e.g., see
  Chap. 21) with the additional constraint that all variables in a ψ-web must be
  coalesced together. This can be done using the pinning mechanism presented in
  Chap. 21.
   We now detail the implementation of each of the first two parts.

15.4.1 Psi-Normalize

We define the notion of normalized-ψ. The normalized form of a ψ-function has
two characteristics:
• The order of the arguments in a normalized-ψ-function is, from left to right,
  equal to the order of their definitions, from top to bottom, in the control-flow
  dominance tree.
• The predicate associated with each argument in a normalized-ψ-function is equal
  to the predicate used on the unique definition of this argument.
    These two characteristics correspond respectively to the two cases presented
in Fig. 15.9a, d. When some arguments of a ψ-function are also defined by ψ-
functions, the normalized-ψ characteristics must hold on a virtual ψ-function where
ψ-inlining has been performed on these arguments.
    When ψ-functions are created during the construction of the ψ-SSA represen-
tation, they are naturally built in their normalized form. Later, transformations are
applied to the ψ-SSA representation. Predicated definitions may be moved relatively
to each other. Also, operation speculation and copy folding may enlarge the domain

of the predicate used on the definition of a variable. These transformations may
cause some ψ-functions to be in a non-normalized form.
PSI-Normalize Implementation
Each ψ-function is processed independently. An analysis of the ψ-functions in a
top-down traversal of the dominator tree reduces the amount of repair code that is
inserted during this pass. We only detail the algorithm for such a traversal.
    For a ψ-function a0 = ψ(p1 ?a1 , . . . , pi ?ai , . . . , pn ?an ), the argument list is
processed from left to right. For each argument ai , the predicate pi associated with
this argument in the ψ-function and the predicate used on the definition of this
argument are compared. If they are not equal, a new variable ai is introduced and
is initialized at the highest point in the dominator tree after the definitions of ai
and pi . ai is defined by the operation pi ? ai = ai . Then ai is replaced by ai in the
ψ-function.
    Next, we consider the dominance order of the definition for ai in respect of the
definition for ai−1 . When ai is defined on a ψ-function, we recursively look for the
definition of the first argument of this ψ-function, until a definition on a non-ψ-
function is found. If the definition we found for ai dominates the definition for ai−1 ,
a correction is needed. If the predicates pi−1 and pi are disjoint, a ψ-permutation
can be applied between ai−1 and ai , so as to reflect into the ψ-function the actual
dominance order of the definitions of ai−1 and ai . If ψ-permutation cannot be
applied, a new variable ai is created for repair. ai is defined by the operation
pi ?ai = ai . This copy operation is inserted at the highest point that is dominated
by the definitions of ai−1 and ai .1 Then ai is replaced in the ψ-function by ai .
    The algorithm continues with the argument ai+1 , until all arguments of the
ψ-function are processed. When all arguments are processed, the ψ is in its
normalized form. When all ψ functions are processed, the function will contain
only normalized-ψ-functions.

15.4.2 Psi-web

The role of the psi-web phase is to repair the ψ-functions that are part of a
non-interference-free ψ-web. This case corresponds to the example presented in
Fig. 15.9g. In the same way as there is a specific point of use for arguments on φ-
functions for liveness analysis (e.g., see Sect. 21.2), we give a definition of the actual
point of use of arguments on normalized ψ-functions for liveness analysis. With this
definition, liveness analysis is computed accurately, and an interference graph can
be built. The cases where repair code is needed can be easily and accurately detected
by observing that variables in a ψ-function interfere.

1 When a is defined by a ψ-function, its definition may appear after the definition for a
        i                                                                                i−1 ,
although the non-ψ definition for ai appears before the definition for ai−1 .

Fig. 15.10 ψ-Functions and
C conditional operations
equivalence

Liveness and Interferences in Psi-SSA
Consider the code in Fig. 15.10b. Instead of using a representation with ψ-functions,
predicated definitions have been modified to make a reference to the value the
predicated definition will have in the event that the predicate evaluates to false. In
this example, we use the notation of the select operator x = cond ? exp1 : exp2
that assigns exp1 to x if cond is true and exp2 otherwise. Each of the predicated
definitions makes explicit use of the variable immediately to its left in the argument
list of the original ψ-function from Fig. 15.10a. We can see that a renaming of the
variables a, b, c, and x into a single representative name will still compute the same
value for the variable x. Note that this transformation can only be performed on
normalized ψ-functions, since the definition of an argument must be dominated by
the definition of the argument immediately to its left in the argument list of the ψ-
function, and the same predicate must be used on the definition of an argument and
with this argument in the ψ operation. Using this equivalence for the representation
of a ψ-function, we now give a definition of the point of use for the arguments of a
ψ-function.
Definition 15.1 (Use Points) Let a0 = ψ(p1 ?a1 , . . . , pi ?ai , . . . , pn ?an ) be a nor-
malized ψ-function. For i < n, the point of use of argument ai occurs at the
operation that defines ai+1 . The point of use for the last argument an occurs at
the ψ-function itself.
   Given this definition of point of use of ψ-function arguments, and using the usual
point of use of φ-function arguments, a traditional liveness analysis can be run. Then
an interference graph can be built to collect the interferences between variables
involved in ψ or φ-functions. For the construction of the interference graph, an
interference between two variables that are defined on disjoint predicates can be
ignored.
Repairing Interferences on ψ-Functions
We now present an algorithm that resolves the interferences as it builds the ψ-
webs. A pseudo-code is given in Algorithm 15.1. First, the ψ-webs are initialized
with a single variable per ψ-web. Next, ψ-functions are processed one at a time,
in no specific order, merging when non-interfering the ψ-webs of its operands
together. Two ψ-webs interfere if at least one variable in the first ψ-web interferes
with at least one variable in the other one. The arguments of the ψ-function, say
a0 = ψ(p1 ?a1 , . . . , pi ?ai , . . . , pn ?an ), are processed from right (an ) to left (a1 ).
If the ψ-web that contains ai does not interfere with the ψ-web that contains a0 ,
they are merged together. Otherwise, repair code is needed. A new variable, ai , is
created and is initialized with a predicated copy pi ? ai = ai , inserted just above

the definition for ai+1 , or just above the ψ-function in case of the last argument.
The current argument ai in the ψ-function is replaced by the new variable ai . The
interference graph is updated. This can be done by considering the set of variables,
say U , that ai interferes with. For each u ∈ U , if u is in the merged ψ-web, it should
not interfere with ai ; if the definition of u dominates the definition of ai , it is live
through the definition of ai , thus it should be made interfering with ai ; last, if the
definition of ai dominates the definition of b, it should be made interfering only if
this definition is within the live range of ai (see Chap. 9).

 Algorithm 15.1: ψ-Webs merging during the processing of a ψ-function
 a0 = ψ(p1 ?a1 , . . . , pi ?ai , . . . , pn ?an )
 1 let psiWeb be the web containing a0
 2 foreach ai in [an , an−1 , . . . , a1 ] do
 3      let opndWeb be the web containing ai
 4      if opndWeb ?= psiWeb then
 5           if IGraph.interfere(psiWeb, opndWeb) then
 6                let ai be a freshly created variable
 7                let Ci be a new predicated copy pi ? ai ← ai
 8                let op be the operation that defines ai+1 , ai .def .op, or the psi operation
 9                while op is a ψ-function do
10                     replace op by the operation that defines its first argument
11                append Ci right before op
12                replace ai by ai in the ψ-function
13                opndWeb ← {ai }
14                foreach u in IGraph.interferenceSet(ai ) do
15                     if u ?∈ psiWeb then                    ?
16                           if u.def .opdominates ai .def .op ai ∈ livein(u.def .op) then
17                                IGraph.addInterference(ai , a)

18           psiWeb ← psiWeb ∪ opndWeb

   Consider the code in Fig. 15.11 to see how this algorithm works. The liveness on
the ψ-function creates a live range for variable a that extends down to the definition

Fig. 15.11 Elimination of ψ live interference

of b, but not further down. Thus, the variable a does not interfere with the variables
b, c, or x. The live range for variable b extends down to its use in the definition of
variable d. This live range interferes with the variables c and x. The live range for
variable c extends down to its use in the ψ-function that defines the variable x. At
the beginning of the processing on the ψ-function x = ψ(p?a, q?b, r?c), ψ-webs
are singletons {a}, {b}, {c}, {x}, {d}. The argument list is processed from right to
left, i.e., starting with variable c. {c} does not interfere with {x}, and they can be
merged together, resulting in psiWeb = {x, c}. Next, variable b is processed. Since
it interferes with both x and c, repair code is needed. A variable b’ is created and is
initialized just below the definition for b, as a predicated copy of b. The interference
graph is updated conservatively, with no changes. psiWeb now becomes {x, b , c}.
Then variable a is processed, and as no interference is encountered, {a} is merged
to psiWeb. The final code after SSA destruction is shown in Fig. 15.11c.

15.5 Further Reading

In this chapter, we have mainly described the ψ-SSA representation and have
detailed specific transformations that can be performed thanks to this representation.
More details on the implementation of the ψ-SSA algorithms, and figures on the
benefits of this representation, can be found in [275] and [104].
   We mentioned in this chapter that a number of classical SSA-based algorithms
can be easily adapted to the ψ-SSA representation, usually by just adapting the rules
on the φ-functions to the ψ-functions. Among these algorithms, we can mention the
constant propagation algorithm described in [303], dead code elimination [202],
global value numbering [76], partial redundancy elimination [73], and induction
variable analysis [306], which have already been implemented into a ψ-SSA
framework.
   There are also other SSA representations that can handle predicated instructions,
of which the Predicated SSA representation [58]. This representation is targeted
at very low-level optimization to improve operation scheduling in the presence of
predicated instructions. Another representation is the gated SSA form, presented in
Chap. 14.
   The ψ-SSA destruction algorithm presented in this chapter is inspired from the
SSA destruction algorithm of Sreedhar et al. [267], which introduces repair code
when needed as it grows φ-webs from φ-functions. The phi-web phase mentioned
in this chapter to complete the ψ-SSA destruction algorithm can use exactly the
same approach by simply initializing ψ-φ-webs by ψ-webs.
