Chapter 17
Array SSA Form

Vivek Sarkar, Kathleen Knobe, and Stephen Fink

In this chapter, we introduce an Array SSA form that captures element-level data-
flow information for array variables and coincides with standard SSA form when
applied to scalar variables. Any program with arbitrary control-flow structures and
arbitrary array subscript expressions can be automatically converted to this Array
SSA form, thereby making it applicable to structures, heap objects, and any other
data structure that can be modelled as a logical array. A key extension over standard
SSA form is the introduction of a definition- function (denoted def ) that is
capable of merging values from distinct array definitions on an element-by-element
basis. There are several potential applications of Array SSA form in compiler
analysis and optimization of sequential and parallel programs. In this chapter, we
focus on sequential programs and use constant propagation as an exemplar of a
program analysis that can be extended to array variables using Array SSA form and
redundant load elimination as an exemplar of a program optimization that can be
extended to heap objects using Array SSA form.
   The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 17.1 introduces full Array
SSA form for runtime evaluation and partial Array SSA form for static analysis.
Section 17.2 extends the scalar SSA constant propagation algorithm to enable
constant propagation through array elements. This includes an extension to the
constant propagation lattice to efficiently record information about array elements
and an extension to the worklist algorithm to support definition- functions

V. Sarkar (?)
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA
e-mail: vsarkar@gatech.edu
K. Knobe
Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
e-mail: kath.knobe@comcast.net
S. Fink
Facebook, Yorktown Hieght, NY, USA

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   227
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_17
228                                                                         V. Sarkar et al.

(Sect. 17.2.1) and a further extension to support non-constant (symbolic) array
subscripts (Sect. 17.2.2). Section 17.3 shows how Array SSA form can be extended
to support elimination of redundant loads of object fields and array elements in
strongly typed languages, and Sect. 17.4 contains suggestions for further reading.

17.1 Array SSA Form

To introduce full Array SSA form with runtime evaluation of -functions, we use
the concept of an iteration vector to differentiate among multiple dynamic instances
of a static definition, Sk , that occur in the same dynamic instance of Sk ’s enclosing
procedure, f (). Let n be the number of loops that enclose Sk in procedure f ().
These loops could be for-loops, while-loops, or even loops constructed out of goto
statements. For convenience, we treat the outermost region of acyclic control flow
in a procedure as a dummy outermost loop with a single iteration, thereby ensuring
that n ≥ 1.
    A single point in the iteration space is specified by the iteration vector ?i =
(i1 , . . . , in ), which is an n-tuple of iteration numbers, one for each enclosing loop.
For convenience, this definition of iteration vectors assumes that all loops are single-
entry, or equivalently, that the control-flow graph is reducible. (This assumption is
not necessary for partial Array SSA form.) For single-entry loops, we know that
each def executes at most once in a given iteration of its surrounding loops, and
hence the iteration vector serves the purpose of a “timestamp.” The key extensions
in Array SSA form relative to standard SSA form are as follows:
1. Renamed array variables: All array variables are renamed so as to satisfy the
   Static Single Assignment property. Analogous to standard SSA form, control
     -functions are introduced to generate new names for merging two or more
   prior definitions at control-flow join points and to ensure that each use refers
   to precisely one definition.
2. Array-valued @ variables: For each static definition Aj , we introduce an @
   variable (pronounced “at variable”) @Aj that identifies the most recent iteration
   vector at which definition Aj was executed. We assume that all @ variables
   are initialized to the empty vector, ( ), at the start of program execution. Each
   update of a single array element, Aj [k] ← . . ., is followed by the statement,
   @Aj [k] ← ?i, where ?i is the iteration vector for the loops surrounding the
   definition of Aj .
3. Definition ’s: A definition operator def is introduced in Array SSA form to
   deal with preserving (“non-killing”) definitions of arrays. Consider A0 and A1 ,
   two renamed arrays that originated from the same array variable in the source
   program such that A1 [k] ← . . . is an update of a single array element and A0 is
   the prevailing definition at the program point just prior to the definition of A1 . A
   definition , A2 ← def (A1 , @A1 , A0 , @A0 ), is inserted immediately after the
   definitions for A1 and @A1 . Since definition A1 only updates one element of A0 ,
17 Array SSA Form                                                                          229

   A2 represents an element-level merge of arrays A1 and A0 . Definition ’s did not
   need to be inserted in standard SSA form because a scalar definition completely
   kills the old value of the variable.
4. Array-valued -functions: Another consequence of renaming arrays is that
   a -function for array variables must also return an array value. Consider a
   (control or definition) -function of the form, A2 ← (A1 , @A1 , A0 , @A0 ).
   Its semantics can be specified precisely by the following conditional expression
   for each element, A2 [j ], in the result array A2 :

                               if     @A1 [j ] ? @A0 [j ] then A1 [j ]
                     A2 [j ] = else A0 [j ]                                            (17.1)
                               end if

   The key extension over the scalar case is that the conditional expression specifies
   an element-level merge of arrays A1 and A0 .
   Figure 17.1 shows an example program with an array variable and the conversion
of the program to full Array SSA form as defined above.
   We now introduce a partial Array SSA form for static analysis, which serves as
an approximation of full Array SSA form. Consider a (control or definition) -
function, A2 ← (A1 , @A1 , A0 , @A0 ). A static analysis will need to approximate
the computation of this -function by some data-flow transfer function, L . The
inputs and output of L will be lattice elements for scalar/array variables that are
compile-time approximations of their runtime values. We use the notation L (V ) to
denote the lattice element for a scalar or array variable V . Therefore, the statement,

              Example program

                                                   Conversion to Full Array SSA Form

Fig. 17.1 Example program with array variables and its conversion to full array SSA form
230                                                                        V. Sarkar et al.

A2 ←        (A1 , @A1 , A0 , @A0 ), will in general be modelled by the data-flow
equation, L (A2 ) = L (L (A1 ), L (@A1 ), L (A0 ), L (@A0 )).
   While the runtime semantics of -functions for array variables critically depends
on @ variables (Eq. 17.1), many compile-time analyses do not need the full
generality of @ variables. For analyses that do not distinguish among iteration
instances, it is sufficient to model A2 ←        (A1 , @A1 , A0 , @A0 ) by a data-
flow equation, L (A2 ) = Lφ (L (A1 ), L (A0 )), that does not use lattice variables
L (@A1 ) and L (@A0 ). For such cases, a partial Array SSA form can be obtained
by dropping @ variables, and using the φ operator, A2 ← φ(A1 , A0 ) instead of
A2 ← (A1 , @A1 , A0 , @A0 ). A consequence of dropping @ variables is that
partial Array SSA form does not need to deal with iteration vectors and therefore
does not require the control-flow graph to be reducible as in full Array SSA form.
For scalar variables, the resulting φ-function obtained by dropping @ variables
exactly coincides with standard SSA form.

17.2 Sparse Constant Propagation of Array Elements

17.2.1 Array Lattice for Sparse Constant Propagation

In this section, we describe the lattice representation used to model array values for
constant propagation. Let Uind  A and U A be the universal set of index values and
                                          elem
the universal set of array element values, respectively, for an array variable A. For an
array variable, the set denoted by lattice element L (A) is a subset of index-element
pairs in Uind
            A × U A . There are three kinds of lattice elements for array variables
                    elem
that are of interest in our framework:
1. L (A) = ? ⇒ SET(L (A)) = { }
   This “top” case indicates that the set of possible index-element pairs that have
   been identified thus far for A is the empty set, { }.
2. L (A) = (i1 , e1 ), (i2 , e2 ), . . ."
   ⇒ SET(L (A)) = {(i1 , e1 ), (i2 , e2 ), . . .} ∪ (Uind  A − {i , i , . . .}) × U A
                                                                  1 2              elem
   The lattice element for this “constant” case is represented by a finite list
   of constant index–element pairs, (i1 , e1 ), (i2 , e2 ), . . .". The constant indices,
   i1 , i2 , . . ., must represent distinct (non-equal) index values. The meaning of this
   lattice element is that the current stage of analysis has identified some finite
   number of constant index–element pairs for array variable A, such that A[i1 ] =
   e1 , A[i2 ] = e2 , etc. All other elements of A are assumed to be non-constant.
   (Extensions to handle non-constant indices are described in Sect. 17.2.2.)
3. L (A) = ⊥ ⇒ SET(L (A)) = Uind                A ×UA
                                                      elem
   This “bottom” case indicates that, according to the approximation in the current
   stage of analysis, array A may take on any value from the universal set of index–
   element pairs. Note that L (A) = ⊥ is equivalent to an empty list, L (A) = ",
   in case (2) above; they both denote the universal set of index–element pairs.
17 Array SSA Form                                                                         231

Fig. 17.2 Lattice computation for L (A1 [k]) = L[ ] (L (A1 ), L (k)), where A1 [k] is an array
element read operator

Fig. 17.3 Lattice computation for L (A1 ) = Ld[ ] (L (k), L (i)), where A1 [k] ← i is an array
element write operator

    We now describe how array lattice elements are computed for various operations
that appear in Array SSA form. We start with the simplest operation viz. a read
access to an array element. Figure 17.2 shows how L (A1 [k]), the lattice element
for array reference A1 [k], is computed as a function of L (A1 ) and L (k), the
lattice elements for A1 and k. We denote this function by L[ ] , i.e., L (A1 [k]) =
L[ ] (L (A1 ), L (k)). The interesting case in Fig. 17.2 occurs in the middle cell when
neither L (A1 ) nor L (k) is ? or ⊥. The notation DS in the middle cell in Fig. 17.2
represents a “definitely same” binary relation, i.e., DS (a, b) = true if and only if
a and b are known to have exactly the same value.
    Next, consider a write access of an array element, which in general has the form
A1 [k] ← i. Figure 17.3 shows how L (A1 ), the lattice element for the array being
written into, is computed as a function of L (k) and L (i), the lattice elements for
k and i. We denote this function by Ld[ ] , i.e., L (A1 ) = Ld[ ] (L (k), L (i)). As
before, the interesting case in Fig. 17.3 occurs in the middle cell when both L (k)
and L (i) are constant. For this case, the value returned for L (A1 ) is simply the
singleton list, (L (k), L (i)) ", which contains exactly one constant index–element
pair.
    Now, we turn our attention to the φ-function. Consider a definition-φ-function
of the form, A2 ← φdef (A1 , A0 ). The lattice computation for L (A2 ) =
Lφdef (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) is shown in Fig. 17.4. Since A1 corresponds to a definition
of a single array element, the list for L (A1 ) can contain at most one pair (see
Fig. 17.3). Therefore, the three cases considered for L (A1 ) in Fig. 17.4 are
L (A1 ) = ?, L (A1 ) = (i , e )", and L (A1 ) = ⊥.
232                                                                             V. Sarkar et al.

Fig. 17.4 Lattice computation for L (A2 ) = Lφdef (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) where A2 ← φdef (A1 , A0 )
is a definition φ operation

Fig. 17.5 Lattice computation for L (A2 ) = Lφ (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) = L (A1 ) # L (A0 ), where
A2 ← φ(A1 , A0 ) is a control φ operation

   The notation UPDATE((i , e ), (i1 , e1 ), . . .") used in the middle cell in Fig. 17.4
denotes a special update of the list L (A0 ) = (i1 , e1 ), . . ." with respect to the
constant index–element pair (i , e ). UPDATE involves four steps:
1. Compute the list T = { (ij , ej ) | (ij , ej ) ∈ L (A0 ) and DD(i , ij ) = true }.
   Analogous to DS , DD denotes a “definitely different” binary relation, i.e.,
   DD(a, b) = true if and only if a and b are known to have distinct (non-equal)
   values.
2. Insert the pair (i , e ) into T to obtain a new list, I .
3. (Optional) If there is a desire to bound the height of the lattice due to compile-
   time considerations and the size of list I exceeds a threshold size Z, then one
   of the pairs in I can be dropped from the output list so as to satisfy the size
   constraint.
4. Return I as the value of UPDATE((i , e ), (i1 , e1 ) . . .").
   Finally, consider a control φ-function that merges two array values, A2 ←
φ(A1 , A0 ). The join operator (#) is used to compute L (A2 ), the lattice element
for A2 , as a function of L (A1 ) and L (A0 ), the lattice elements for A1 and A0 , i.e.,
L (A2 ) = Lφ (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) = L (A1 ) # L (A0 ). The rules for computing this
join operator are shown in Fig. 17.5, depending on different cases for L (A1 ) and
L (A0 ). The notation L (A1 ) ∩ L (A0 ) used in the middle cell in Fig. 17.5 denotes
a simple intersection of lists L (A1 ) and L (A0 )—the result is a list of pairs that
appear in both L (A1 ) and L (A0 ).
   We conclude this section by discussing the example program in Fig. 17.6a. The
partial Array SSA form for this example is shown in Fig. 17.6b, and the data-flow
equations for this example are shown in Fig. 17.7a. Each assignment statement in
the partial Array SSA form (in Fig. 17.6b) results in one data-flow equation (in
Fig. 17.7a); the numbering S1 through S8 indicates the correspondence. Any solver
17 Array SSA Form                                                                         233

Fig. 17.6 Sparse constant propagation example (a) and its Array SSA form (b)

Fig. 17.7 (a) Data-flow equations for the sparse constant propagation example of Fig. 17.6 and
their solutions assuming (b) I is unknown or (c) known to be equal to 3

can be used for these data-flow equations, including the standard worklist-based
algorithm for constant propagation using scalar SSA form. The fixpoint solution is
shown in Fig. 17.7b. This solution was obtained assuming L (I ) = ⊥. If, instead,
variable I is known to equal 3, i.e., L (I ) = 3, then the lattice variables that would
be obtained after the fixpoint iteration step has completed are shown in Fig. 17.7c.
In either case (L (I ) = ⊥ or L (I ) = 3), the resulting array element constants
revealed by the algorithm can be used in whatever analyses or transformations the
compiler considers to be profitable to perform.

17.2.2 Beyond Constant Indices

In this section, we address constant propagation through non-constant array
subscripts, as a generalization of the algorithm for constant subscripts described
in Sect. 17.2.1. As an example, consider the program fragment in Fig. 17.8. In the
loop, we see that the read access of a[i] will have a constant value (k × 5 = 10),
234                                                                      V. Sarkar et al.

Fig. 17.8 Example of
constant propagation through
non-constant index

even though the index/subscript value i is not a constant. We would like to extend
the framework from Sect. 17.2.1 to be able to recognize the read of a[i] as constant
in such programs. There are two key extensions that need to be considered for non-
constant (symbolic) subscript values:
• For constants, C1 and C2 , DS (C1 , C2 ) ?= DD(C1 , C2 ). However, for two
  symbols, S1 and S2 , it is possible that both DS (S1 , S2 ) and DD(S1 , S2 ) are
  false, that is, we do not know if they are the same or different.
• For constants, C1 and C2 , the values for DS (C1 , C2 ) and DD(C1 , C2 ) can be
  computed by inspection. For symbolic indices, however, some program analysis
  is necessary to compute the DS and DD relations.
   We now discuss the compile-time computation of DS and DD for symbolic
indices. Observe that, given index values I1 and I2 , only one of the following three
cases is possible:
   Case 1: DS (I1 , I2 ) = false; DD(I1 , I2 ) = false
   Case 2: DS (I1 , I2 ) = true; DD(I1 , I2 ) = false
   Case 3: DS (I1 , I2 ) = false; DD(I1 , I2 ) = true

The first case is the most conservative solution. In the absence of any other
knowledge, it is always correct to state that DS (I1 , I2 ) = false and DD(I1 , I2 ) =
false.
    The problem of determining if two symbolic index values are the same is
equivalent to the classical problem of global value numbering. If two indices i
and j have the same value number, then DS (i, j ) must = true . The problem of
computing DD is more complex. Note that DD, unlike DS , is not an equivalence
relation because DD is not transitive. If DD(A, B) = true and DD(B, C) = true,
it does not imply that DD(A, C) = true. However, we can leverage past work on
array dependence analysis to identify cases for which DD can be evaluated to true.
For example, it is clear that DD(i, i + 1) = true and that DD(i, 0) = true if i is a
loop index variable that is known to be ≥ 1.
    Let us consider how the DS and DD relations for symbolic index values are
used by our constant propagation algorithms. Note that the specification of how DS
and DD are used is a separate issue from the precision of the DS and DD values.
We now describe how the lattice and the lattice operations presented in Sect. 17.2.1
can be extended to deal with non-constant subscripts.
    First, consider the lattice itself. The ? and ⊥ lattice elements retain the same
meaning as in Sect. 17.2.1 viz. SET(?) = { } and SET(⊥) = Uind       A × U A . Each
                                                                             elem
element in the lattice is a list of index-value pairs where the value is still required
17 Array SSA Form                                                                          235

Fig. 17.9 Lattice computation for L (A1 [k]) = L[ ] (L (A1 ), L (k)), where A1 [k] is an array
element read operator. If L (k) = VN(k), the lattice value of index k is a value number that
represents a constant or a symbolic value

Fig. 17.10 Lattice computation for L (A1 ) = Ld[ ] (L (k), L (i)), where A1 [k] ← i is an array
element write operator. If L (k) = VN(k), the lattice value of index k is a value number that
represents a constant or a symbolic value

to be constant but the index may be symbolic—the index is represented by its value
number (VN(i) for SSA variable i).
    We now revisit the processing of an array element read of A1 [k] and the
processing of an array element write of A1 [k]. These operations were presented in
Sect. 17.2.1 (Figs. 17.2 and 17.3) for constant indices. The versions for non-constant
indices appear in Figs. 17.9 and 17.10. For the read operation in Fig. 17.9, if there
exists a pair (ij ,ej ) such that DS (ij , k) = true (i.e., ij and VN(k) have the same
value number), then the result is ej . Otherwise, the result is ? or ⊥ as specified in
Fig. 17.9. For the write operation in Fig. 17.10, if the value of the right-hand side, i,
is a constant, the result is the singleton list (VN(k), L (i))". Otherwise, the result is
? or ⊥ as specified in Fig. 17.10.
    Let us now consider the propagation of lattice values through φdef operators.
The only extension required relative to Fig. 17.4 is that the DD relation used in
performing the UPDATE operation should be able to determine when DD(i , ij ) =
true if i and ij are symbolic value numbers rather than constants. (If no symbolic
information is available for i and ij , then it is always safe to return DD(i , ij ) =
false.)

17.3 Extension to Objects: Redundant Load Elimination

In this section, we introduce redundantload elimination as an exemplar of a program
optimization that can be extended to heap objects in strongly typed languages by
using Array SSA form. This extension models object references (pointers) as indices
into hypothetical heap arrays (Sect. 17.3.1). We then describe how definitely same
236                                                                       V. Sarkar et al.

and definitely different analyses can be extended to heap array indices (Sect. 17.3.2),
followed by a scalar promotion transformation that uses the analysis results to
perform load elimination (Sect. 17.3.3).

17.3.1 Analysis Framework

We introduce a formalism called heap arrays which allows us to model object
references as associative arrays. An extended Array SSA form is constructed on heap
arrays by adding use-φ functions (denoted φuse ). For each field x, we introduce
a hypothetical one-dimensional heap array, H x . Heap array H x consolidates all
instances of field x present in the heap. Heap arrays are indexed by object references.
Thus, a GETFIELD of p.x is modelled as a read of element H x [p], and a PUTFIELD
of q.x is modelled as a write of element H x [q]. The use of distinct heap arrays
for distinct fields leverages the fact that accesses to distinct fields must be directed
to distinct memory locations in a strongly typed language. Note that field x is
considered to be the same field for objects of types C1 and C2 , if C2 is a subtype
of C1 . Accesses to one-dimensional array objects with the same element type are
modelled as accesses to a single two-dimensional heap array for that element type,
with one dimension indexed by the object reference as in heap arrays for fields and
the second dimension indexed by the integer subscript.
   Heap arrays are renamed in accordance with an extended Array SSA form that
contains three kinds of φ-functions:
1. A control-φ-function (φ) from scalar SSA form.
2. A definition-φ-function (φdef ) from Array SSA form.
3. A use-φ-function (φuse ) function creates a new name whenever a statement reads
   a heap array element. φuse -functions represent the extension in “extended” Array
   SSA form.
The main purpose of the φuse -function is to link together load instructions for
the same heap array in control-flow order. While φuse -functions are used by the
redundant load elimination optimization presented in this chapter, it is not necessary
for analysis algorithms (e.g., constant propagation) that do not require the creation
of a new name at each use.

17.3.2 Definitely Same and Definitely Different Analyses for
       Heap Array Indices

In this section, we show how global value numbering and allocation-site information
can be used to efficiently compute definitely same (DS ) and definitely different
(DD) information for heap array indices, thereby reducing pointer analysis queries
17 Array SSA Form                                                                  237

Fig. 17.11 Examples of scalar promotion

to array index queries. If more sophisticated pointer analyses are available in a
compiler, they can be used to further refine the DS and DD information.
   As an example, Fig. 17.11 illustrates two different cases of scalar promotion (load
elimination) for object fields. The notation Hx[p] refers to a read/write access of
heap array element, H x [p]. For the original program in Fig. 17.11a, introducing a
scalar temporary T1 for the store (def) of p.x can enable the load (use) of r.x
to be eliminated, i.e., to be replaced by a use of T1. Figure 17.11b contains an
example in which a scalar temporary (T2) is introduced for the first load of p.x,
thus enabling the second load of r.x to be eliminated, i.e., replaced by T2. In both
cases, the goal of our analysis is to determine that the load of r.x is redundant,
thereby enabling the compiler to replace it by a use of scalar temporary that captures
the value in p.x. We need to establish two facts to perform this transformation:
1. object references p and r are identical (definitely same) in all program executions,
and 2. object references q and r are distinct (definitely different) in all program
executions.
    As before, we use the notation VN(i) to denote the value number of SSA variable
i. Therefore, if VN(i) = VN(j ), then DS (i, j ) = true. For the code fragment
above, the statement, p ← r, ensures that p and r are given the same value
number, VN(p) = VN(r), so that DS (p, r) = true. The problem of computing
DD for object references is more complex than value numbering and relates to
pointer alias analysis. We outline a simple and sound approach below, which can be
238                                                                              V. Sarkar et al.

replaced by more sophisticated techniques as needed. It relies on two observations
related to allocation-sites:
1. Object references that contain the results of distinct allocation-sites must be
   different.
2. An object reference containing the result of an allocation-site must be different
   from any object reference that occurs at a program point that dominates the
   allocation-site in the control-flow graph. For example, in Fig. 17.11, the presence
   of the allocation-site in q ← new Type1 ensures that DD(p, q) = true.

17.3.3 Scalar Promotion Algorithm

The main program analysis needed to enable redundant load elimination is index
propagation, which identifies the set of indices that are available at a specific def/use
Ai of heap array A. Index propagation is a data-flow problem, the goal of which is to
compute a lattice value L (H ) for each renamed heap variable H in the Array SSA
form such that a load of H [?i] is available if V (?i) ∈ L (H ). Note that the lattice
element does not include the value of H [?i] (as in constant propagation), just the
fact that it is available. Figures 17.12, 17.13, and 17.14 give the lattice computations

Fig. 17.12 Lattice computation for L (A2 ) = Lφdef (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) where A2 ← φdef (A1 , A0 )
is a definition φ operation

Fig. 17.13 Lattice computation for L (A2 ) = Lφuse (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) where A2 ← φuse (A1 , A0 )
is a use φ operation

Fig. 17.14 Lattice computation for L (A2 ) = Lφ (L (A1 ), L (A0 )) = L (A1 ) # L (A0 ), where
A2 ← φ(A1 , A0 ) is a control φ operation
17 Array SSA Form                                                                       239

    Extended Array SSA form         After index propagation           After transformation

Fig. 17.15 Trace of index propagation and load elimination transformation for program in
Fig. 17.11a

which define the index propagation solution. The notation UPDATE(i? , i?1 , . . .") used
in the middle cell in Fig. 17.12 denotes a special update of the list L (A0 ) = i?1 , . . ."
with respect to index i? . UPDATE involves four steps:
1. Compute the list T = { i?j | i?j ∈ L (A0 ) and DD(i? , i?j ) = true }. List T
   contains only those indices from L (A0 ) that are definitely different from i? .
2. Insert i? into T to obtain a new list, I .
3. (Optional) As before, if there is a desire to bound the height of the lattice due
   to compile-time considerations and the size of list I exceeds a threshold size Z,
   then any one of the indices in I can be dropped from the output list.
4. Return I as the value of UPDATE(i? , i?1 , . . .").
    After index propagation, the algorithm selects a load, Aj [?
                                                               x ], for scalar promotion
if and only if index propagation determines that an index with value number
VN(()?x ) is available at the def of Aj . Figure 17.15 illustrates a trace of this load
elimination algorithm for the example program in Fig. 17.11a. Figure 17.15a shows
the extended Array SSA form computed for this example program. The results
of index propagation are shown in Fig. 17.15b. These results depend on definitely
different analysis establishing that VN(p) ?= VN(q) and definitely same analysis
establishing that VN(p) = VN(r). Figure 17.15c shows the transformed code after
performing the scalar promotion actions. The load of p.x has thus been eliminated
in the transformed code and replaced by a use of the scalar temporary, T1.

17.4 Further Reading

In this chapter, we introduced an Array SSA form that captures element-level
data-flow information for array variables, illustrated how it can be used to extend
program analyses for scalars to array variables using constant propagation as an
exemplar, and illustrated how it can be used to extend optimizations for scalars
to array variables using load elimination in heap objects as an exemplar. In
240                                                                      V. Sarkar et al.

addition to reading the other chapters in this book for related topics, the interested
reader can consult [168] for details on full Array SSA form, [169] for details on
constant propagation using Array SSA form, [120] for details on load and store
elimination for pointer-based objects using Array SSA form, [253] for efficient
dependence analysis of pointer-based array objects, and [18] for extensions of this
load elimination algorithm to parallel programs.
   There are many possible directions for future research based on this work. The
definitely same and definitely different analyses outlined in this chapter are sound
but conservative. In restricted cases, they can be made more precise using array
subscript analysis from polyhedral compilation frameworks. Achieving a robust
integration of Array SSA and polyhedral approaches is an interesting goal for future
research. Past work on Fuzzy Array Data-flow Analysis (FADA) [19] may provide
a useful foundation for exploring such an integration. Another interesting direction
is to extend the value numbering and definitely different analyses mentioned in
Sect. 17.2.2 so that they can be combined with constant propagation rather than
performed as a pre-pass. An ultimate goal is to combine conditional constant, type
propagation, value numbering, partial redundancy elimination, and otion analyses
within a single framework that can be used to analyse scalar variables, array
variables, and pointer objects with a unified approach.
