Chapter 19
Instruction Code Selection

Dietmar Ebner, Andreas Krall, and Bernhard Scholz

Instruction code selection is a transformation step in a compiler that translates a
machine-independent intermediate code representation into a low-level intermediate
representation or into machine code for a specific target architecture. Instead
of hand-crafting an instruction selector for each target architecture, generator
tools have been developed that generate the instruction code selector based on a
specification. The specification describes the machine of the target and how the
intermediate instructions are mapped to the machine code. This approach is used
in large compiler infrastructures such as GCC or LLVM that target a range of
architectures. A possible scenario of a code generator in a compiler is depicted
in Fig. 19.1. The Intermediate Representation (IR) of an input program is passed
on to an optional lowering phase that breaks down instructions and performs other
machine-dependent transformations. Thereafter, the instruction selection performs
the mapping to machine code or lowered IR based on the machine description of the
target architecture.
   One of the widely used techniques in code generation is tree-pattern matching.
The unit of translation for tree-pattern matching is expressed as a tree structure
that is called a data-flow tree (DFT). The basic idea is to describe the target
instruction set using an ambiguous cost-annotated graph grammar. The instruction
code selector seeks a cost-minimal cover of the DFT. Each of the selected rules

D. Ebner
Waymo, San Jose, CA, USA
e-mail: ebner@waymo.com
A. Krall
TU Wien, Vienna, Austria
e-mail: andi@complang.tuwien.ac.at; andreas.krall@tuwien.ac.at
B. Scholz ()
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
e-mail: Bernhard.Scholz@sydney.edu.au

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   257
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_19
258                                                                                 D. Ebner et al.

                   Code
                                     Machine
                   Generator        Description

           IR          Lowering
                                     Instruction    Machine-             Target Program
                                        Code        Dependent
                      (optional)
                                      Selection      Backend

Fig. 19.1 Scenario: an instruction code selector translates a compiler’s IR to a low-level machine-
dependent representation

Fig. 19.2 Example of a data-flow tree (b) and a rule fragment with associated costs (a)

has an associated semantic action that is used to emit the corresponding machine
instructions, either by constructing a new intermediate representation or by rewriting
the DFT bottom-up.
   An example of a DFT along with a set of rules representing valid ARM
instructions are shown in Fig. 19.2. Each rule consists of non-terminals (shown in
lower case) and terminal symbols (shown in upper case). Non-terminals are used to
chain individual rules together. Non-terminal s denotes a distinguished start symbol
for the root node of the DFT. Terminal symbols match the corresponding labels of
nodes in the data-flow trees. The terminals of the grammar are VAR, CST, SHL,
ADD, and LD. Rules that translate from one non-terminal to another are called chain
rules, e.g., reg ← imm, which translates an immediate value to a register. Note
that there are multiple possibilities to obtain a cover of the data-flow tree for the
example shown in Fig. 19.2b. Each rule has associated costs. The cost of a tree
cover is the sum of the costs of the selected rules. For example, the DFT could be
covered by rules R3 , R4 , and R10 , which would give a total cost for the cover of
one cost unit. Alternatively, the DFT could be covered by rules R2 , R3 , R5 , R7 ,
and R8 yielding four cost units for the cover for issuing four assembly instructions.
A dynamic programming algorithm selects a cost-optimal cover for the DFT.
   Tree-pattern matching on a DFT is limited to the scope of tree structures.
To overcome this limitation, we can extend the scope of the matching algorithm
to the computational flow of a whole procedure. The use of the SSA form as
19 Instruction Code Selection                                                       259

an intermediate representation improves the code generation by making def-use
relationships explicit. Hence, SSA exposes the data flow of a translation unit and
utilizes the code generation process. Instead of using a textual SSA representation,
we employ a graph representation of SSA called the SSA graph1 , which is an
extension of DFTs and represents the data flow for scalar variables of a procedure in
SSA form. SSA graphs are a suitable representation for code generation: First, SSA
graphs capture acyclic and cyclic information flow beyond basic block boundaries.
Second, SSA graphs often arise naturally in modern compilers, as the intermediate
code representation is usually already in SSA form. Third, output dependencies or
anti-dependencies do not exist in SSA graphs.
    As even acyclic SSA graphs are generally not restricted to a tree, no dynamic
programming approach can be employed for instruction code selection. To get a
handle on instruction code selection for SSA graphs, below we will discuss an
approach based on a problem reduction to a quadratic mathematical programming
problem (PBQP). Consider the code fragment of a dot-product routine and the
corresponding SSA graph shown in Fig. 19.3. The code implements a simple vector
dot-product using fixed-point arithmetic. Nodes in the SSA graph represent a single
operation while edges describe the flow of data that is produced at the source node
and consumed at the target node. Incoming edges have an order which reflects the
argument order of the operation.
    The example in Fig. 19.3 has fixed-point computations that have to be expressed
in the grammar. For fixed-point values most arithmetic and bit-wise operations
are identical to their integer equivalents. However, some operations have different
semantics, e.g., multiplying two fixed-point values in format m.i results in a value
with 2i fractional digits. The result of the multiplication has to be adjusted by a
shift operation to the right (LSR). To accommodate for fixed-point values, we add
the following rules to the grammar introduced in Fig. 19.2a:

       rule                                     cost               instruction
       reg ← VAR                  is_fixed_point ? ∞ otherwise 0
       fp ← VAR                   is_fixed_point ? 0 otherwise ∞
       fp2 ← MUL(fp, fp)                         1                 MUL Rd, Rm, Rs
       fp ← fp2                                  1                 LSR Rd, Rm, i
       fp ← ADD(fp, fp)                          1                 ADD Rd, Rm, Rs
       fp2 ← ADD(fp2, fp2)                       1                 ADD Rd, Rm, Rs
       fp ← PHI(fp, . . . )                      0
       fp2 ← PHI(fp2, . . . )                    0

   In the example, the accumulation for double-precision fixed-point values (fp2)
can be performed at the same cost as for the single-precision format (fp). Thus, it
would be beneficial to move the necessary shift from the inner loop to the return

1 We consider its data-based representation here, see Chap. 14.
260                                                                                 D. Ebner et al.

Fig. 19.3 Instruction code selection SSA Graph for a vector dot-product in fixed-point arithmetic.
“fp_” stands for unsigned short fixed-point type and “*” for pointer manipulations (like in C). The
colours of the nodes indicate which basic block the operations belong to

block, performing the intermediate calculations in the extended format. Note that a
tree-pattern matcher generates code at statement level, and hence the information of
having values as double-precision cannot be hoisted across basic block boundaries.
However, an instruction code selector that is operating on the SSA graph is able to
propagate non-terminal fp2 across the φ node prior to the return and emits the code
for the shift to the right in the return block.
   In the following, we will explain how to perform instruction code selection
on SSA graphs by means of a specialized quadratic assignment problem (PBQP).
First, we discuss the instruction code selection problem by employing a discrete
optimization problem called a partitioned boolean quadratic problem. An extension
of patterns to arbitrary acyclic graph structures, which we refer to as DAG
grammars, is discussed in Sect. 19.2.1.
19 Instruction Code Selection                                                            261

19.1 Instruction Code Selection for Tree Patterns on SSA
     Graphs

The matching problem for SSA graphs is reduced to a discrete optimization problem
called a Partitioned Boolean Quadratic Problem (PBQP). First, we will introduce
the PBQP problem and then we will describe the mapping of the instruction code
selection problem to PBQP.

19.1.1 Partitioned Boolean Quadratic Problem

Partitioned boolean quadratic programming (PBQP) is a generalized quadratic
assignment problem that has proven to be effective for a wide range of applications
in embedded code generation, e.g., register assignment, address mode selection,
or bank selection for architectures with partitioned memory. Instead of problem-
specific algorithms, these problems can be modelled in terms of generic PBQPs that
are solved using a common solver library. PBQP is flexible enough to model the
irregularities of embedded architectures that are hard to cope with using traditional
heuristic approaches.
    Consider a set of discrete variables X = {x1 , . . . , xn } and their finite domains
{D1 , . . . , Dn }. A solution of PBQP is a mapping h of each variable to an element
in its domain, i.e., an element of Di needs to be chosen for variable xi . The chosen
element imposes local costs and related costs with neighbouring variables. Hence,
the quality of a solution is based on the contribution of two sets of terms.
1. For assigning variable xi to the element di in Di . The quality of the assignment
   is measured by a local cost function c(xi , di ).
2. For assigning two related variables xi and xj to the elements di ∈ Di and
   dj ∈ Dj . We measure the quality of the assignment with a related cost function
   C(xi , xj , di , dj ).
The total cost of a solution h is given as
                                                                 
            f=        c(xi , h(xi )) +    C xi , xj , h(xi ), h(xj ) .                (19.1)
                 1≤i≤n              1≤i<j ≤n

The PBQP problem seeks an assignment of variables xi with minimum total costs.
    In the following we represent both the local cost function and the related
cost function in matrix form, i.e., the related cost function C(xi , xj , di , dj ) is
decomposed for each pair (xi , xj ). The costs for the pair are represented as
|Di |-by-|Dj | matrix/table Cij . A matrix element corresponds to an assignment
(di , dj ). Similarly, the local cost function c(xi , di ) is represented by a cost vector −
                                                                                           →
                                                                                           ci
enumerating the costs of the elements. A PBQP problem has an underlying graph
structure, expressed as graph G = (V , E, C, c), which we refer to as a PBQP graph.
262                                                                      D. Ebner et al.

For each decision variable xi we have a corresponding node vi ∈ V in the graph,
and for each cost matrix Ci,j that is not the zero matrix, we introduce an edge
e = (vi , vj ). The cost functions c and C map nodes and edges to the original cost
vectors and matrices, respectively. We will present an example later in this chapter
in the context of instruction code selection.
    In general, finding a solution to this minimization problem is NP-hard. However,
in many practical cases, the PBQP instances are sparse, i.e., many of the cost
matrices Ci,j are zero matrices and do not contribute to the overall solution.
Thus, optimal or near-optimal solutions can often be found within reasonable time
limits. Currently, there are two algorithmic approaches for PBQP that have been
proven to be efficient in practice for instruction code selection problems, i.e., a
polynomial-time heuristic algorithm and a branch-&-bound based algorithm with
exponential worst-case complexity. For a certain subclass of PBQP, the algorithm
produces provably optimal solutions in time O(nm3 ), where n is the number of
discrete variables and m is the maximal number of elements in their domains, i.e.,
m = max (|D1 |, . . . , |Dn |). For general PBQPs, however, the solution may not be
optimal. To still obtain an optimal solution outside the subclass, branch-&-bound
techniques can be applied.

19.1.2 Instruction Code Selection with PBQP

In this section, we describe the modelling of instruction code selection for SSA
graphs as a PBQP problem. In the basic modelling, SSA and PBQP graphs coincide.
The variables xi of the PBQP are decision variables reflecting the choices of
applicable rules (represented by Di ) for the corresponding node of xi . The local
costs reflect the costs of the rules, and the related costs reflect the costs of chain
rules making rules compatible with each other. This means that the number of
decision vectors and the number of cost matrices in the PBQP are determined by
the number of nodes and edges in the SSA graph, respectively. The sizes of Di
depend on the number of rules in the grammar. A solution for the PBQP instance
induces a complete cost-minimal cover of the SSA graph.
   As in traditional tree-pattern matching, an ambiguous graph grammar consisting
of tree patterns with associated costs and semantic actions is used. Input grammars
have to be normalized. This means that each rule is either a so-called base rule or a
chain rule. A base rule is a production of the form nt0 ← OP(nt1 , . . . , ntkp )
where nti are non-terminals and OP is a terminal symbol, i.e., an operation
represented by a node in the SSA graph. A chain rule is a production of the form
nt0 ← nt1 , where nt0 and nt1 are non-terminals. A production rule nt ←
OP1 (α, OP2 (β), γ )) can be normalized by rewriting the rule into two production
rules nt ← OP1 (α, nt , γ ) and nt ← OP2 (β) where nt is a new non-terminal
symbol and α, β, and γ denote arbitrary pattern fragments. This transformation
can be iteratively applied until all production rules are either chain rules or base
rules. To illustrate this transformation, consider the grammar in Fig. 19.4, which is
19 Instruction Code Selection                                                           263

Fig. 19.4 PBQP instance derived from the example shown in Fig. 19.2. The grammar has been
normalized by introducing additional non-terminals. Highlighted elements show a cost-minimal
solution

a normalized version of the tree grammar introduced in Fig. 19.2a. Temporary non-
terminal symbols t1, t2, and t3 are used to decompose larger tree patterns into
simple base rules. Each base rule spans across a single node in the SSA graph.
   The instruction code selection problem for SSA graphs is modelled in PBQP
as follows. For each node u in the SSA graph, a PBQP variable xu is introduced.
The domain of variable xu is determined by the subset of base rules whose terminal
symbol matches the operation of the SSA node, e.g., there are three rules (R4 , R5 ,
R6 ) that can be used to cover the shift operation SHL in our example. The last rule is
the result of automatic normalization of a more complex tree pattern. The cost vector
−
→
cu = wu · c(R1 ), . . . , c(Rku )" of variable xu encodes the local costs for a particular
assignment where c(Ri ) denotes the associated cost of base rule Ri . Weight wu is
used as a parameter to optimize for various objectives including speed (e.g., wu is
264                                                                      D. Ebner et al.

the expected execution frequency of the operation at node u) and space (e.g., the wu
is set to one). In our example, both R4 and R5 have associated costs of one. Rule R6
contributes no local costs, as we account for the full costs of a complex tree pattern
at the root node. All nodes have the same weight of one, thus the cost vector for the
SHL node is 1, 1, 0".
    An edge in the SSA graph represents data transfer between the result of an
operation u, which is the source of the edge, and the operand v, which is the tail
of the edge. To ensure consistency among base rules and to account for the costs of
chain rules, we impose costs that are dependent on the selection of variable xu and
variable xv in the form of a cost matrix Cuv . An element in the matrix corresponds
to the costs of selecting a specific base rule ru ∈ Ru of the result and a specific
base rule rv ∈ Rv of the operand node. Assume that ru is nt ← OP (. . . ) and rv
is · · · ← OP (α, nt , β) where nt is the non-terminal of operand v whose value is
obtained from the result of node u. There are three possible cases:
1. If the non-terminals nt and nt’ are identical, the corresponding element in
   matrix Cuv is zero, since the result of u is compatible with the operand of node v.
2. If the non-terminals nt and nt differ and there exists a rule r : nt ← nt in
   the transitive closure of all chain rules, the corresponding element in Cuv has the
   costs of the chain rule, i.e., wv · c(r).
3. Otherwise, the corresponding element in Cuv has infinite costs prohibiting the
   selection of incompatible base rules.
   As an example, consider the edge from CST:2 to node SHL in Fig. 19.4. There is
a single base rule R1 with local cost 0 and result non-terminal imm for the constant.
Base rules R4 , R5 , and R6 are applicable for the shift, the first of which expects
non-terminal reg as its second argument, and rules R5 and R6 both expect imm.
Consequently, the corresponding cost matrix accounts for the cost of converting
from reg to imm at index (1, 1) and is zero otherwise.
   Highlighted elements in Fig. 19.4 show a cost-minimal solution of the PBQP
with cost one. A solution of the PBQP directly induces a selection of base and chain
rules for the SSA graph. The execution of the semantic action rules inside a basic
block follows the order of basic blocks. Special care is necessary for chain rules
that correspond to data flow across basic blocks. Such chain rules may be placed
inefficiently, and a placement algorithm is required for some grammars.

19.2 Extensions and Generalizations

19.2.1 Instruction Code Selection for DAG Patterns

In the previous section we have introduced an approach based on code patterns that
resemble simple tree fragments. This restriction often complicates code generators
19 Instruction Code Selection                                                    265

for modern CPUs with specialized instructions and SIMD extensions, e.g., there is
no support for machine instructions with multiple results.
    Consider the introductory example shown in Fig. 19.3. Many architectures have
some form of auto-increment addressing modes. On such a machine, the load and
the increment of both p and q can be done in a single instruction benefiting both
code size and performance. However, post-increment loads cannot be modelled
using a single tree-shaped pattern. Instead, it produces multiple results and spans
across two non-adjacent nodes in the SSA graph, with the only restriction that their
arguments have to be the same.
    Similar examples can be found in most architectures, e.g., the DIVU instruction
in the Motorola 68K architecture performs the division and the modulo operation for
the same pair of inputs. Other examples are the RMS (read-modify-store) instructions
on the IA32/AMD64 architecture, autoincrement- and decrement-addressing modes
of several embedded systems architectures, the IRC instruction of the HPPA
architecture, or fsincos instructions of various math libraries. Compiler writers
are forced to pre- or post-process these patterns heuristically, often missing much
of the optimization potential. These architecture-specific tweaks also complicate
re-targeting, especially in situations where patterns are automatically derived from
generic architecture descriptions.
    We will now outline, through the example in Fig. 19.5, a possible problem
formulation for these generalized patterns in the PBQP framework discussed so
far. The code fragment contains three feasible instances of a post-increment store
pattern. Assuming that p, q, and r point to mutually distinct memory locations,
there are no further dependencies apart from the edges shown in the SSA graph. If
we select all three instances of the post-increment store pattern concurrently, the
cover induced by SSA edges becomes cyclic, and the code cannot be emitted. To
overcome this difficulty, the idea is to express in the PBQP model a numbering of
chosen nodes that reflects the existence of a topological order in the cover-avoiding
cycles. PBQP has no constraints as such, but they can be simulated by imposing

Fig. 19.5 DAG patterns may
introduce cyclic data
dependencies
266                                                                        D. Ebner et al.

arbitrary high costs denoted by ∞ for certain combinations that do not satisfy the
topological constraint.
Modelling
The first step is to explicitly enumerate instances of complex patterns, i.e., concrete
tuples of nodes that match the terminal symbols specified in a particular production.
There are three instances of the post-increment store pattern (surrounded by
boxes) in the example shown in Fig. 19.5. As for tree patterns, DAG patterns are
decomposed into simple base rules for the purpose of modelling, e.g., the post-
increment store pattern
   P1 : tmt ← ST(x: reg, reg), reg ← INC(x) : 3
is decomposed into the individual pattern fragments
   P1,1 : stmt ← ST(reg, reg)
   P1,2 : reg ← INC(reg)
    For our modelling, new variables are created for each enumerated instance of a
complex production. They encode whether a particular instance is chosen or not,
i.e., the domain basically consists of the elements on and off. The local costs are
set to the combined costs for the particular pattern for the on state and to 0 for
the off state. Furthermore, the domain of existing nodes is augmented with the
base rule fragments obtained from the decomposition of complex patterns. We can
safely squash all identical base rules obtained from this process into a single state.
Thus, each of these new states can be seen as a proxy for the whole set of instances
of (possibly different) complex productions including the node. The local costs for
these proxy states are set to 0.
    Continuing our example, the PBQP for the SSA graph introduced in Fig. 19.5 is
shown in Fig. 19.6. In addition to the post-increment store pattern with costs three,
we assume regular tree patterns for the store and the increment nodes with costs
two denoted by P2 and P3 , respectively. Rules for the VAR nodes are omitted for
simplicity.
    Nodes 1–6 correspond to the nodes in the SSA graph. Their domain is defined
by the simple base rule with costs two and the proxy state obtained from the
decomposition of the post-increment store pattern. Nodes 7, 8, and 9 correspond to
the three instances identified for the post-increment store pattern. As noted before,
we have to guarantee the existence of a topological order in the cover among the
chosen nodes. To this end, we refine the state on such that it reflects a particular
index in a concrete topological order. Matrices among these nodes account for data
dependencies, e.g., consider the matrix established among nodes 7 and 8. Assuming
instance 7 is on at index 2 (i.e., mapped to on2 ), the only remaining choices for
instance 8 are not to use the pattern (i.e., mapped to off) or to enable it at index 3
(i.e., mapped to on3 ), as node 7 has to precede node 8.
    Additional cost matrices are required to ensure that the corresponding proxy state
is selected on all the variables forming a particular pattern instance (which can be
modelled with combined costs of 0 or ∞, respectively). However, this formulation
allows for the trivial solution where all of the related variables encoding the selection
19 Instruction Code Selection                                                            267

Fig. 19.6 PBQP Graph for the example shown in Fig. 19.5. M is a large integer value. We use k
as a shorthand for the term 3 − 2M
268                                                                         D. Ebner et al.

of a complex pattern are set to off (accounting for 0 costs) even though the artificial
proxy state has been selected. We can overcome this problem by adding a large
integer value M to the costs for all proxy states. In exchange, we subtract these
costs from the cost vector of instances. Thus, the penalties for the proxy states are
effectively eliminated unless an invalid solution is selected.
   Cost matrices among nodes 1–6 do not differ from the basic approach discussed
before and reflect the costs of converting the non-terminal symbols involved. It
should be noted that for general grammars and irreducible graphs, the heuristic
solver of PBQP cannot guarantee delivering a solution that satisfies all constraints
modelled in terms of ∞ costs. This would be an NP-complete problem. One way
to work around this limitation is to include a small set of rules that cover each node
individually and that can be used as a fallback rule in situations where no feasible
solution has been obtained, which is similar to macro substitution techniques and
ensures a correct but possibly non-optimal matching. These limitations do not
apply to exact PBQP solvers such as the branch-&-bound algorithm. It is also
straightforward to extend the heuristic algorithm with a backtracking scheme on
RN reductions, which would of course also be exponential in the worst case.

19.3 Concluding Remarks and Further Reading

Aggressive optimizations for the instruction code selection problem are enabled
by the use of SSA graphs. The whole flow of a function is taken into account
for instruction selection rather than a local scope of statements. The move from
basic tree-pattern matching [1] to SSA-based DAG matching is a relatively small
step as long as a PBQP library and some basic infrastructure (graph grammar
translator, etc.) are provided. The complexity of the approach is hidden in the
discrete optimization problem called PBQP. Free PBQP libraries are available from
the web-pages of the authors and a library is implemented as part of the LLVM [186]
framework.
    Many aspects of the PBQP formulation presented in this chapter could not be
covered in detail. The interested reader is referred to the relevant literature [108, 109]
for an in-depth discussion.
    As we move from acyclic linear code regions to whole-functions, it becomes less
clear in which basic block the selected machine instructions should be emitted. For
chain rules, the obvious choices are often non-optimal. In [254], a polynomial-time
algorithm based on generic network flows is introduced that allows a more efficient
placement of chain rules across basic block boundaries. This technique is orthogonal
to the generalization to complex patterns.
