Chapter 18
SSA Form and Code Generation

Benoît Dupont de Dinechin

In a compiler for imperative languages such as C, C++, or FORTRAN, the
code generator covers the set of code transformations and optimizations that are
performed on a program representation close to the target machine’s Instruction Set
Architecture (ISA). The code generator produces an assembly source or relocatable
file with debugging information.
    The main duties of code generation are: lowering the program Intermediate
Representation (IR) [270] to machine instruction level with appropriate calling
conventions; laying out data objects in sections; composing the stack frames;
allocating variable live ranges to architectural registers; scheduling instructions
in order to exploit micro-architecture features; and producing assembly source or
object code.
    Historically, the 1986 edition of the “Compilers Principles, Techniques, and
Tools” Dragon Book by Aho et al. [2] lists the tasks of code generation as
•   Instruction selection and lowering of the calling conventions;
•   Control-flow (dominators, loops) and data-flow (variable liveness) analyses;
•   Register allocation and stack frame building;
•   Peephole optimizations.
Ten years later, the 1997 textbook “Advanced Compiler Design & Implementation”
by Muchnick [205] extends code generation with the following tasks:
• Loop unrolling and basic block replication
• Instruction scheduling and software pipelining
• Branch optimizations and basic block alignment

B. Dupont de Dinechin (?)
Kalray, Montbonnot-Saint-Martin, France
e-mail: benoit.dinechin@kalray.eu

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022    243
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_18

In high-end compilers such as Open64 [64, 65], GCC [268], or LLVM [176],
code generation techniques have significantly evolved, as they are mainly respon-
sible for exploiting the performance-oriented features of architectures and micro-
architectures. In those compilers, code generator optimizations include:
• If-conversion using select, conditional move, or predicated instructions
  (Chap. 20)
• Use of specialized addressing modes such as auto-modified addressing [180] and
  modulo addressing [66]
• Exploitation of hardware looping [183] or static branch prediction hints
• Matching fixed-point arithmetic and SIMD idioms to special instructions
• Optimization with regard to memory hierarchy, including cache prefetching and
  register preloading [99]
• VLIW instruction bundling, where parallel instruction groups constructed by
  postpass instruction scheduling are encoded into instruction bundles [159]
    This sophistication of modern compiler code generation is one of the reasons
behind the introduction of the SSA form for machine code, in order to simplify
certain analyses and optimizations. In particular, liveness analysis (Chap. 9), if-
conversion (Chap. 20), unrolling-based loop optimizations (Chap. 10), and exploita-
tion of special instructions or addressing modes benefit significantly from the SSA
form. Chapter 19 presents an advanced technique for instruction selection on the
SSA form by solving a specialized quadratic assignment problem (PBQP). Although
there is a debate as to whether or not SSA form should be used in a register allocator,
Chap. 22 makes a convincing case for it. The challenge of correct and efficient SSA
form destruction under the constraints of machine code is addressed in Chap. 21.
Finally, Chap. 23 illustrates how the SSA form has been successfully applied to
hardware compilation.
    Basing ourselves on our experience on a family of production code generators
and linear assembly optimizers for the ST120 DSP core [102, 103, 240, 275] and
the Lx/ST200 VLIW family [34–36, 100, 101, 113], this chapter reviews some of
the issues of using the SSA form in a code generator. Section 18.1 presents the
challenges of maintaining the SSA form on a program representation based on
machine instructions. Section 18.2 discusses two code generator optimizations that
seem at odds with the SSA form, yet must occur before register allocation. One is
if-conversion, whose modern formulations require an extension of the SSA form.
The other is prepass instruction scheduling, for which the benefit of using the SSA
form has not been assessed by any implementation yet. Using the SSA form at
machine-code level requires the ability to construct and destruct SSA form at that
level. Section 18.3 characterizes various SSA form destruction algorithms in terms
of satisfying the constraints of machine code.

18.1 SSA Form Engineering Issues

18.1.1 Instructions, Operands, Operations, and Operators

An instruction is a member of the machine instruction set architecture (ISA).
Instructions access values and modify the machine state through operands. We
distinguish explicit operands, which are associated with a specific bit-field in the
instruction encoding, from implicit operands, without any encoding bits. Explicit
operands correspond to allocatable architectural registers, immediate values, or
operand modifiers (such as shift, extend, saturate). Implicit operands
correspond to dedicated architectural registers, and to registers implicitly used by
some instructions, for instance, the status register, the procedure link register, or the
stack pointer.
   An operation is an instance of an instruction that composes a program. It is seen
by the compiler as an operator applied to a list of operands (explicit and implicit),
along with operand naming constraints, and has a set of clobbered registers (i.e., that
can be trashed or modified in unpredictable way). The compiler view of operations
also involves indirect operands, which are not apparent in the instruction behaviour,
but are required to connect the flow of values between operations. Implicit operands
correspond to the registers used for passing arguments and returning results at
function call sites, and may also be used for the registers encoded in register mask
immediates.

18.1.2 Representation of Instruction Semantics

Unlike IR operators, there is no straightforward mapping between machine instruc-
tions and their semantics. For instance, a subtract instruction with operands (a, b, c)
may either compute c ← a − b or c ← b − a or any such expression with permuted
operands. Yet basic SSA form code cleanups, such as constant propagation or sign
extension removal, need to know what is actually computed by machine instructions.
Machine instructions may also have multiple target operands, such as memory
accesses with auto-modified addressing, combined division-modulus instructions,
or side-effects on status registers.
   There are two ways to associate machine instructions with semantics:
• Add properties to the instruction operator and to its operands, a technique used
  by the Open64 compiler. Operator properties include isAdd, isLoad, etc. Typical
  operand properties include isLeft, isRight, isBase, isOffset, isPredicated, etc.
  Extended properties that involve the operator and some of its operands include
  isAssociative, isCommutative, etc.

• Associate a semantic combinator [300], that is, a tree of IR-like operators, to each
  target operand of a machine instruction. This alternative has been implemented
  in the SML/NJ [182] compiler and the LAO compiler [102].
    An issue related to the representation of instruction semantics is how to encode
it. Most information can be statically tabulated by the instruction operator, yet
properties such as safety for control speculation, or equivalence to a simple IR
instruction, can be refined by the context where the instruction appears. For instance,
range propagation may ensure that an addition cannot overflow, that a division
by zero is impossible, or that a memory access is safe for control speculation.
Context-dependent semantics, which needs to be associated with specific machine
instructions in the code generator’s internal representation, can be provided as
annotations that override the statically tabulated information.
    Finally, code generation for some instruction set architectures requires that
pseudo-instructions with standard semantics be available, as well as variants of φ-
functions and parallel copy operations.
• Machine instructions that operate on register pairs, such as the long multiplies on
  the ARM, or more generally on register tuples, must be handled. In such cases
  there is a need for pseudo-instructions to compose wide operands in register
  tuples, and to independently extract register allocatable operands from wide
  operands.
• Embedded processor architectures such as the Tensilica Xtensa [130] provide
  zero-overhead loops (hardware loops), where an implicit conditional branch
  back to the loop header is taken whenever the program counter matches some
  addresses. The implied loop-back branch is also conveniently materialized by a
  pseudo-instruction.
• Register allocation for predicated architectures requires that the live ranges
  of temporary variables with predicated definitions be contained by pseudo-
  instructions [128] that provide backward kill points for liveness analysis.

18.1.3 Operand Naming Constraints

Implicit operands and indirect operands are constrained to specific architectural
registers, either by the instruction set architecture (ISA constraints) or by the
application binary interface (ABI constraints). An effective way to deal with
such dedicated register naming constraints in the SSA form is to insert parallel
copy operations that write to the constrained source operands, or read from the
constrained target operands of instructions. The new SSA variables thus created
are pre-coloured with the required architectural register. With modern SSA form
destruction [35, 267] (see Chap. 21), copy operations are aggressively coalesced,
and the remaining ones are sequentialized into machine operations.
   Explicit instruction operands may be constrained to use the same resource
(an unspecified architectural register) between a source and a target operand,

as illustrated by most x86 instructions [257] and by DSP-style auto-modified
addressing modes [180]. A related naming constraint is to require different resources
between source and destination operands, as with the mul instructions on the
ARMv5 processors. The same resource naming constraints are represented under
the SSA form by inserting a copy operation between the constrained source operand
and a new variable, then using this new variable as the constrained source operand.
In case of multiple constrained source operands, a parallel copy operation is used.
Again, these copy operations are processed by the SSA form destruction.
   A more widespread case of an operand naming constraint is when a variable
must be bound to a specific architectural register at all points in the program. This
is the case with the stack pointer, as interrupt handling may reuse the runtime
stack at any program point. One possibility is to inhibit the promotion of the stack
pointer to a SSA variable. Stack pointer definitions, including memory allocations
through alloca(), activation frame creation/destruction, are then encapsulated
as instances of a specific pseudo-instruction. Instructions that use the stack pointer
must be treated as special cases for SSA form analyses and optimizations.

18.1.4 Non-kill Target Operands

The SSA form requires variable definitions to be killing definitions (see e.g. [208]
or kill points in data-flow analysis). This is not the case for target operands such
as a status register, which contains several independent bit-fields. Moreover, some
instruction effects on bit-fields may be sticky, that is, with an implied disjunction
with the previous value. Typical sticky bits include exception flags of the IEEE 754
arithmetic, or the integer overflow flag on DSPs with fixed-point arithmetic.
When mapping a status register to a SSA variable, any operation that partially
reads or modifies the register bit-fields should appear as reading and writing the
corresponding variable.
    Predicated execution and conditional execution are other sources of definitions
that do not kill their target register. The execution of predicated instructions is
guarded by the evaluation of a single bit operand. The execution of conditional
instructions is guarded by the evaluation of a condition on a multi-bit operand. We
extend the ISA classification of [193] to include four classes:

Partial predicated execution support: select instructions, first introduced by
  the Multiflow TRACE architecture [81], are provided. These instructions write
  to a destination register the value of one among two source operands, depending
  on the condition tested on a third source operand. The Multiflow TRACE
  500 architecture was planned to include predicated store and floating-point
  instructions [189].
Full predicated execution support: Most instructions accept a boolean predi-
  cate operand, which nullifies the instruction effects if the predicate evaluates
  to false. EPIC-style architectures also provide predicate define instructions

  (pdi) to efficiently evaluate predicates corresponding to nested conditions:
  Unconditional, Conditional, parallel or, parallel and [128].
Partial conditional execution support: Conditional move (cmov) instructions,
  first introduced by the Alpha AXP architecture [31], are provided. cmov
  instructions have been available in the ia32 ISA since the Pentium Pro.
Full conditional execution support: Most instructions are conditionally exe-
  cuted depending on the evaluation of a condition of a source operand. On
  the ARM architecture, the implicit source operand is a bit-field in the status
  register and the condition is encoded on 4 bits. On the VelociTI™ TMS230C6x
  architecture [256], the source operand is a general register encoded on 3 bits and
  the condition is encoded on 1 bit.

18.1.5 Program Representation Invariants

Engineering a code generator requires decisions about which information is tran-
sient and which belongs to the invariants of the program representation. An invariant
is a property that is ensured before and after each phase. Transient information is
recomputed as needed by some phases from the program representation invariants.
The applicability of the SSA form only spans the early phases of the code
generation process: from instruction selection down to register allocation. After
register allocation, program variables are mapped to architectural registers or to
memory locations, so the SSA form analyses and optimizations no longer apply.
In addition, a program may be only partially converted to the SSA form. This is
the reason for the engineering of the SSA form as extensions to a baseline code
generator program representation.
    Some extensions to the program representation required by the SSA form are
better engineered as invariants, in particular for operands, operations, basic blocks,
and control-flow graphs. Operands that are SSA variables need to record the unique
operation that defines them as a target operand, and possibly to maintain the list of
the places where they appear as source operands. Operations such as φ-functions ,
σ -functions of the SSI form [36] (see Chap. 13), and parallel copies may appear as
regular operations constrained to specific places in the basic blocks. The incoming
(resp. outgoing) edges of basic blocks also need be kept in the same order as the
operands of each of their φ-functions (resp. σ -functions).
    A program representation invariant that impacts the engineering of SSA form
is the structure of loops. The modern way of identifying loops in a CFG is the
construction of a loop nesting forest as defined by Ramalingam [236]. High-
level information such as loop-carried memory dependencies, or user-level loop
annotations, should be provided to the code generator. Such information is attached
to a loop structure, which thus becomes an invariant. The impact on the SSA form
is that some loop nesting forests, such as the Havlak [142] loop structure, are more
suitable than others as they can be used to attach to basic blocks the results of key
analyses such as SSA variable liveness [36] (see Chap. 9).

    Live-in and live-out sets at basic block boundaries are also candidates for
program representation invariants. However, when using and updating liveness
information under the SSA form, it appears convenient to distinguish the φ-function
contributions from the results of data-flow fixed-point computation. In particular,
Sreedhar et al. [267] introduced the φ-function semantics that became later known
as multiplexing mode (see Chap. 21), where a φ-function B0 : a0 = φ(B1 :
a1 , . . . , Bn : an ) makes a0 live-in of basic block B0 , and a1 , . . . an live-out of basic
blocks B1 , . . . Bn . The classical basic block invariants LiveIn(B) and LiveOut(B)
are then complemented with PhiDefs(B) and PhiUses(B).
    Finally, some compilers adopt the invariant that the SSA form be conventional
across the code generation phases. This approach is motivated by the fact that
classical optimizations such as SSAPRE [164] (see Chap. 11) require that “the live
ranges of different versions of the same original program variable do not overlap,”
implying that the SSA form should be conventional. Other compilers that use
SSA numbers and omit the φ-functions from the program representation [175] are
similarly constrained. Work by Sreedhar et al. [267] and by Boissinot et al. [35] have
clarified how to convert the transformed SSA form into conventional form wherever
required, so there now is no reason for this property to be an invariant.

18.2 Code Generation Phases and the SSA Form

18.2.1 If-Conversion

If-conversion refers to optimizations that convert a program region to straight-line
code. It is primarily motivated by instruction scheduling on instruction-level parallel
cores [193], as removing conditional branches serves to:
• Eliminate branch resolution stalls in the instruction pipeline
• Reduce uses of the branch unit, which is often single-issue
• Increase the size of the instruction scheduling regions
In case of inner loop bodies, if-conversion further enables vectorization [5] and
software pipelining [220] (modulo scheduling). Consequently, control-flow regions
selected for if-conversion are acyclic, even though seminal techniques [5, 220]
consider more general control-flow.
   The scope and effectiveness of if-conversion depend on the ISA support. In
principle, any if-conversion technique targeted to full predicated or conditional
execution support may be adapted to partial predicated or conditional execution
support. For instance, non-predicated instructions with side-effects such as memory
accesses can be used in combination with select to provide a harmless effective
address in the event that the operation must be nullified [193].
   Besides predicated or conditional execution, architectural support for if-
conversion is improved by supporting speculative execution. Speculative execution

(control speculation) refers to executing an operation before knowing that its
execution is required, which happens when moving code above a branch [189]
or promoting operation predicates [193]. Speculative execution assumes that
instructions have reversible side effects, so speculating potentially excepting
instructions requires architectural support. On the Multiflow TRACE 300
architecture and later on the Lx VLIW architecture [113], non-trapping memory
loads known as dismissible loads are provided. The IMPACT EPIC architecture
speculative execution [13] is generalized from the sentinel model [192].
Classical Contributions to If-Conversion Without SSA Form
The initial classical contributions to if-conversion did not consider the SSA form.
The goal of this paragraph is to provide a short overview of those contributions.
Allen et al. [5] Conversion of control dependencies to data dependencies, moti-
   vated by inner loop vectorization. The authors distinguish forward branches, exit
   branches, and backward branches and compute boolean guards accordingly. As
   this work pre-dates the Program Dependence Graph [118] (see Chap. 14), the
   complexity of the resulting boolean expressions is an issue. When compared
   to later if-conversion techniques, only the conversion of forward branches is
   relevant.
Park and Schlansker [220] Formulation of the “RK algorithm” based on control
   dependencies. The authors assume a fully predicated architecture with only
   conditional pdi instructions. The R function assigns a minimal set of boolean
   predicates to basic blocks, and the K function expresses the way those predicates
   are computed (Fig. 18.1). The algorithm is general enough to process cyclic and
   irreducible rooted flow graphs, but in practice it is applied to single-entry acyclic
   regions.
Blickstein et al. [31] Pioneering use of cmov instructions to replace conditional
   branches in the GEM compilers for the Alpha AXP architecture.
Lowney et al. [189] Matching of the innermost if-then constructs in the Mul-
   tiflow Trace Scheduling compiler, in order to generate the select and the
   predicated memory store operations.
Fang [112] The proposed algorithm assumes a fully predicated architecture with
   conditional pdi instructions. It is tailored to acyclic regions with single entry
   and multiple exits, and as such is able to compute both R and K functions
   without relying on explicit control dependencies. The main improvement of this
   algorithm over [220] is that it also speculates instructions up the dominance
   tree through predicate promotion,1 except for stores and pdi instructions. This
   work further proposes a pre-optimization pass performed before predication and
   speculation that hoist or sink common sub-expressions.
Leupers [184] The technique focuses on if-conversion of nested
   if-then-else statements for architectures with full conditional execution
   support. A dynamic programming technique appropriately selects either a

1 The predicate used to guard an operation is promoted to a weaker condition.

                           Control-flow graph             If-converted code

                                             K function

Fig. 18.1 Illustration of the RK algorithm

   conditional jump or a conditional instruction-based implementation scheme
   for each if-then-else statement. The objective is the reduction of worst-
   case execution time (WCET).
Classical Contributions to If-Conversion with Internal Use of SSA Form
We now describe two contributions to if-conversion that did use the SSA form, but
only internally.
Jacome et al. [148] Proposition of the Static Single Assignment—Predicated
   Switching (SSA-PS) transformation. This assumes a clustered VLIW architec-
   ture fitted with conditional move instructions that operate inside clusters (internal
   moves) or between clusters (external moves). The first idea of the SSA-PS
   transformation is to perform the conditional assignments corresponding to φ-
   functions via predicated switching operations, in particular conditional move
   operations. The second idea is that the conditional external moves leverage the
   penalties associated with inter-cluster data transfers. The SSA-PS transformation
   predicates non-move operations and is apparently restricted to innermost if-then-
   else statements.
Chuang et al. [74] A predicated execution support aimed at removing non-kill
   register writes from the micro-architecture. They propose select instructions
   called PHI-ops (similar to the φif -function described in Sect. 14.4), predicated
   memory accesses, unconditional pdi instructions, and orp instructions for

   or-ing multiple predicates. The RK algorithm is simplified for the case of single-
   entry single-exit regions, and adapted to the proposed architectural support.
   The other contribution is the generation of PHI-ops, whose insertion points are
   computed like the SSA form placement of φ-functions. The φ-functions’ source
   operands are replaced by phi-lists, where each operand is associated with the
   predicate of its source basic block. The phi-lists are processed by topological
   order of the predicates to generate the PHI-ops.
If-Conversion Under SSA Form
The ability to perform if-conversion on the SSA form of a program representation
requires the handling of operations that do not kill the target operand because of
predicated or conditional execution. The following papers address this issue:
Stoutchinin and Ferrière [275] Introduction of ψ-functions in order to represent
   fully predicated code under the SSA form, which is then called the ψ-SSA
   form. The ψ-functions’ arguments are paired with predicates and are ordered in
   dominance order in the ψ-function argument list. This ordering is a correctness
   condition re-discovered by Chuang et al. [74] for their PHI-ops. The ψ-SSA form
   is presented in Chap. 15.
Stoutchinin and Gao [276] Proposition of an if-conversion technique based on
   the predication of Fang [112] and the replacement of φ-functions by ψ-
   functions. The authors prove that the conversion is correct provided that the SSA
   form is conventional. The technique is implemented in Open64 for the IA-64
   architecture.
Bruel [52] The technique targets VLIW architectures with select and dismis-
   sible load instructions. The proposed framework reduces acyclic control-flow
   constructs from innermost to outermost. A benefit criterion is used to stop the
   reduction process. The core technique performs control speculation in addition
   to tail duplication, and reduces the height of predicate computations. It can
   also generate ψ-functions instead of select operations. A generalization of
   this framework, which also accepts ψ-SSA form as input, is described in
   Chap. 20.
Ferrière [104] Extension of the ψ-SSA form algorithms of [275] to architectures
   with partial predicated execution support, by formulating simple correctness
   conditions for the predicate promotion of operations that do not have side-effects.
   This work also details how to transform the ψ-SSA form to conventional ψ-
   SSA form by generating cmov operations. A self-contained explanation of these
   techniques appears in Chap. 15.
   Thanks to these contributions, virtually all if-conversion techniques formulated
without the SSA form can be adapted to the ψ-SSA form, with the added benefit
that already predicated code may be part of the input. In practice, these contributions
follow the generic steps of if-conversion proposed by Fang [112]:
• If-conversion region selection
• Code hoisting and sinking of common sub-expressions
• Assignment of predicates to the basic blocks

• Insertion of operations to compute the basic block predicates
• Predication or speculation of operations
• Conditional branch removal
The result of an if-converted region is a hyper-block, that is, a sequence of basic
blocks with predicated or conditional operations, where control may only enter from
the top, but may exit from one or more locations [191].
   Although if-conversion based on the ψ-SSA form appears effective for the
different classes of architectural support, the downstream phases of the code
generator require some adaptations of the plain SSA form algorithms to handle the
ψ-functions. The largest impact of handling ψ-functions is apparent in the ψ-SSA
form destruction [104], whose original description [275] was incomplete.
   In order to avoid such complexities, a code generator may adopt a simpler solu-
tion than the ψ-functions to represent the non-kill effects of conditional operations
on target operands. The key observation is that under the SSA form, a cmov
operation is equivalent to a select operation with the same resource naming
constraint between one source and the target operand. Unlike other predicated or
conditional instructions, a select instruction kills its target register. Generalizing
this observation provides a simple way to handle predicated or conditional opera-
tions in plain SSA form:
• For each target operand of the predicated or conditional instruction, add a
  corresponding source operand in the instruction signature.
• For each added source operand, add the same resource naming constraint with
  the corresponding target operand.
This simple transformation enables the SSA form analyses and optimizations to
remain oblivious to predicated or conditional execution. The drawback of this
solution is that non-kill definitions of a given variable (before SSA variable
renaming) remain in dominance order across program transformations, as opposed
to ψ-SSA where predicate value analysis may enable this order to be relaxed.

18.2.2 Prepass Instruction Scheduling

Further down the code generator, the last major phase before register allocation is
prepass instruction scheduling. Innermost loops with a single basic block, super-
block, or hyper-block body are candidates for software pipelining techniques
such as modulo scheduling [241]. For innermost loops that are not software
pipelined, and for other program regions, acyclic instruction scheduling techniques
apply: basic block scheduling [131]; super-block scheduling [146]; hyper-block
scheduling [191]; tree region scheduling [140]; or trace scheduling [189].
   By definition, prepass instruction scheduling operates before register allocation.
At this stage, instruction operands are mostly virtual registers, except for instruc-
tions with ISA or ABI constraints that bind them to specific architectural registers.

Moreover, preparation for prepass instruction scheduling includes virtual register
renaming, also known as register web construction, whose goal is to reduce the
number of anti-dependencies and output dependencies in the instruction scheduling
problem. Such code preconditioning would not be required under SSA form, but the
design of an SSA based prepass instruction scheduling algorithm would face several
difficulties including:
• Ordering constraints related to control dependencies and true data dependencies
  have to be fulfiled so as to avoid violating the semantic of the original code.
  Anti-dependencies, on the other hand, are artifacts of the storage allocation.
  Temporary variable renaming (with the most aggressive form being obtained
  by SSA construction) removes such dependencies, thus giving more freedom
  to the scheduling heuristic. The more freedom, the more potential effect on
  interferences between variables, and thus on register pressure. Without adding
  any bias on the scheduling strategy to account for register pressure and renaming
  constraints, important negative impacts might be observed with the insertion of
  shuffle code such as spill and register-to-register copies.
• Some machine instructions have partial effects on special resources such as the
  status register. Representing special resources as SSA variables even though they
  are accessed at the bit-field level requires coarsening the instruction effects to the
  whole resource, as discussed in Sect. 18.1.4. Doing so naively would lead to the
  creation of spurious data-flow dependencies associated with the def-use chain
  of the special resource. Moreover, def-use ordering implied by SSA form is not
  adapted to resources composed of sticky bits, as the definitions of these resources
  can be reordered. Scheduling OR-type predicate define operations [255] raises
  the same issues. An instruction scheduler is also expected to precisely track
  accesses to unrelated or partially overlapping bit-fields in a status register. More
  generally, some sets of operations might be considered as commutative in the
  IR. A reordering with relaxed constraints may, under SSA, create inconsistencies
  (that have to be fixed) among the implicit def-use relationships between impacted
  instructions.
   To summarize, trying to keep the SSA form inside the prepass instruction
scheduling seems reasonable but requires non-trivial adaptations.

18.3 SSA Form Destruction Algorithms

The destruction of the SSA form in a code generator is required at some point.
A weaker form of SSA destruction is the conversion of transformed SSA form
to conventional SSA form, which is required by a few classical SSA form
optimizations such as SSAPRE (see Chap. 11). For all such cases, the main objective
is the lowering to machine-code representation (getting rid of pseudo-instructions
and satisfying naming constraints) by inserting the necessary copy/spill instructions.

   The contributions to SSA form destruction techniques can be characterized as
an evolution towards correctness, the ability to manage operand naming constraints,
the handling of critical edges, and the reduction of algorithmic time and memory
requirements. One of the main contributions is also the coupling with register
allocation and the generation of high-quality code in terms of edge splitting and
the amount of inserted copies.

Cytron et al. [90] First technique for translating out of SSA, by “naive replace-
   ment preceded by dead code elimination and followed by colouring.” The authors
   replace each φ-function B0 : a0 = φ(B1 : a1 , . . . , Bn : an ) by n copies a0 = ai ,
   one per basic block Bi , before applying Chaitin-style coalescing.
Briggs et al. [50] The correctness issues of Cytron et al. [90] out of (transformed)
   SSA form translation are identified and illustrated by the lost-copy problem and
   the swap problem. These problems appear in relation to the critical edges and
   when the parallel assignment semantics of a sequence of φ-functions at the start
   of a basic block is not accounted for [35]. Two SSA form destruction algorithms
   are proposed, depending on the presence of critical edges in the control-flow
   graph. However, the need for parallel copy operations to represent code after
   φ-function removal is not recognized.
Sreedhar et al. [267] This work is based on the definition of φ-congruence
   classes as the sets of SSA variables that are transitively connected by a φ-
   function. When none of the φ-congruence classes has members that interfere, the
   SSA form is called conventional and its destruction is trivial: replace all the SSA
   variables of a φ-congruence class by a temporary variable, and remove the φ-
   functions. In general, the SSA form is transformed after program optimizations,
   that is, some φ-congruence classes contain interferences. In Method I, the SSA
   form is made conventional by isolating φ-functions using copies both at the end
   of direct predecessor blocks and at the start of the current block. The latter
   is the key for not depending on critical edge splitting [35]. The code is then
   improved by running a new SSA variable coalescer that grows the φ-congruence
   classes with copy-related variables, while keeping the SSA form conventional. In
   Method II and Method III, the φ-congruence classes are initialized as singletons,
   then merged as the φ-functions are processed. In Method II, two variables of the
   current φ-function that interfere directly or through their φ-congruence classes
   are isolated by inserting copy operations for both. This ensures that the φ-
   congruence class that is grown from the classes of the variables related by the
   current φ-function is interference-free. In Method III, if possible only one copy
   operation is inserted to remove the interference, and more involved choices about
   which variables to isolate from the φ-function congruence class are resolved by a
   maximum independent set heuristic. Both methods are correct except for a detail
   about the live-out sets to consider when testing for interferences [35].
Leung and George [182] This work is the first to address the problem of satisfy-
   ing the same resource and the dedicated register operand naming constraints of
   the SSA form on machine code. They identify that Chaitin-style coalescing after

  SSA form destruction is not sufficient, and that adapting the SSA optimizations
  to enforce operand naming constraints is not practical. They work in three steps:
  collect the renaming constraints; mark the renaming conflicts; and reconstruct
  code, which adapts the SSA destruction of Briggs et al. [50]. This work is also
  the first to make explicit use of parallel copy operations. A few correctness issues
  were later identified and corrected by Rastello et al. [240].
Budimlić et al. [53] Contribution of a lightweight SSA form destruction moti-
  vated by JIT compilation. It uses the (strict) SSA form property of dominance of
  variable definitions over uses to avoid the maintenance of an explicit interference
  graph. Unlike previous approaches to SSA form destruction that coalesce
  increasingly larger sets of non-interfering φ-related (and copy-related) variables,
  they first construct SSA webs with early pruning of obviously interfering vari-
  ables, then de-coalesce the SSA webs into non-interfering classes. They propose
  the dominance forest explicit data structure to speed up these interference tests.
  This SSA form destruction technique does not handle the operand naming
  constraints, and also requires critical edge splitting.
Rastello et al. [240] The problem of satisfying the same resource and dedicated
  register operand naming constraints of the SSA form on machine code is
  revisited, motivated by erroneous code produced by the technique of Leung and
  George [182]. Inspired by the work of Sreedhar et al. [267], they include the
  φ-related variables as candidates in the coalescing that optimizes the operand
  naming constraints. This work avoids the patent of Sreedhar et al. (US patent
  6182284).
Boissinot et al. [35] Formulation of a generic approach to SSA form destruction
  that is proved correct handles operand naming constraints and can be optimized
  for speed (see Chap. 21 for details of this generic approach). The foundation
  of this approach is to transform the program to conventional SSA form by
  isolating the φ-functions like in Method I of Sreedhar et al. [267]. However,
  the copy operations inserted are parallel, so a parallel copy sequentialization
  algorithm is provided. The task of improving the conventional SSA form is
  then seen as a classical aggressive variable coalescing problem, but thanks to
  the SSA form the interference relation between SSA variables is made precise
  and frugal to compute. Interference is obtained by combining the intersection of
  SSA live ranges, and the equality of values, which is easily tracked under the
  SSA form across copy operations. Moreover, the use of the dominance forest
  data structure of Budimlić et al. [53] to speed up interference tests between
  congruence classes is obviated by a linear traversal of these classes in pre-order of
  the dominance tree. Finally, the same resource operand constraints are managed
  by pre-coalescing, and the dedicated register operand constraints are represented
  by pre-colouring the congruence classes. Congruence classes with a different
  pre-colouring always interfere.
