Chapter 21
SSA Destruction for Machine Code

Fabrice Rastello

Chapter 3 provides a basic algorithm for destructing SSA that suffers from several
limitations and drawbacks: first, it works under implicit assumptions that are not
necessarily fulfiled at machine level; second, it must rely on subsequent phases to
remove the numerous copy operations it inserts; finally, it subsequently increases
the size of the intermediate representation, thus making it unsuitable for just-in-time
compilation.
Correctness
SSA at machine level complicates the process of destruction that can potentially
lead to bugs if not performed carefully. The algorithm described in Sect. 3.2 involves
the splitting of every critical edge. Unfortunately, because of specific architectural
constraints, region boundaries, or exception handling code, edge splitting is not
always possible. As we will see further on, this obstacle could easily be overcome
by appending copy operations at the very beginning and very end of basic blocks.
Unfortunately, appending a copy operation at the very end of a basic block might not
be possible either (it has to be before the jump operation). Also, care must be taken
with duplicated edges, i.e., when the same basic block appears twice in the list of
direct predecessors. This can occur after control-flow graph structural optimizations
such as dead code elimination or empty block elimination, etc.
    SSA imposes a strict discipline on variable naming: every “name” must be
associated with only one definition which, most of the time, is obviously not
compatible with the instruction set of the target architecture. As an example, a
two-address mode instruction such as auto-increment (x = x + 1) would force
its definition to use the same resource as one of its arguments (defined elsewhere),
thus imposing two different definitions for the same temporary variable. This is

F. Rastello ()
Inria, Grenoble, France
e-mail: fabrice.rastello@inria.fr

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022    285
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_21
286                                                                         F. Rastello

why some compiler designers prefer using, for SSA construction, the notion of
versioning in place of renaming. Implicitly, two versions of the same original
variable should not interfere, while two names can. Such a flavour corresponds to
the C-SSA form described in Chap. 2. The former simplifies the SSA destruction
phase, while the latter simplifies and allows more transformations to be performed
under SSA (updating C-SSA is very difficult) . Apart from dedicated registers for
which optimizations are usually very careful in managing their live range, register
constraints related to calling conventions or instruction set architecture might be
handled by the register allocation phase. However, as we will see, enforcement
of register constraints impacts the register pressure as well as the number of copy
operations. For those reasons we may want those constraints to be expressed earlier
(such as for the pre-pass scheduler), in which case the SSA destruction phase might
have to cope with them.
Code Quality
The natural way of lowering φ-functions and expressing register constraints is
through the insertion of copies (when edge splitting is not mandatory as discussed
above). If done carelessly, the resulting code will contain many temporary-to-
temporary copy operations. In theory, reducing the number of these copies is the
role of the coalescing during the register allocation phase. A few memory and time-
consuming existing coalescing heuristics mentioned in Chap. 22 are quite effective
in practice. The difficulty comes both from the size of the interference graph
(the information of colourability is spread out) and from the presence of many
overlapping live ranges that carry the same value (so are non-interfering). With
less effort, coalescing can also be performed prior to the register allocation phase.
As opposed to a (so-called conservative) coalescing during register allocation, this
aggressive coalescing would not cope with the interference graph colourability. As
we will see, strict SSA form is really helpful for both computing and representing
equivalent variables. This makes the SSA destruction phase the right candidate for
eliminating (or not inserting) those copies.
Speed and Memory Footprint
The cleanest and simplest way to perform SSA destruction with good code quality
is to first insert copy instructions to make the SSA form conventional, then
take advantage of the SSA form to efficiently run aggressive coalescing (without
breaking the conventional property), before eventually renaming φ-webs and getting
rid of φ-functions. Unfortunately, in a transitional stage this approach will lead to
an intermediate representation with a substantial number of variables: The liveness
sets and the interference graph classically used to perform coalescing become
prohibitively large for dynamic compilation. To overcome this difficulty liveness
and interference can be computed on demand, which, as we already mentioned, is
made simpler by the use of SSA form (see Chap. 9). There remains the process
of copy insertion itself that might still take a substantial amount of time. To fulfil
memory and time constraints imposed by just-in-time compilation, one idea is to
virtually insert those copies, and only effectively insert the non-coalesced ones.
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                   287

   This chapter addresses these three issues: handling of machine-level constraints,
code quality (elimination of copies), and algorithm efficiency (speed and memory
footprint). The layout falls into three corresponding sections.

21.1 Correctness

Isolating φ-Node Using Copies
In most cases, edge splitting can be avoided by treating φ-uses and φ-definition
operands symmetrically: Instead of just inserting copies on the incoming control-
flow edges of the φ-node (one for each use operand), a copy is also inserted on
the outgoing edge (one for its defining operand). This has the effect of isolating
the value associated with the φ-node, thus avoiding (as discussed further on) SSA
destruction issues such as the well-known lost-copy problem. The process of φ-
node isolation is illustrated by Fig. 21.1. The corresponding pseudo-code is given in
Algorithm 21.1. If, because of different φ-functions, several copies are introduced at
the same place, they should be viewed as parallel copies. For that reason, an empty
parallel copy is initially inserted both at the beginning (i.e., right after φ-functions,
if any) and at the end of each basic block (i.e., just before the branching operation, if
any). Note that, as far as correctness is concerned, these copies can be sequentialized
in any order, as they concern different variables (this is a consequence of φ-node
isolation—see below).
    When incoming edges are not split, it is important to insert a copy not only for
each argument of the φ-function but also for its result: Without the copy a0 ← a0 ,
the φ-function defines directly a0 whose live range can be long enough to intersect
the live range of some ai , i > 0. Prior SSA destruction algorithms that have not
performed the copy a0 ← a0 have identified two problems. (1) In the “lost-copy
problem”, a0 is used in a direct successor of Bi = B0 , and the edge from Bi to B0
is critical. (2) In the “swap problem,” a0 is used in B0 as a φ-function argument.
In this latter case, if parallel copies are used, a0 is dead before ai is defined. But, if
copies are sequentialized blindly, the live range of a0 can go beyond the definition

Fig. 21.1 Isolation of a φ-node
288                                                                                F. Rastello

point of ai and lead to an incorrect code after renaming a0 and ai with the same
name. φ-node isolation can be used to solve most of the issues that may be faced at
machine level. However, the subtleties listed below remain.
Limitations
A tricky case is where the basic block contains variables defined after the point
of copy insertion. This, for example, is the case of the PowerPC bclr branch
instructions with a behaviour similar to hardware loop. In addition to the condition,
a counter u is decremented by the instruction itself. If u is used in a φ-function in a
direct successor block, no copy insertion can split its live range. It must then be given
the same name as the variable defined by the φ-function. If both variables interfere,
this is simply impossible! For example, suppose that for the code in Fig. 21.2a,
the instruction selection chooses a branch with decrement (denoted br_dec) for
Block B1 (Fig. 21.2b). Then, the φ-function of Block B2 , which uses u, cannot
be translated out of SSA by standard copy insertion because u interferes with t1
and its live range cannot be split. To destruct SSA, one could add t1 ← u − 1
in Block B1 to anticipate the branch. Or one could split the critical edge between
B1 and B2 as in Fig. 21.2c. In other words, simple copy insertions are not enough in
this case. We see several alternatives to solve the problem: (1) The SSA optimization
could be designed with more care; (2) the counter variable must not be promoted to
SSA; (3) some instructions must be changed; (4) the control-flow edge must be split
somehow.

Fig. 21.2 Copy insertion may not be sufficient. br_dec u, B1 decrements u, then branches to B1
if u = 0
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                  289

Fig. 21.3 Copy folding followed by empty block elimination can lead to SSA code for which
destruction is not possible through simple copy insertion

    Another tricky case is when a basic block has the same direct predecessor
block twice. This can result from consecutively applying copy folding and control-
flow graph structural optimizations such as dead code elimination or empty block
elimination. This is the case for the example of Fig. 21.3 where copy folding would
remove the copy a2 ← b in Block B2 . If B2 is eliminated, there is no way to
implement the control dependence of the value to be assigned to a3 other than
through predicated code (see Chaps. 15 and 14) or through the reinsertion of a basic
block between B1 and B0 by splitting one of the edges.
    The last difficulty SSA destruction faces when performed at machine level
is related to register constraints such as instruction set architecture (ISA) or
application binary interface (ABI) constraints. For the sake of the discussion
we differentiate two kinds of resource constraints that we will refer as operand
pinning and live range pinning. The live range pinning of a variable v to resource
R will be represented by Rv , just as if v were a version of temporary R. An
operand pinning to a resource R will be represented using the exponent ↑R on
the corresponding operand. Live range pinning expresses the fact that the entire
live range of a variable must reside in a given resource (usually a dedicated
register). Examples of live range pinning are versions of the stack-pointer temporary
that must be assigned back to register SP. On the other hand, the pinning of an
operation’s operand to a given resource does not impose anything on the live
range of the corresponding variable. The scope of the constraint is restricted to
the operation. Examples of operand pinning are operand constraints such as two-
address mode where two operands of one instruction must use the same resource,
or where an operand must use a given register. This last case encapsulates ABI
constraints.
    Note that looser constraints where the live range or the operand can reside in
more than one resource are not handled here. We assume that the handling of this
latter constraint is the responsibility of the register allocation. We first simplify the
problem by transforming any operand pinning into a live range pinning, as sketched
290                                                                              F. Rastello

      Operand pinning of an auto-increment             Corresponding live range pinning

      Operand pinning of a function call               Corresponding live range pinning

Fig. 21.4 Operand pinning and corresponding live range pinning

in Fig. 21.4: Parallel copies with new variables pinned to the corresponding resource
are inserted just before (for use operand pinning) and just after (for definition-
operand pinning) the operation.
Detection of Strong Interferences
The scheme we propose in this section to perform SSA destruction that deals with
machine level constraints does not address compilation cost (in terms of speed and
memory footprint). It is designed to be simple. It first inserts parallel copies to isolate
φ-functions and operand pinning. Then it checks for interferences that may persist.
We will denote such interferences as strong, as they cannot be tackled through the
simple insertion of temporary-to-temporary copies in the code. We consider that
fixing strong interferences should be done on a case-by-case basis and restrict the
discussion here to their detection.
    As far as correctness is concerned, Algorithm 21.1 splits the data flow between
variables and φ-nodes through the insertion of copies. For a given φ-function a0 ←
φ(a1 , . . . , an ), this transformation is correct as long as the copies can be inserted
close enough to the φ-function. This might not be the case if the insertion point
(for a use operand) of copy ai ← ai is not dominated by the definition point of ai
(such as for argument u of the φ-function t1 ← φ(u, t2 ) for the code in Fig. 21.2b);
symmetrically, it will not be correct if the insertion point (for the definition-operand)
of copy a0 ← a0 does not dominate all the uses of a0 . More precisely, this leads to
the insertion of the following tests in Algorithm 21.1:
• Line 9: “if the definition of ai does not dominate PCi then continue.”
• Line 16: “if one use of a0 is not dominated by PC0 then continue.”
For the discussion, we will denote as split operands the newly created local variables
to differentiate them from the ones concerned by the two previous cases (designated
as non-split operands). We suppose that a similar process has been performed for
operand pinning to express them in terms of live range pinning with (when possible)
very short live ranges around the concerned operations.
   At this point, the code is still under SSA, and the goal of the next step is to check
that it is conventional: This will obviously be the case only if all the variables of a
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                              291

φ-web can be coalesced together. But this is not the only constraint: The set of all
variables pinned to a common resource must also be interference free. We say that x
and y are pinned-φ-related to one another if they are φ-related or if they are pinned
to a common resource. The transitive closure of this relation defines an equivalence
relation that partitions the variables defined locally in the procedure into equivalence
classes, the pinned-φ-webs. Intuitively, the pinned-φ-equivalence class of a resource
represents a set of resources “connected” via φ-functions and resource pinning. The
computation of φ-webs given by Algorithm 3.4 can be generalized easily to compute
pinned-φ-webs. The resulting pseudo-code is given by Algorithm 21.2.

 Algorithm 21.1: Algorithm making non-conventional SSA form conventional
 by isolating φ-nodes
 1 foreach B: basic block of the CFG do
 2     insert an empty parallel copy at the beginning of B
 3     insert an empty parallel copy at the end of B
 4 foreach B0 : basic block of the CFG do
 5     foreach φ-function at the entry of B0 of the form a0 = φ(B1 : a1 , . . . , Bn : an ) do
 6         foreach ai (argument of the φ-function corresponding to Bi ) do
 7               let PCi be the parallel copy at the end of Bi

10               let ai be a freshly created variable
11               add copy ai ← ai to PCi
12               replace ai by ai in the φ-function;
13          begin
14              let PC0 be the parallel copy at the beginning of B0

17               let a0 be a freshly created variable
18               add copy a0 ← a0 to PC0
19               replace a0 by a0 in the φ-function
             all ai can be coalesced and the φ-function removed

   Now we need to check that each web is interference free. A web contains
variables and resources. The notion of interferences between two variables is the
one discussed in Sect. 2.6 for which we will propose an efficient implementation
later in this chapter. A variable and a physical resource do not interfere while two
distinct physical resources interfere with one another.
   If any interference has been discovered, it has to be fixed on a case-by-case basis.
Note that some interferences such as the one depicted in Fig. 21.3 can be detected
and handled initially (through edge splitting if possible) during the copy insertion
phase.
292                                                                           F. Rastello

 Algorithm 21.2: The pinned-φ-webs discovery algorithm, based on the union-
 find pattern
 1   for each resource R do
 2        web(R) ← {R}
 3 for each variable v do
 4      web(v) ← {v}
 5      if v pinned to a resource R then
 6           union(web(R), web(v))

 7 for each instruction of the form adest = φ(a1 , . . . , an ) do
 8      for each source operand ai in instruction do
 9           union(web(adest ), web(ai ))

21.2 Code Quality

Once the code is in conventional SSA, the correctness problem is solved: Destruc-
ting it is by definition straightforward, as it consists in renaming all variables in
each φ-web into a unique representative name and then removing all φ-functions.
To improve the code, however, it is important to remove as many copies as possible.
Aggressive Coalescing
Aggressive coalescing can be treated with standard non-SSA coalescing technique.
Indeed, conventional SSA allows us to coalesce the set of all variables in each φ-
web together. Coalesced variables are no longer SSA variables, but φ-functions can
be removed. Liveness and interferences can then be defined as for a regular code
(with parallel copies). An interference graph (as depicted in Fig. 21.5e) can be used.
A solid edge between two nodes (e.g., between x2 and x3 ) materializes the presence
of an interference between the two corresponding variables, i.e., expressing the fact
that they cannot be coalesced and share the same resource. A dashed edge between
two nodes materializes an affinity between the two corresponding variables, i.e.,
the presence of a copy (e.g., between x2 and x2 ) that could be removed by their
coalescing.
   This process is illustrated by Fig. 21.5: the isolation of the φ-function leads to
the insertion of the three copies that respectively define x1 , define x3 , and use x2 ;
the corresponding φ-web {x1 , x2 , x3 } is coalesced into a representative variable x;
according to the interference graph in Fig. 21.5e, x1 , x3 can then be coalesced with
x leading to the code in Fig. 21.5c.
Liveness Under SSA
If the goal is not to destruct SSA completely but remove as many copies as possible
while maintaining the conventional property, liveness of φ-function operands should
reproduce the behaviour of the corresponding non-SSA code as if the variables
of the φ-web were coalesced all together. The semantic of the φ-operator in the
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                       293

    Lost-copy problem                       C-SSA                      After coalescing

                                          Interferences                  Interferences

Fig. 21.5 SSA destruction for the lost-copy problem

so-called multiplexing mode fits the requirements. The corresponding interference
graph on our example is depicted in Fig. 21.5d.
Definition 21.1 (Multiplexing Mode) Let a φ-function B0 : a0 = φ(B1 :
a1 , . . . , Bn : an ) be in multiplexing mode, then its liveness follows the following
semantic: Its definition-operand is considered to be at the entry of B0 , in other words
variable a0 is live-in of B0 ; its use operands are at the exit of the corresponding direct
predecessor basic blocks, in other words, variable ai for i > 0 is live-out of basic
block Bi .
Value-Based Interference
As outlined earlier, after the φ-isolation phase and the treatment of operand pinning
constraints, the code contains many overlapping live ranges that carry the same
value. Because of this, to be efficient coalescing must use an accurate notion of
interference. As already mentioned in Chap. 2, the ultimate notion of interference
contains two dynamic (i.e., execution-related) notions: the notion of liveness and
the notion of value. Analysing statically if a variable is live at a given execution
point or if two variables carry identical values is a difficult problem. The scope
of variable coalescing is usually not so large, and graph colouring-based register
allocation commonly takes the following conservative test: Two variables interfere
if one is live at a definition point of the other and this definition is not a copy between
the two variables.
294                                                                                    F. Rastello

   It can be noted that, with this conservative interference definition, when a
and b are coalesced, the set of interferences of the new variable may be strictly
smaller than the union of interferences of a and b. Thus, simply merging the two
corresponding nodes in the interference graph is an over-approximation with respect
to the interference definition. For example, in a block with two successive copies
b = a and c = a where a is defined before, and b and c (and possibly a) are used
after, it is considered that b and c interfere but that neither of them interfere with a.
However, after coalescing a and b, c should no longer interfere with the coalesced
variable. Hence the interference graph would have to be updated or rebuilt.
   However, in SSA, each variable has, statically, a unique value, given by its
unique definition. Furthermore, the “has-the-same-value” binary relation defined on
variables is, if the SSA form fulfils the dominance property , an equivalence relation.
The value of an equivalence class1 is the variable whose definition dominates the
definitions of all other variables in the class. Hence, using the same scheme as
in SSA copy folding, finding the value of a variable can be done by a simple
topological traversal of the dominance tree: When reaching an assignment of a
variable b, if the instruction is a copy b = a, V (b) is set to V (a), otherwise
V (b) is set to b. The interference test is now both simple and accurate (no need
to rebuild/update after a coalescing): if live(x) denotes the set of program points
where x is live,
            a interferes with b if live(a) intersects live(b) and V (a) = V (b).
   The first part reduces to def(a) ∈ live(b) or def(b) ∈ live(a) thanks to the
dominance property. In the previous example, a, b, and c have the same value
V (c) = V (b) = V (a) = a, thus they do not interfere.
   Note that our notion of values is limited to the live ranges of SSA variables,
as we consider that each φ-function defines a new variable. We could propagate
information through a φ-function when its arguments are equivalent (same value).
But we would face the complexity of global value numbering (see Chap. 11). By
comparison, our equality test in SSA comes for free.

21.3 Speed and Memory Footprint

Implementing the technique of the previous section may be considered too costly.
First, it inserts many instructions before realizing that most are useless. Also, copy
insertion is already in itself time-consuming. It introduces many new variables,
too: The size of the variable universe has an impact on the liveness analysis and
the interference graph construction. Finally, if a general coalescing algorithm is
used, a graph representation with adjacency lists (in addition to the bit matrix) and
a working graph to explicitly merge nodes when coalescing variables, would be

1 Dominance property is required here, e.g., consider the following loop body if(i = 0) {b ← a; }

c ← . . . ; · · · ← b; a ← c; the interference between b and c is actual.
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                   295

required. All these constructions, updates, and manipulations are time-consuming
and memory-consuming. We may improve the whole process by: (a) avoiding
the use of any interference graph and liveness sets; (b) avoiding the quadratic
complexity of interference checks between two sets of variables by adopting an
optimistic approach that first coalesces all copy-related variables (even interfering
ones), then traverses each set of coalesced variables and un-coalesces all the
interfering ones one by one; (c) emulating (“virtualizing”) the introduction of the
φ-related copies.
Interference Check
Liveness sets and the interference graph are the main source of memory usage. In
the context of JIT compilation, this is a good reason not to build an interference
graph at all, and rely on the liveness check described in Chap. 9 to test if two live
ranges intersect or not. Let us suppose for this purpose that a “has-the-same-value”
equivalence relation is available thanks to a mapping V of variables to symbolic
values:

             variables a and b have the same value ⇔ V (a) = V (b)

As explained in Paragraph 21.2, this can be done linearly (without requiring a hash
map-table) on a single traversal of the program if under strict SSA form. We also
suppose that the liveness check is available, meaning that for a given variable a and
program point p, one can answer if a is live at this point through the boolean value
of a.islive(p). This can directly be used, under strict SSA form, to check if two
variables live ranges intersect:

    intersect(a, b) ⇔ liverange(a) ∩ liverange(b) = ∅
                        a.def .op = b.def .op
                                                     
                    ⇔  a.def .op dominates b.def .op a.islive (out(b.def .op))
                                                      
                        b.def .op dominates a.def .op     b.islive (out(a.def .op))

   Which leads to our refined notion of interference:

                 interfere(a, b) ⇔ intersect(a, b)      V (a) = V (b)

De-coalescing in Linear Time
The interference check outlined in the previous paragraph serves to avoid building
an interference graph of the SSA form program. However, coalescing has the effect
of merging vertices, and interference queries are actually to be done between sets of
vertices. To overcome this complexity issue, the technique proposed here is based on
a de-coalescing scheme. The idea is to first merge all copy- and φ-function-related
variables together. A merged set might contain interfering variables at this point.
The principle is to identify some variables that interfere with some other variables
within the merged set and remove them (along with the one they are pinned with)
296                                                                          F. Rastello

from the merged set. As we will see, thanks to the dominance property, this can be
done linearly using a single traversal of the set.
    In reference to register allocation, and graph colouring, we will associate the
notion of colours with merged sets: All the variables of the same set are assigned
the same colour, and different sets are assigned different colours. The process of
de-coalescing a variable is to extract it from its set; it is not put in another set,
just isolated. We will say uncoloured. Actually, variables pinned together have
to stay together. We denote the (interference free) set of variables pinned to a
common resource that contains variable v, atomic-merged-set(v). So the process
of uncolouring a variable might have the effect of uncolouring some others. In other
words, a coloured variable is to be coalesced with variables of the same colour, and
any uncoloured variable v is to be coalesced only with the variables it is pinned
with, i.e., atomic-merged-set(v).
    We suppose that variables have already been coloured, and the goal is to uncolour
some of them (preferably not all of them) so that each merged set becomes
interference free. We suppose that if two variables are pinned together they have
been assigned the same colour, and that a merged set cannot contain variables pinned
to different physical resources. Here we focus on a single merged set and the goal
is to make it interference free within a single traversal. The idea exploits the tree
shape of variables’ live ranges under strict SSA. To this end, variables are identified
by their definition point and ordered accordingly using dominance.
    Algorithm 21.3 performs a traversal of this set along the dominance order,
enforcing at each step the subset of already considered variables to be interference
free. From now, we will abusively design as the dominators of a variable v, the set
of variables of colour identical to v whose definition dominates the definition of v.
Variables defined at the same program point are arbitrarily ordered, so as to use the
standard definition of immediate dominator (denoted v.idom, set to ⊥ if they do not
exist, updated lines 6–8). To illustrate the role of v.eanc in Algorithm 21.3, let us
consider the example of Fig. 21.6 where all variables are assumed to be originally in
the same merged set: v.eanc (updated line 16) represents the immediate intersecting
dominator with the same value as v; so we have b.eanc = ⊥ and d.eanc = a. When
line 14 is reached, cur_anc (if not ⊥) represents a dominating variable interfering
with v and with the same value than v.idom: when v is set to c (c.idom = b), as b
does not intersect c and as b.eanc = ⊥, cur_anc = ⊥, which allows us to conclude
that there is no dominating variable that interferes with c; when v is set to e, d does
not intersect e but as a intersects and has the same value as d (otherwise a or d
would have been uncoloured), we have d.eanc = a and thus cur_anc = a. This
allows us to detect on line 18 the interference of e with a.
Virtualizing φ-Related Copies
The last step towards a memory-friendly and fast SSA destruction algorithm consists
in emulating the initial introduction of copies and only actually inserting them on
the fly when they appear to be required. We use exactly the same algorithms as for
the solution without virtualization, and use a special location in the code, identified
as a “virtual” parallel copy, where the real copies, if any, will be placed.
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                        297

 Algorithm 21.3: De-coalescing of a merged set
 1   cur_idom = ⊥
 2 foreach variable v of the merged set in DFS pre-order of the dominance tree do
 3     DeCoalesce(v, cur_idom)
 4     cur_idom ← v

 5   Function DeCoalesce(v,
                       u)
 6      while (u = ⊥) (¬(udominates v) ∨ uncolored(u)) do u ← u.idom
 8      v.idom ← u
 9      v.eanc ← ⊥
10      cur_anc ← v.idom
11      while cur_anc = ⊥ do 
12          while cur_anc = ⊥ ¬ (colored(cur_anc) ∧ intersect(cur_anc, v)) do
13              cur_anc ← cur_anc.eanc
14          if cur_anc = ⊥ then
15               if V (cur_anc) = V (v) then
16                    v.eanc ← cur_anc
17                    break
18               else                                                cur_anc and v interfere
19                      if preferable to uncolor v then
20                           uncolor atomic-merged-set(v)
21                           break
22                      else
23                             uncolor atomic-merged-set(cur_anc)
24                             cur_anc ← cur_anc.eanc

Fig. 21.6 Variables’ live
ranges are sub-trees of the
dominator tree

   Because of this we consider a different semantic for φ-functions from the
multiplexing mode previously defined. To this end we differentiate φ-operands for
which a copy cannot be inserted (such as for the br_dec of Fig. 21.2b) from the
others. We use the terms non-split and split operands introduced in Sect. 21.1. For
a φ-function B0 : a0 = φ(B1 : a1 , . . . , Bn : an ) and a split operand Bi : ai , we
denote the program point where the corresponding copy would be inserted as the
early point of B0 (early(B0 )—right after the φ-functions of B0 ) for the definition-
operand, and as the late point of Bi (late(Bi )—just before the branching instruction)
for a use operand.
298                                                                            F. Rastello

Definition 21.2 (Copy Mode) Let a φ-function B0 : a0 = φ(B1 : a1 , . . . , Bn :
an ) be in copy mode, then the liveness for any split operand follows the following
semantic: Its definition-operand is considered to be at the early point of B0 , in other
words, variable a0 is not live-in of B0 ; its use operands are at the late point of the
corresponding direct predecessor basic blocks, in other words variable ai for i > 0
is (unless used further) not live-out of basic block Bi . The liveness for non-split
operands follows the multiplexing mode semantic.
    When the algorithm decides that a virtual copy ai ← ai (resp. a0 ← a0 )
cannot be coalesced, it is materialized in the parallel copy and ai (resp. a0 )
becomes explicit in its merged set. The corresponding φ-operator is replaced and
the use of ai (resp. def of a0 ) is now assumed, as in the multiplexing mode, to
be on the corresponding control-flow edge. This way, only copies that the first
approach would finally leave un-coalesced are introduced. We choose to postpone
the materialization of all copies along a single traversal of the program at the very
end of the de-coalescing process. Because of the virtualization of φ-related copies,
the de-coalescing scheme given by Algorithm 21.3 has to be adapted to emulate live
ranges of split operands. The pseudo-code for processing a local virtual variable is
given by Algorithm 21.5. The trick is to use the φ-function itself as a placeholder for
its set of local virtual variables. As the live range of a local virtual variable is very
small, the cases to consider are quite limited: A local virtual variable can interfere
with another virtual variable (lines 2–4) or with a “real” variable (lines 5–18).
    The overall scheme works as follows: (1) All copy-related (even virtual) variables
are first coalesced (unless pinning to physical resources forbids this); (2) then
merged sets (identified by their associated colour) are traversed and interfering
variables are de-coalesced; (3) finally, materialization of the remaining virtual
copies is performed through a single traversal of all φ-functions of the program:
Whenever one of the two operands of a virtual copy is uncoloured, or whenever the
colours are different, a copy is inserted.
    A key implementation aspect is related to the handling of pinning. In particular,
for the purpose of correctness, coalescing is performed in two separated steps. First
pinned-φ-webs have to be coalesced. Detection and fixing of strong interferences
are handled at this point. The merged sets thus obtained (that contain local virtual
variables) have to be identified as atomic, i.e., they cannot be separated. After
the second step of coalescing, atomic merged sets will compose larger merged
sets. A variable cannot be de-coalesced from a set without also de-coalescing its
atomic merged-set from the set. Non-singleton atomic merged sets have to be
represented somehow. For φ-functions, the trick is again to use the φ-function itself
as a placeholder for its set of local virtual variables: The pinning of the virtual
variables is represented through the pinning of the corresponding φ-function. As a
consequence, any φ-function will be pinned to all its non-split operands.
    Without any virtualization, the process of transforming operand pinning into
live range pinning also introduces copies and new local variables pinned together.
This systematic copy insertion can also be avoided and managed lazily, just as
for φ-nodes isolation. We do not address this aspect of the virtualization here: To
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                         299

 Algorithm 21.4: De-coalescing with virtualization of φ-related copies
 1 foreach c ∈ COLORS do c.cur_idom = ⊥
 2 foreach basic block B in CFG in DFS pre-order of the dominance tree do
 3     foreach program point l of B in topological order do
 4         if l = late(B) then
 5              foreach c ∈ COLORS do c.curphi = ⊥
 6              foreach basic-block B direct successor of B do
 7                   foreach operation Phi: ‘‘B : a0 = φ(. . . , B : v, . . . )’’ in B do
 8                       if ¬colored(Phi) then continue
 9                       else c ← color(Phi)
11                         DeCoalesce_virtual(Phi, B : v, c.curphi, c.cur_idom)
12                         if colored(Phi) then c.curphi ← Phi

14          else
15                 foreach operation OP at l (including φ-functions) do
16                     foreach variable v defined by OP do
17                         if ¬colored(v) then continue
18                         else c ← color(v)
20                         DeCoalesce(v, c.cur_idom)
21                         if colored(v) then c.cur_idom ← v

simplify, we consider any operand pinning to be either ignored (handled by register
allocation) or expressed as live range pinning.
Sequentialization of Parallel Copies
Throughout the algorithm, we treat the copies placed at a given program point as
parallel copies, which are indeed the semantics of φ-functions. This gives several
benefits: a simpler implementation, in particular for defining and updating liveness
sets, a more symmetric implementation, and fewer constraints for the coalescer.
However, at the end of the process, we need to go back to standard code, i.e., write
the final copies in sequential order.
    As explained in Sect. 3.2, (Algorithm 3.6) the sequentialization of a parallel copy
can be done using a simple traversal of a windmill farm-shaped graph from the
tips of the blades to the wheels. Algorithm 21.6 emulates a traversal of this graph
(without building it), allowing a variable to be overwritten as soon as it is saved in
some other variable.
    When a variable a is copied in a variable b, the algorithm remembers b as the
last location where the initial value of a is available. This information is stored into
loc(a). The initial value that must be copied into b is stored in directpred(b).
The initialization consists in identifying the variables whose values are not needed
(tree leaves), which are stored in the list ready. The list to_do contains the
300                                                                              F. Rastello

 Algorithm 21.5: Process (de-coalescing) a virtual variable
 1 Function DeCoalesce_virtual(Phi, B : v, Phi’, u)
 2    if Phi = ⊥ ∧ V (operand_from_B(Phi )) = V (a ) then               Interference
 3         uncolor atomic-merged-set(Phi)
 4         return
                     
 5    while (u = ⊥) (¬(udominates B) ∨ ¬colored(u)) do
 6         u ← u.idom
 7     v.idom ← u;
 8     v.eanc ← ⊥; cur_anc ← u
 9     while cur_anc = ⊥ do 
10         while cur_anc = ⊥ ¬ (colored(cur_anc) ∧ cur_anc.islive(out(B))) do
11             cur_anc ← cur_anc.eanc
12         if cur_anc = ⊥ then                                           interference
13              if preferable to uncolor Phi then
14                   uncolor atomic-merged-set(Phi)
15                   break
16             else
17                    uncolor atomic-merged-set(cur_anc)
18                    cur_anc ← cur_anc.eanc

destination of all copies to be treated. Copies are first treated by considering leaves
(while loop on the list ready). Then, the to_do list is considered, ignoring copies
that have already been treated, possibly breaking a circuit with no duplication,
thanks to an extra copy into the fresh variable n.

21.4 Further Reading

SSA destruction was first addressed by Cytron et al. [90] who propose to simply
replace each φ-function by copies in the direct predecessor basic block. Although
this naive translation seems, at first sight, correct, Briggs et al. [50] pointed out
subtle errors due to parallel copies and/or critical edges in the control-flow graph.
Two typical situations are identified, namely the “lost-copy problem” and the “swap
problem.” The first solution, both simple and correct, was proposed by Sreedhar
et al. [267]. They address the associated problem of coalescing and describe three
solutions. The first one consists of three steps: (a) translate SSA into CSSA, by
isolating φ-functions; (b) eliminate redundant copies; (c) eliminate φ-functions and
leave CSSA. The third solution, which turns out to be nothing else than the first
solution except that it virtualizes the isolation of φ-functions, has the advantage
of introducing fewer copies. The reason for that, identified by Boissinot et al., is
21 SSA Destruction for Machine Code                                                             301

 Algorithm 21.6: Parallel copy sequentialization algorithm
   Data: Set P of parallel copies of the form a )→ b, a = b, one extra fresh variable n
   Output: List of copies in sequential order
 1 ready ← [] ; to_do ← [] ; directpred(n) ← ⊥
 2 forall (a )→ b) ∈ P do
 3     loc(b)← ⊥ ; directpred(a) ← ⊥                                               initialization
 4 forall (a )→ b) ∈ P do
 5     loc(a) ← a                                                    needed and not copied yet
 6     directpred(b) ← a                                            (unique) direct predecessor
 7     to_do.push(b)                                                    copy into b to be done
 8   forall (a )→ b) ∈ P do
 9       if loc(b) = ⊥ then ready.push(b)                  b is not used and can be overwritten
10 while to_do = [] do
11     while ready = [] do
12          b ← ready.pop()                                               pick a free location
13          a ← directpred(b) ; c ← loc(a)                                      available in c
14          emit_copy(c )→ b)                                              generate the copy
15          loc(a) ← b                                                    now, available in b
16          if a = c and directpred(a) =⊥ then ready.push(a)  just copied, can be overwritten
17       b ← to_do.pop()                                               look for remaining copy
18       if b = loc(directpred(b)) then
19            emit_copy(b )→ n)                                         break circuit with copy
20            loc(b) ← n                                                   now, available in n
21            ready.push(b)                                               b can be overwritten

the fact that in the presence of many copies the code contains many intersecting
variables that do not actually interfere. Boissinot et al. [35] revisited Sreedhar et
al.’s approach in the light of this remark and proposed the value-based interference
described in this chapter.
    The ultimate notion of interference was discussed by Chaitin et al. [60] in
the context of register allocation. They proposed a simple conservative test: Two
variables interfere if one is live at a definition point of the other and this definition is
not a copy between the two variables. This interference notion is the most commonly
used, see for example how the interference graph is computed in [10]. Still they
noticed that, with this conservative interference definition, after coalescing some
variables the interference graph has to be updated or rebuilt. A counting mechanism
to update the interference graph was proposed, but it was considered to be too space-
consuming. Recomputing it from time to time was preferred [59, 60].
    The value-based technique described here can also obviously be used in the
context of register allocation even if the code is not under SSA form. The notion
of value may be approximated using data-flow analysis on specific lattices [6], and
under SSA form simple global value numbering [249] can be used.
302                                                                         F. Rastello

    Leung and George [182] addressed SSA destruction for machine code. Register
renaming constraints, such as calling conventions or dedicated registers, are treated
with pinned variables. A simple data-flow analysis scheme is used to place repairing
copies. By revisiting this approach to address the coalescing of copies, Rastello et
al. [240] pointed out and fixed a few errors present in the original algorithm. While
being very efficient in minimizing the introduced copies, this algorithm is quite
complicated to implement and not suited to just-in-time compilation.
    The first technique to address speed and memory footprint was proposed by
Budimlić et al. [53]. It proposes the de-coalescing technique, revisited in this
chapter, that exploits the underlying tree structure of the dominance relation between
variables of the same merged set.
    Last, this chapter describes a fast sequentialization algorithm that requires the
minimum number of copies. A similar algorithm has already been proposed by
C. May [196].
