Chapter 20
If-Conversion

Christian Bruel

Very long instruction word (VLIW) or explicitly parallel instruction computing
(EPIC) architectures make instruction-level Parallelism (ILP) visible within the
Instruction Set Architecture (ISA), relying on static schedulers to organize the
compiler output such that multiple instructions can be issued in each cycle.
   If-conversion is the process of transforming a control-flow region with condi-
tional branches into an equivalent predicated or speculated sequence of instructions
(into a region of basic blocks, possibly single) referred to as a Hyperblock.
If-converted code replaces control dependencies by data dependencies and thus
exposes instruction-level Parallelism very naturally within the new region at the
software level.
   Removing control hazards improves performance in several ways. When the
misprediction penalty is removed, the instruction fetch throughput is increased
and the instruction cache locality is improved. Enlarging the size of basic blocks
allows earlier execution of long latency operations and the merging of multiple
control-flow paths into a single flow of execution that can later be exploited
by scheduling frameworks such as VLIW scheduling, hyperblock scheduling, or
modulo scheduling.
   Consider the simple example given in Fig. 20.1, which represents the execution
of an if-then-else-end statement on a 4-issue processor with non-biased
branches. In this figure, r = q ? r1 : r2 stands for a select instruction where
r is assigned r1 if q is true, and r2 otherwise. With standard basic block ordering,
assuming that all instructions have a one-cycle latency, the schedule height rises
from five cycles in the most optimistic case to six cycles. After if-conversion, the
execution path is reduced to four cycles with no branches, regardless of the test

C. Bruel ()
STMicroelectronics, Grenoble, France
e-mail: christian.bruel@st.com

© The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland AG 2022   269
F. Rastello, F. Bouchez Tichadou (eds.), SSA-based Compiler Design,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80515-9_20
270                                                                                  C. Bruel

                Control flow                             with basic block ordering

                                          After if-conversion

Fig. 20.1 Static schedule of a simple region on a 4-issue processor

outcome, and assuming a very optimistic one-cycle branch penalty. The main benefit
here is that it can be executed without branch disruption.
   From this introductory example, we can observe that:
• The two possible execution paths have been merged into a single execution path,
  implying a better exploitation of the available resources.
• The schedule height has been reduced, because instructions can be control-
  speculated before the branch.
• The variables have been renamed, and a merge pseudo-instruction has been
  introduced.
   Thanks to SSA, the merging point is already materialized in the original control
flow as a φ pseudo-instruction, and register renaming has been performed by SSA
construction. Given this, the transformation to generate if-converted code seems
natural locally. Exploiting these properties on larger-scale control-flow regions
requires a framework that we will develop further.
20 If-Conversion                                                                       271

20.1 Architectural Requirements

The merge pseudo-operations need to be mapped to a conditional form of execution
in the target’s architecture. As illustrated in Fig. 20.2, we differentiate the following
three models of conditional execution:
• Fully predicated execution: Any instruction can be executed conditionally on the
  value of a predicate operand.
• (Control) speculative execution: The instruction is executed unconditionally and
  then committed using conditional move (cmov or select) instructions.
• Partially predicated execution: Only a subset of the ISA is predicated, usually
  memory operations that are not easily speculated; other instructions are specu-
  lated.
   In this figure, we use the notation r = c ? r1 : r2 to represent a select -like
operation. Its semantic is identical to the gating φif -function presented in Chap. 14:
r takes the value of r1 if c is true, and r2 otherwise. Similarly, we also use the
notation c ? r = op to represent the predicated execution of op if the predicate c is
true; c ? r = op if the predicate c is false.
   To be speculated, an instruction must not have any side effects or hazards. For
instance, a memory load must not trap because of an invalid address. Memory
operations are a major impediment to if-conversion. This is regrettable, because
like any other long latency instructions, speculative loads can be very effective
in fetching data earlier in the instruction stream, thereby reducing stalls. Modern
architectures provide architectural support to dismiss invalid address exceptions.
Examples are the ldw.d dismissible load operation in the Multiflow Trace series of
computers, or in the STMicroelectronics ST231 processor, but also the speculative
load of the Intel IA64. The main difference is that with a dismissible model,
invalid memory access exceptions are not delivered, which can be problematic
in an embedded or kernel environment that relies on memory exception for
correct behaviour. A speculative model serves to catch the exception thanks
to the token bit check instruction. Some architectures, such as the IA64, offer
both speculative and predicated memory operations. Stores can also be executed
conditionally by speculating part of their address value, with additional constraints
on the ordering of the memory operations due to possible aliases between the
two paths. Figure 20.3 shows examples of various forms of speculative memory
operations.

        fully predicated          speculative using select    speculative using cmov

Fig. 20.2 Conditional execution using different models
272                                                                               C. Bruel

       IA64 speculative load                         Multiflow/ST231 dismissible load

           base store hoisting                             index store hoisting

Fig. 20.3 Examples of speculated memory operations

    Note that the select instruction is an architecture instruction that does not
need to be replaced during the SSA destruction phase. If the target architecture
does not provide such a gating instruction, it can be emulated using two conditional
moves. This translation can be done afterwards, and the select instruction can
still be used as an intermediate form. It allows the program to stay in full SSA form
where all the data dependencies are made explicit, and can thus be fed to all SSA
optimizers.
    This chapter is organized as follows. We begin by describing the SSA techniques
to convert a CFG region into SSA form to produce an if-converted SSA repre-
sentation using speculation. We then describe how this framework is extended to
use predicated instructions, using the ψ-SSA form presented in Chap. 15. Finally,
we outline a global framework to pull together these techniques, incrementally
enlarging the scope of the if-converted region to its maximum beneficial size.

20.2 Basic Transformations

Unlike global approaches that identify a control-flow region and if-convert it in one
shot, the technique described in this chapter is based on incremental reductions. To
this end, we consider basic SSA transformations whose goal is to isolate a simple
diamond-DAG structure (informally an if-then-else-end) that can be easily
if-converted. The complete framework, which identifies and incrementally performs
the transformation, is described in Sect. 20.3.

20.2.1 SSA Operations on Basic Blocks

The basic transformation that actually if-converts the code is the φ removal, which
takes a simple diamond-DAG as an input, i.e., a single-entry node/single-exit node
(SESE) DAG with only two distinct forward paths from its entry node to its
20 If-Conversion                                                                      273

Fig. 20.4 φ removal

Fig. 20.5 φ reduction

exit node. The φ removal consists in (1) speculating the code of both branches
in the entry basic block (denoted head); then (2) replacing the φ-function by a
select; and finally (3) simplifying the control flow to a single basic block. This
transformation is illustrated in Fig. 20.4.
    The goal of the φ reduction transformation is to isolate a diamond-DAG from a
structure that resembles a diamond-DAG but has side entries to its exit block. This
diamond-DAG can then be reduced using the φ removal transformation. Nested
if-then-else-end in the original code can create such a control-flow region.
Of note is the similarity with the nested arity-two φif -functions used for gated SSA
(see Chap. 14). In the most general case, the joint node of the considered region
has n direct predecessors with φ-functions of the form B0 : r = φ(B1 : r1 , B2 :
r2 , . . . , Bn : rn ) and is such that removing edges from B3 , . . . , Bn would give a
diamond-DAG. After the transformation, B1 and B2 point to a freshly created basic
block, say B12 , that itself points to B0 ; a new variable B12 : r12 = φ(B1 : r1 , B2 :
r2 ) is created in this new basic block; the φ-function in B0 is replaced by B0 : r =
φ(B12 : r12 , . . . , Bn : rn ). This is illustrated in Fig. 20.5.
    The goal of path duplication is to isolate a diamond-DAG from a structure that
resembles a diamond-DAG but has side exit edges. Through path duplication, all
edges that point to a node different from the exit node or to the willing entry node
are “redirected” to the exit node. φ reduction can then be applied to the region
obtained. More formally, consider two distinguished nodes, the first named head and
the second a single-exit node of the region named exit, such that there are exactly
two different control-flow paths from head to exit; consider (if it exists) the first node
274                                                                                      C. Bruel

sidei on one of the forward paths head → side0 → . . . sidep → exit, which has at
least two direct predecessors. The transformation duplicates the path P = sidei →
· · · → sidep → exit into P = side i → · · · → side p → exit and redirects sidei−1
(or head if i = 0) to side i . All the φ-functions that are along P and P for which the
number of direct predecessors has changed have to be updated accordingly. Hence,
a r = φ(sidep : r1 , B2 : r2 , . . . , Bn : rn ) in exit will be updated into r = φ(sidep :
r1 , B2 : r2 , . . . , Bn : rn , sidep : r1 ); a r = φ(sidei−1 : r0 , r1 , . . . , rm ) originally
in sidei will be updated into r = φ(r1 , . . . , rm ) in sidei and into r = φ(r0 ), i.e.,
r = r0 in side i . Variable renaming (see Chap. 5) along with copy folding can then
be performed on P and P . All steps are illustrated in Fig. 20.6.
     The last transformation, namely the conjunctive predicate merge, concerns the
if-conversion of a control-flow pattern that sometimes appears on codes to represent
logical and or or conditional operations. As illustrated in Fig. 20.7, the goal is to
isolate a diamond-DAG from a structure that resembles a diamond-DAG but has side
exit edges. As opposed to path duplication, the transformation is actually restricted

Fig. 20.6 Path duplication
20 If-Conversion                                                                275

Fig. 20.7 Convergent conjunctive merge

     if-conversion on minimal SSA                 if-conversion on pruned SSA

Fig. 20.8 SSA predicate minimality

to a very simple pattern, highlighted in Fig. 20.7, made up of three distinct basic
blocks: head, which branches with predicate p to side, or exit. side, which is empty
and branches itself with predicate q to another basic block outside of the region,
or exit. Conceptually, the transformation can be understood as first isolating the
outgoing path p → q and then if-converting the obtained diamond-DAG.
   Implementing the same framework on a non-SSA-form program would require
more effort: The φ reduction would do the renaming, involving either a global
data-flow analysis or the insertion of copies at the exit node of the diamond-DAG;
inferring the minimum amount of select operations would also require the upkeep of
liveness information. SSA form solves the renaming issue without additional effort,
and, as illustrated in Fig. 20.8, the minimality and the pruned type of the SSA form
avoid inserting useless select operations.

20.2.2 Handling of Predicated Execution Model

The φ removal transformation described above involved a speculative execution
model. As we will illustrate below, in the context of a predicated execution model,
the choice of speculation versus predication is an optimization decision that should
276                                                                               C. Bruel

not be imposed by the intermediate representation. Also, transforming speculated
code into predicated code can be viewed as a coalescing problem. The use of ψ-
SSA (see Chap. 15) as the intermediate form of if-conversion serves to postpone the
decision to speculate some code, while the coalescing problem is naturally handled
by the ψ-SSA destruction phase.
   Just as (control) speculating an operation on a control-flow graph means ignoring
the control dependence with the conditional branch, speculating an operation
on an if-converted code is the same as removing the data dependence with the
corresponding predicate. On the other hand, after register allocation, speculation
adds anti-dependencies. This trade-off is illustrated in the example of Fig. 20.9:
For the fully predicated version of the code, the computation of p has to be done
before the computations of x1 and x2 ; speculating the computation of x1 removes the
dependence with p and allows it to be executed in parallel with the test (a < ? b); if
the computation of both x1 and x2 is speculated, they cannot be coalesced, and when
destruction of ψ-SSA, the ψ-function will give rise to some select instructions; if
only the computation of x1 is speculated, then x1 and x2 can be coalesced to x, but
then an anti-dependence from x = a + b and p ? x = c appears, forbidding its
execution in parallel.
   In practice, speculation is performed during the φ removal transformation,
whenever it is possible (operations with side effect cannot be speculated) and
considered as beneficial. As illustrated in Fig. 20.10b, only the operations part of

      predicated code      fully speculated     partially speculated      after coalescing

Fig. 20.9 Speculation removes the dependency with the predicate but adds anti-dependencies
between concurrent computations

         nested if          speculating the then branch      predicating both branches

Fig. 20.10 Inner region ψ-functions
20 If-Conversion                                                                     277

one of the diamond-DAG branches are actually speculated. This partial speculation
leads to the manipulation of predicated code.
   Speculating code is the easiest part, as it could be done prior to the actual if-
conversion by simply hoisting the code above the conditional branch. Still, it is
worth pointing out that since ψ-functions are part of the intermediate representation,
they can be considered for inclusion in a candidate region for if-conversion, and in
particular for speculation. However, the strength of ψ-SSA allows ψ-functions to
be treated just like any other operation. Consider the code in Fig. 20.10a containing
a subregion that has already been processed. To speculate the operation d1 = f(x),
the operation defining x, i.e., the ψ-function, also has to be speculated. Similarly, all
the operations defining the operands x1 and x2 should also be speculated. If one of
them can produce hazardous execution, then the ψ-function cannot be speculated,
which in turn forbids the operation d1 = f(x) from being speculated. Marking
operations that cannot be speculated can be done easily using a forward propagation
along def-use chains.
   All operations that cannot be speculated, possibly including some ψ-functions,
should be predicated. Suppose we are considering a non-speculated operation that
we aim to if-convert and that is part of the then branch on predicate q. Just as
for x2 = c in Fig. 20.10a, this operation might already be predicated (on p here)
prior to the if-conversion. In that case, a projection on q is performed, meaning that
instead of predicating x2 = c by p it gets predicated by q ∧p. A ψ-function can also
be projected on a predicate q, as described in Chap. 15: All gates of each operand
are individually projected on q. As an example, originally non-gating operand x1
gets gated by q, while the p-gated operand x2 gets gated by s = q ∧ p. Note that
as opposed to speculating it, predicating a ψ-function does not impose predicating
the operations that defined its operands. The only subtlety related to projection is the
generation of the new predicate as the logical conjunction of the original guard (e.g.,
p) and the current branch predicate (e.g., q). Here, s needs to be computed at some
point. The heuristic consists in first listing the set of all necessary predicates and
then emitting the corresponding code at the earlier place. Here, the used predicates
are q, q, and q ∧ p, and q and q are already available. The earlier place where q ∧ p
can be computed is just after calculating p.
   Once operations have been speculated or projected (on q for the then branch,
on q for the else), each φ-function at the merge point is replaced by a ψ-function:
operands of speculated operations are placed first and guarded by true; operands of
projected operations follow, guarded by the predicate of the corresponding branch.

20.3 Global Analysis and Transformations

Frequently executed regions are rarely just composed of simple if-then-else
control-flow regions, but processors have limited resources: the number of registers
will determine the acceptable level of data dependencies to minimize register
278                                                                                C. Bruel

pressure; the number of predicate registers will determine the depth of the if-
conversion so that the number of conditions does not exceed the number of
available predicates; and the number of processing units will determine the number
of instructions that can be executed simultaneously. The inner–outer incremental
process advocated in this chapter serves to evaluate precisely the profitability of
if-conversion.

20.3.1 SSA Incremental If-Conversion Algorithm

The algorithm takes as input a CFG in SSA form and applies incremental reductions
using the list of candidate-conditional basic blocks sorted in post-order. Each basic
block in the list designates the head of a sub-graph that can be if-converted using
the transformations described in Sect. 20.2. Post-order traversal serves to process
each region from the inner to the outer. When the if-converted region cannot grow
anymore because of resources, or because a basic block cannot be if-converted,
then the next sub-graph candidate is considered until the entire CFG is explored.
Note that as the reduction proceeds, maintaining SSA can be done using the general
technique described in Chap. 5. Basic local ad hoc updates can also be implemented
instead.
   Consider for example the CFG reported in Fig. 20.11a. The exit node B6 and
basic block B3 (which contains a function call) cannot be if-converted. The post-
order list of conditional blocks (represented in bold) is [B9 , B14 , B13 , B11 , B8 , B7 ,
B5 , B2 ]. (1) The first candidate region is composed of {B9 , B2 , B10 }; φ reduction
can be applied, promoting the instructions of B10 in B9 ; B2 becomes the single
direct successor of B9 . (2) The region headed by B14 is then considered; B15 cannot
yet be promoted because of the side entries coming both from B12 and B13 ; B15
is duplicated into a B15 with B2 as direct successor; B15 can then be promoted
into B14 , which now has a single direct successor B2 . (3) The region headed by
B13 , which has B14 and B15 as direct successors, is now considered; B15 is again
duplicated into B15 ’, so as to promote B14 and B15 into B13 through φ reduction;
B15 already contains predicated operations from the previous transformation, so a
new merging predicate is computed and inserted. After the completion of φ removal,
B13 has a unique direct successor, B2 . (4) B11 is the head of the new candidate
region; here, B12 and B13 can be promoted. Again, since B13 contains predicated
and predicate setting operations, a fresh predicate must be created to hold the
merged conditions. (5) B8 is then considered; B11 needs to be duplicated to B11 .
The process finishes with the region head B7 .

20.3.2 Tail Duplication

As shown in Fig. 20.11, some basic blocks (such as B3 ) may have to be excluded
from the region to if-convert. Tail duplication can be used for this purpose. Similar
20 If-Conversion                                                                                279

                                                                          B1
             B1

                                                                          B2
             B2
                                                               B3                 B4
   B3               B4
                                                                          B5
             B5
                                                               B6                 B7
   B6               B7
                                                                                If-conversion
                           B8
                                                                           B1

                   B11             B9
                                                                           B2
             B12           B13       B10
                                                                B3                 B4
                                   B14

                           B15                                  B5                 B5

                                                          B7        B6                    B7

                         Initial                                         Tail duplication

Fig. 20.11 If-conversion of wc (word count program). Basic blocks in the highlighted region
cannot be if-converted. Tail duplication can be used to exclude B3 from the to-be-if-converted
region

to path duplication described in Sect. 20.1, the goal of tail duplication is to get rid of
the incoming edges of a region to if-convert. This is usually done in the context of
hyperblock formation, a technique that, unlike the inner-outer incremental technique
described in this chapter, consists in if-converting a region in “one shot.” Consider
again the example of Fig. 20.11a, and suppose that the set of selected basic blocks
defining the region to if-convert consists of all basic blocks from B2 to B15 excluding
B3 and B6 . Getting rid of the incoming edge from B3 to B5 is possible by duplicating
all basic blocks of the region reachable from B5 , as shown in Fig. 20.11c.
    Consider a region R made up of a set of basic blocks, a distinguished one entry
and the others denoted (Bi )2≤i≤n , such that any Bi is reachable from entry in R.
Suppose a basic block Bs has some direct predecessors out1 , . . . , outm that are
not in R. Tail duplication involves the following steps: (1) for all Bj (including Bs )
reachable from Bs in R, create a basic block Bj as a copy of Bj ; (2) any branch
from Bj that points to a basic block Bk of the region is rerouted to its duplicate Bk ;
280                                                                           C. Bruel

(3) any branch from a basic block outk to Bs is rerouted to Bs . In our example, we
would have entry = B2 , Bs = B6 , and out = B4 .
    A global approach would follow the steps in Fig. 20.11c: First, select the region;
second, get rid of the incoming edges using tail duplication; and finally, perform
if-conversion of the whole region in one shot. It is worth pointing out that there is
no phasing issue with tail duplication. To illustrate this point, consider the example
of Fig. 20.12 where B2 cannot be if-converted. The selected region is made up of
all other basic blocks. Using a global approach as in standard hyperblock formation,
tail duplication would be performed prior to any if-conversion. This would result in
the CFG on the left part of the figure. Note that a new node, B7 , has been added
here after the tail duplication by a process called branch coalescing. Applying if-
conversion on the two disjoint regions, whose heads are, respectively, B4 and B4 ,
would result in the final code shown at the bottom of the figure. Our incremental
scheme would first perform if-conversion of the region headed by B4 , resulting in
the code depicted in the CFG on the right. Applying tail duplication to get rid of the
side entry from B2 would result in exactly the same final code at the bottom.

Fig. 20.12 The absence of phasing issue for tail duplication
20 If-Conversion                                                                         281

20.3.3 Profitability

Fusing execution paths can overcommit the architectural ability to execute the multi-
ple instructions in parallel: Data dependencies and register renaming introduce new
register constraints. Moving operations earlier in the instruction stream increases
live ranges. Aggressive if-conversion can easily exceed processor resources, leading
to excessive register pressure or moving infrequently used long latency instructions
into the critical path. The prevalent idea is that a region can be if-converted if the cost
of the resulting if-converted basic block is smaller than the cost of each individual
basic block of the original region weighted by their respective execution probability.
To evaluate these costs, we consider all possible paths impacted by the if-conversion.
    For all transformations except the conjunctive predicate merge, there are two
such paths starting at the basic block head. For the code in Fig. 20.13, we would
have pathp = [head, B1 , exit[ and pathp = [head, B1 , B2 , exit[ of respective
probabilities prob(p) and prob(p). For a path Pq = [B0 , B1 , . . . , Bn [ of probability
                                                     
prob(q), its cost is given by P    q = prob(q) × n−1 [B     i , Bi+1 [, where [Bi , Bi+1 [
                                                         i=0
                                       
represents the cost of basic block [Bi ] estimated using its schedule height plus the
branch latency br_lat, if the edge (Bi , Bi+1 ) corresponds to a conditional branch, 0
otherwise. Note that if Bi branches to Sq on predicate q and falls through to Sq , we
have
                                                         
  Bi = prob(q) × [B    i , Sq [ + prob(q) × [B               
                                                    i , Sq [ = [B  i ] + prob(q) × br_lat.

   Let pathp = [head, B1 , . . . , Bn , exit[ and pathp = [head, B1 , . . . , Bm , exit[ be
the two paths starting at the basic block head, where p is the branch predicate. Then,
the overall cost before if-conversion simplifies to the following:

                 p + path
   costcontrol = path p
                                                               
                                                     
                                                     n                       
                                                                             m
                   + prob(p) × br_lat +
                = [head]                                   
                                                           [Bi ] + prob(p) ×   ].
                                                                               [B i
                                                     i=0                        i=0

Fig. 20.13 φ reduction
282                                                                            C. Bruel

Fig. 20.14 Conjunctive
predicate merge

This is to be compared to the cost after if-conversion:
                                           
                                                                
                 costpredicated = head ◦ %ni=1 B i ◦ %m
                                                      i=1 Bi ,

where ◦ is the composition function that merges basic blocks together, removes
associated branches, and creates the predicate operations.
   The profitability of the logical conjunctive merge in Fig. 20.14 can be
evaluated similarly. There are three paths impacted by the transformation:
pathp∧q = [head, side, B1 [, pathp∧q = [head, side, exit[, and pathp = [head, exit[
of respective probabilities prob(p ∧ q), prob(p ∧ q), and prob(p). The overall cost
                                                        
before the transformation (if branches are on p and q) path                 
                                                            p∧q + pathp∧q + pathp
simplifies to

                      + side
      costcontrol = head  = [head]
                               + prob(p) × (1 + prob(q)) × br_lat,

which should be compared to (if the branch on the new head block is on p ∧ q)

                      
   costpredicated = head             
                         ◦ side = [head ◦ side] + prob(p) × prob(q) × br_lat.

   Note that if prob(p) & 1, emitting a conjunctive merge might not be beneficial.
In that case, another strategy such as path duplication from the exit block will
be evaluated. Profitability for any conjunctive predicate merge (disjunctive or
conjunctive; convergent or not) is evaluated similarly.
   A speed-oriented objective function needs the target machine description to
derive the instruction latencies, resource usage, and scheduling constraints. The
local dependencies computed between instructions are used to compute the depen-
dence height. The branch probability is obtained from static branch prediction
heuristics, profile information, or user-inserted directives. Naturally, this heuristic
can be either pessimistic, because it does not take into account new optimization
opportunities introduced by the branch removal or explicit new dependencies, or
optimistic because of inaccurate register pressure estimation leading to register
spilling on the critical path, or uncertainty in the branch prediction. But since
the SSA incremental if-conversion framework reduces the scope for the decision
function to a localized part of the CFG, the size and complexity of the inner
20 If-Conversion                                                                  283

region under consideration make the profitability a comprehensive process. This
cost function is fast enough to be reapplied to each region during the incremental
processing, with the advantage that all the instructions introduced by the if-
conversion process in the inner regions, such as new predicate merging instructions
or new temporary pseudo-registers, can be taken into account.

20.4 Concluding Remarks and Further Reading

In this chapter, we presented how an if-conversion algorithm can take advantage
of the SSA properties to efficiently assign predicates and lay out the new control
flow in an incremental, inner–outer process. As opposed to the alternative top-down
approach, the region selection can be reevaluated at each nested transformation,
using local analysis. Hyperblocks [191] were proposed as the primary if-converted
scheduling framework, excluding basic blocks that do not justify their inclusion
in the if-converted flow of control. Region selection and if-conversion can be
performed as a single pass, hyperblocks being created lazily, with well-known
techniques such as tail duplication or branch coalescing used only when the benefit
is established. Predication and speculation are often presented as two different
alternatives for if-conversion. They can coexist in an efficient if-conversion process
such that every model of conditional execution is accepted in the same framework,
thanks to the conditional moves and ψ [275] transformations.
